Patricia Anne Shean Marries David Paul Kelley 2d
LEAD: At Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in Washington, Patricia Anne Shean, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Leonard Shean of Arlington, Va., was married yesterday to David Paul Kelley 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
D.
Philip Kelley of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Richard F. Smith performed the ceremony.


Headliners; By the Pen
LEAD: Will Rhett Butler wish he had given a damn?
Will Scarlett O'Hara find her life improved by the arrival of a new sunrise?
The answers will go on sale sometime in 1990, when Warner Books expects to publish a sequel to ''Gone With the Wind.'' In the meantime, it may be presumed that the fate of Scarlett, Rhett and others from Margaret Mitchell's 1936 best seller is known only to Alexandra Ripley, the author who is to write the ''GW


Pragmatism and Principle in Korea
LEAD: South Koreans, blessed and maybe also a bit cursed with a limitless capacity for political surprise, put their democratic progress to a tough new test last week and wandered into wholly uncharted territory.
It was anyone's guess whether the journey would turn out well.


Asking Some Questions About Special Education
LEAD: I read the letter from Jane Goldblatt to the Long Island editor on March 6 and was disturbed by her attitude toward educating the handicaped.
I would like to offer a rebuttal, strictly addressing her need for defining education.
I am a speech therapist working in special education in the public domain and have been for over 20 years.


A Word on Diagnosing Medical Progress
LEAD: The scenario depicted in Penny Singer's article  [ ''Diabetic Doctor Offers a New Treatment,'' April 3 ]  is the stuff of old Hollywood romances: lone figure with miraculous intuitive insight struggles valiantly against his own affliction as well as against an indifferent, reactionary medical establishment unwilling to take at face value his anecdotal account of self-salvation and restoration to health.


U.S. Outslugged By Cuban Boxers
LEAD: Cuba's amateur boxing team beat the United States squad in 10 of 12 matches today.
It was the 15th time in 15 dual meetings between the countries, dating to 1977, that Cuba had won.


The Hudson and History
LEAD: Most American tourists know that the nation's wine country can be found in California's Sonoma Valley and that the Shakers live in Pennsylvania.
But if proponents of tourism in the Hudson Valley have their way, a nine-county region including Westchester will soon be known to the nation and to the world as the ''historic''


Police Guard at Kean's Home Accidentally Shoots Himself
LEAD: A state trooper assigned to guard the home of Governor Kean accidentally shot himself in the foot today while cleaning a gun in a trailer outside the Governor's house, officials said.


Elizabeth Joy Wingate Marries Joel M. Hausman
LEAD: Elizabeth Joy Wingate, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul D. Wingate of Hamden, Conn., was married last evening to Joel M. Hausman, the son of Mrs.
Irving Hausman of San Francisco and the late Rabbi Hausman.
Rabbi Herbert Brockman performed the ceremony at Temple Mishkan Israel in Hamden.


Chili and Cash: Aiding an Orchestra
LEAD: AN increasing number of music lovers and some musicians have been joining forces to help the Greenwich Symphony Orchestra.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''It's very difficult, barring a catastrophe, to see any scenario that would derail the economy before the election.''


IMPATIENS - POPULAR, COLORFUL AND CAREFREE
LEAD: Snap or cut off faded daffodils to prevent the formation of seed pods, but allow foliage to ripen naturally.
Fertilize roses, if they have not been fed this spring.
Wait another week or two to plant corn, melons and beans.
Harvest leaf lettuce and spinach.
Plant perennials and new shrubs.
Impatiens


Patricia Ogden Wed
LEAD: Patricia Perkins Ogden and John William McGrath were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York by the Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley.
The bride, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Perkins, is the manager of membership and major gifts at the New York Zoological Society.


Public Employees Don't Live High on the Expense-Account Hog
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fish and Sauces: An Excellent Spring Marriage
LEAD: WITH the arrival of spring it is time to take a fresh look at fish.
The delicate flavor of fish fillets is adaptable to all sorts of interesting sauces.
White fish such as sole or flounder is ideal with cream sauces gently flavored with curry, saffron or turmeric.
A stronger-flavored fish such as red snapper or sea bass goes very well with a puree of yellow peppers, seasoned with shallots, fresh thyme and a dash of balsamic vinegar.


Julia Carlisle Married To Thomas B. Martin
LEAD: The wedding of Julia Ellen Carlisle, a freelance producer and broadcast writer, to Thomas Burch Martin, a producer with the ''Crossfire'' program on the Cable News Network, were married yesterday at the Friends Meeting House in Washington.
The Rev.
William Lloyd Fox Jr., a Unitarian minister, officiated.


Cuomo Orders Inquiry On Troopers' Testimony
LEAD: Governor Cuomo has directed a state commission to investigate allegations that state police officers lied under oath in a vehicular manslaughter case in upstate New York.


'On The Verge' Explores Time Travel
LEAD: IN less than three years, the Boston Post Road Stage Company has emerged as a small theater of audacity and intelligence.
With ''On the Verge,'' which concludes the company's second full season, it may have come up with its most challenging, offbeat play yet.


FICTION
LEAD:  SHINE ON.
By Fred Pfeil. (Lynx House/Small Press Distribution, Cloth, $14.95; Paper, $7.50.) The title of Fred Pfeil's first collection of stories suggests a transcendence his characters seldom attain.
Indeed, ''Shine On'' records the peculiar diminutions of American life during the 1970's and the way a shrinking economy pinches the imagination as well as the purse.


Beer's Shelf Life ...
LEAD: To the Editor:


REFUSING TO BUCKLE
LEAD:  TO LIVE AND TO WRITE  Selections by Japanese Women  Writers 1913-1938.
Edited by Yukiko Tanaka.
Illustrated. 225 pp.
Seattle:  The Seal Press.
Cloth, $16.95.
Paper, $9.95.


Greenport Railroad Museum: Blowing Smoke
LEAD: Project 39 director Jim Brehm's statement estimating that the yet-to-be-finished steam locomotive and the yet-to-even-be-started railroad museum will ''bring in 150,000 visitors a year'' is, I believe, overly optimistic  [ ''Rail Museum to Displace a Furniture Company,'' March 27 ] .


CHILD CARE: THE FEDERAL ROLE GROWS IN THE 80's
LEAD: When Vice President Bush made a campaign stop the other day to express his concern about ''major problems'' in child care, he chose an appropriate setting: the day-care center for the children of Federal workers at the Labor Department, the first of its kind when it opened 20 years ago.


Mary Elizabeth Abele Weds Michael Makurat
LEAD: At St.
Anthony's Roman Catholic Church in Oceanside, L.I., Mary Elizabeth Abele, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Abele of Baldwin and Southold, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael David Makurat, the son of Mrs.
Thomas M. Makurat of Harwich, Mass., and the late Mr.
Makurat.
The Rev.
Thomas F.


KENNEDY DECIDES TO REDECIDE: ONE VOTE TIPS A BALANCE ON CIVIL RIGHTS
LEAD: The Supreme Court sent a chill through civil rights groups last week with an unexpected 5-to-4 vote that left many wondering whether Justice Anthony M. Kennedy's arrival had cemented a conservative majority with an agenda for change.


Headliners; By the Sword
LEAD: An Israeli judge said last week that ''there is no punishment in the rules of man that is severe enough'' for John Demjanjuk, whom an Israeli court found to be a Nazi death camp guard who helped torture and murder thousands of Jews during World War II.
The judge sentenced Mr.
Demjanjuk to death by hanging.


Margaret Russell Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Margaret Angele Russell, a daughter of Mrs.
William Thomas Russell of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Mr.
Russell, was married yesterday to Stephen Wright Barringer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell Newton Barringer Jr. of Durham, N.C., and Myrtle Beach, S.C.
The Rev.
Charles C. Smith performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in New


At S.I. School, Lessons In Curbing Racial Strife
LEAD: In 1980, a scuffle in the gymnasium of New Dorp High School on Staten Island erupted into violence.
Black students were forced to flee in buses as white students hurled stones and shouted racial epithets.
The school was closed temporarily, and it was days before black students returned to class.


New Head of Stevens Sets Goals
LEAD: DR.
HAROLD J. RAVECHE, the next president of Stevens Institute of Technology, says that the nation was built on a foundation of strong education and that ''hands-on experience and studies'' can improve the quality of its future leaders.


Foreign Medical Graduates May Get New Test
LEAD: After years of battling for equal recognition, graduates of foreign medical schools may soon be able to take the same test in basic and clinical sciences that is given to graduates of American medical schools.


Price Tags on Art, Cont'd.
LEAD: To the Editor:


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Feeling Lovable
Floyd Patterson demystifies boxing and shows us what it's actually like.
Here he tells Gay Talese how it feels to be knocked out.
This is from ''Reading the Fights,'' edited by Joyce Carol Oates and Daniel Halpern (Holt).


TIME STANDS STILL
LEAD: For years, architects and designers in major cities have been restoring and renovating buildings that date from early in this century.
Evident from the street are highly polished stone facades, or those freshly painted in colors reproduced from original paint chips.
And inside many residential buildings, apartments are also being renovated in ways that make them appear as though they had never been prey to decades of changing tastes.


U.S.O.C. Cutting Foreign Aid Program
LEAD: The United States Olympic Committee's annual House of Delegates meeting ended today with no major decisions.
However, one minor decision seemed to reflect a growing feeling among some members that less money should be spent on direct aid to athletes and programs of other countries.


An Epidemic of Meningitis Strikes Wide Areas of Africa
LEAD: An epidemic of meningitis in central and western Africa has affected thousands of people and killed hundreds, but vaccination programs are controlling the spread, according to the United Nations Childrens Fund.


Q AND A
LEAD:  Deadbeat Tenant
Question: Recently I agreed to let an acquaintance stay in my apartment until next August while I work in Los Angeles.
We agreed in a letter that she would pay half of the rent and the utility bills.


HOW FOREIGN INVESTMENT FITS INTO AMERICA
LEAD: John J. Nevin has an uncommon mastery of the details of his industry, say his colleagues and competitors.
But the Firestone chief is also known for his interest in the big picture.
Here are some of his thoughts on how foreign investment fits into America's economy:


Native American Potters At Montclair State College
LEAD: ACOMA, a native American pueblo on a mesa in the desert near Albuquerque, N.M., has been described as an awesome, wind-swept plateau.
Said to be the oldest continuously inhabited settlement in North America, Acoma is famous today for its pottery tradition.


Mount Laurel: Slow, Painful Progress
LEAD: After nearly two decades of bearing witness to suits, countersuits and endless appeals, Ethel Lawrence, a 62-year-old grandmother from Mount Laurel, N.J., recites without pause the gist of complex rulings handed down by the New Jersey Supreme Court and cited in discriminatory zoning cases across the nation.


Swing Low, Sweet Dollar: Exports Rise
LEAD: IN the carrying-coals-to-Newcastle department: the first shipload of American-made Honda Accord coupes left Portland, Ore., for export to Japan last month.
Honda, the fourth-largest automaker in the United States, plans to export 4,000 Accords to Japan this year.


Bird Brouhaha
LEAD: To the Editor:


As Amnesty Ends, Aliens Crowd New York Offices
LEAD: With the amnesty program of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 due to expire Wednesday, large numbers of aliens are now coming forward to apply in the New York region.


Punchy
LEAD: FAT CITY  Directed by John Huston.
With Stacy Keach (in photo), Jeff Bridges  and Susan Tyrrell (in photo).
RCA/Columbia Home Video.  96 minutes. $69.95.


THE POLITICS OF VIOLENCE
LEAD:  REVOLUTIONARIES  AND FUNCTIONARIES  The Dual Face of Terrorism.
By Richard Falk.  222 pp.
New York:  E. P. Dutton.


8,000 Officers Mourn a Slain Comrade
LEAD: As strains of ''Amazing Grace'' streamed down Fifth Avenue yesterday morning, 8,000 police officers saluted the flag-draped coffin of Sgt.
John F. McCormick, who was slain last week in a drug raid - a victim, many of his comrades said, in a battle without purpose and a war without end.


The Worm and the Apple; Road Apples
LEAD: Horse diapers!
The very idea convulses public officials in New York.
Horsefeathers! they gibe in response.
Such reactions hastily minimize a public annoyance and ignorantly dismiss a practical remedy.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Bowling  Williams Wins 2d Firestone Title: After opening with four strikes, Mark Williams beat Tony Westlake, 237-214, in the championship game yesterday to capture his second $250,000 Firestone Tournament of Champions in Fairlawn, Ohio.
Williams, at 30 the oldest among the five players in the nationally televised championship round, collected his sixth Professional Bowlers Association crown and $50,000.


Biding Your Time, in Nanoseconds
LEAD: Whoa, wait just a darned nanosecond.
We've been reading more and more lately about something called zero wait states, usually in the context of computer makers bragging about their machines being better than other computers.
Some machines are said to have one wait state.
If that's so great, why are some computer makers - like the Tandy Corporation, the Dell Computer Corporation and Zenith Electronics


Hungary Hardens Its Line Against Internal Critics
LEAD: The Hungarian leadership is taking a tougher stand against people who criticize the Communist Government, in an action that appears designed to reaffirm central control over discussion of economic and political change.


Going With Kids
LEAD: To the Editor: Though I enjoyed Cynthia Samuels' article on traveling with children (Travel, Jan. 24), I wish to correct two pieces of information regarding air travel that appeared in the accompanying box by Dennis Hevesi.
My information is based on a trip we took to Rome last summer with our 6-month-old daughter and on several domestic trips.


ELDERLY LIVES AND LOVERS
LEAD:  SECOND CHANCES  By Alice Adams.  257 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Beside the Sea In Brighton, Royal Fantasy
LEAD: Its owner was impossible, its architect impractical, its workers often unpaid; it was the wrong building at the wrong time in the wrong climate, a visionary extravagance that affronted many of its visitors and was abandoned within 30 years of its completion.
And yet, today, despite restoration work and scaffolding, the Royal Pavilion at Brighton shines forth as the proof that style and imagination can indeed create the most unlikely of masterpieces.


Fish and Sauces: An Excellent Spring Marriage
LEAD: WITH the arrival of spring it is time to take a fresh look at fish.
The delicate flavor of fish fillets is adaptable to all sorts of interesting sauces.
White fish such as sole or flounder is ideal with cream sauces gently flavored with curry, saffron or turmeric.
A stronger-flavored fish such as red snapper or sea bass goes very well with a puree of yellow peppers, seasoned with shallots, fresh thyme and a dash of balsamic vinegar.


Gail Cruikshank Wed To Keith Livingstone
LEAD: The marriage of Gail Warren Cruikshank, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren Lott Cruikshank of Maplewood, N.J., to Keith Eric Livingstone took place yesterday at the home of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruce L. Livingstone, the parents of the bridegroom, in Bellevue, Wash.
Judge James C. Kaiser of King County Northeast District Court in Redmond,


AN ANGLER'S RITES OF SPRING
LEAD: Patricia Leigh Brown has done a service by piercing the myth of fly-fishing's most elite connotations (''An Angler's Rites of Spring,'' March 27).
It's an activity that can be as simple or complex as one desires.
My fly-fishing guide service in the Lake Tahoe area has attracted the ''eclectic'' cross section she mentions: a microsurgeon who was enthralled to learn that a ''triple-surgeon'' is a standard angling knot, a sheet-metal worker, a printer, a fisheries biologist on a busman's holiday, an advertising executive and an M.B


Kimberley Lovell Is Married to Douglas Hiscano
LEAD: Kimberley Whyte Lovell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Lovell Jr. of New Vernon, N.J., and Raymond Cape, Me., was married yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church in New Vernon to Douglas R. Hiscano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raphael A. Hiscano of Short Hills, N.J., and Stag Lake in Andover, N.J.


VICE PRESIDENTS OFTEN GET ON BASE, BUT SELDOM SCORE
LEAD: Vice President Bush's march toward the Republican nomination is carrying him into a predicament that few men in his position have overcome.


CERONE LIKES HIS ROLE ON TEAM HE USED TO HATE
LEAD: NOT only do the Boston Red Sox have Roger Clemens and Lee Smith and Ellis Burks and Mike Greenwell, but they also have history on their side.


Fresh Air, Fresh Outlooks
LEAD: When 9-year-old DeeDee, from New York City, went on her first visit to an apple farm in Maine, she was amazed.
She never knew, she said, that apples grow on trees.
She thought they arrived in plastic bags.
Her enlightenment came by way of the Fresh Air Fund, which offers poor inner-city youngsters free vacations in the country.


CUBS SET BACK GIANTS, 2-1, IN 13TH
LEAD: Vance Law hit a run-scoring single with two out in the 13th inning, giving the Chicago Cubs a 2-1 victory today over the Giants.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Franklin Township  $145,000
135 Hampton Court
2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2-year-old town-house condominium; patio, cathedral ceiling; monthly charges $67.50, taxes $2,181.
Livingston  $415,000
8 Birchwood Drive
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old split level; deck, dining room, finished basement; taxes $4,389.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I recently painted my living room.
The radiator, which is the old-fashioned cast-iron type, has brown stains on it and is peeling in places.
It has been painted many times before.
How can I paint this so it won't develop these dark stains and peel, and can I do this while the heat is on?


ARAB RAGE INSIDE ISRAEL
LEAD: Last December's Israeli-Arab general strike indeed was a shock to many Israeli Jews.
But the Police Minister, Haim Bar-Lev, reported that violence occurred in only four Arab communities, and those incidents were condemned by the strike's organizers.
In contrast to the violence in the territories, the Israeli-Arab demonstrations on Land Day in March were peaceful, as was the general strike Israel's Arab citizens held in June 1987 to protest inequities in municipal services, education, housing and employment opportunities.


Is This the End?
LEAD: HE hasn't even seen the doctor, but Jimmy Connors, who has been nursing a sore foot for months, has the scenario mapped out.
The doctor will tell him he needs surgery and suddenly his career will be over. ''I'm finished,'' he said. ''I'd have to take six months off, then I'm 36 years old.
Then it would take me six months more to get back in decent shape.


Saudis Reject Plan For an OPEC Deal With Nonmembers
LEAD: Saudi Arabia rejected early today a proposal that would have opened the way to unprecedented cooperation between the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and nonmember independent oil producers.


For Poland's Priests, Labor Unrest Means Walking a Tightrope
LEAD: When the steelworkers of Stalowa Wola ended their strike today the leaders, and a few followers, marched to a Catholic church for a rally and Mass.


Volleyball, Swimming and the Dow
LEAD: School will be out soon.
Want to make sure that your child doesn't spend the whole summer just enjoying fishing or hanging around the malls?
Then send him or her to business camp.
Between volleyball and swimming, the future financiers of America can spend a week sharpening their money-making skills.


Japanese Adults, Spurning the Likes of 'Miami Vice,' Can't Get Enough Of Oscar the Grouch
LEAD: On April 10, ''Sesame Street'' went back on the air in Japan after a seven-year absence.
Its return for an hour every Sunday evening struck a blow for sound adult programming.


Shooting for Dollars
LEAD: EVER since he began his National Basketball Association career in 1985 as a third-round draft pick of the Sacramento Kings, Michael Adams, has been a year-to-year player.
But since coming to the Denver Nuggets in a trade with the Washington Bullets last November, Adams has been working toward the future.


Companies Teaching Workers 3 R's to Compete in Age of High Technology
LEAD: When Motorola Inc. introduced a system of quality control at its plant in Arcade, N.Y., it found that many employees lacked the mathematical skills needed to understand the new statistics-based approach.
In response, Motorola officials added six hours of remedial training in grade-school mathematics for all workers.


TOBACCO MAKERS ATTACK TESTIMONY
LEAD: Three tobacco companies accused of causing a smoker's death asked a Federal judge this week to strike much of the testimony from the record of the civil trial.


Verbatim: Koch and Blacks
LEAD: ' Whatever the Mayor thought he was doing about what he did, I'm here to tell him, and I think the whole city community - black and white - are saying, that it didn't come out right, Ed, and it has a divisive tone to it. '  Benjamin Ward
Police Commissioner of New York City, calling on Mayor Koch to apologize for his attacks on the Rev.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bellmore  $165,000
906 Ardmore Place
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; new eat-in kitchen, basement, new siding; taxes $1,800.
Elmont  $169,000
195 East Warwick Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; finished basement, eat-in kitchen; taxes $2,400.


Hospital: A Meditation
LEAD: My earliest recollections of a hospital were of St.
Mary's, in a town in upstate New York.


A SELF-MADE SCIENTIST
LEAD:  IN PRAISE OF IMPERFECTION  My Life and Work.
By Rita Levi-Montalcini.
Translated by Luigi Attardi.
Illustrated. 220 pp.
New York:  Sloan Foundation Science Series/  Basic Books. $18.95.


CHARLESTON
LEAD: For years, the standard itinerary to Charleston, S.C., included touring a meticulously restored home, riding the ferry to Fort Sumter, dining on a bowl of she-crab soup and picking up a souvenir: a coiled seagrass basket, or perhaps a miniature bale of cotton.


Forrest Bess: Desire Ruled His Vision
LEAD: Forrest Bess WAS BORN IN BAY City, Tex., in 1911.
He went to Texas A. &amp; M. and the University of Texas, studying architecture, philosophy and religion.
Like his father, he worked in oilfields.
He lived in Mexico.
He wandered.
During World War II, he served in the Army and was commended for camouflage design.


AFTER THE BRIDGESTONE DEAL, WHAT NEXT?
LEAD: After 17 years as a Ford Motor Company manager, eight years as chief executive of the Zenith Electronics Corporation and nine years at the top of the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company, John J. Nevin is unsure where he is going next.


Posting: Condominium Hotel; A Return to Victoriana in Chautauqua
LEAD: A resort hotel at a resort with a season only nine weeks long needs an innovative plan to be successful.
That is why developers of the St.
Elmo Hotel in Chautauqua, N.Y., joined a nationwide trend toward hotel condominiums.
The 63-unit, Victorian-style hotel will be among the first built exclusively as a condominium.


In the Bush With Thesiger
LEAD: To the Editor:


Samuelson's Absence Leaves Lots of Room for Unexpected
LEAD: The absence of Joan Benoit Samuelson, the best American female marathoner ever, has left the Olympic marathon trial today in Pittsburgh wide open for a handful of other runners with a legitimate chance to finish among the first three, make the Olympic team and win $25,000.


Bold, Vibrant Quilts By the Mennonites
LEAD: Maggie Tulliver, George Eliot's heroine in ''The Mill on the Floss,'' thought making patchwork was foolish -''tearing things to pieces to sew 'em together again.'' But it would be hard to come away from a tiny shop in Toronto without being impressed by the skill and panache of 19th- and early 20th-century


Richard Chamberlain's Mini-Series Mastery
LEAD: The king of the mini-series is tired and yearning for his beach house in Hawaii. ''I don't handle complexity very well,'' Richard Chamberlain says. ''I'm very simple-minded.
It's so simple in Hawaii -watching the sunset is the big event of the day.''


WHO WILL WIN THE KENTUCKY DERBY?
LEAD: It is not any race horse who can achieve a 7-for-7 lifetime victory record over different racetracks, at various distances, against the best horses in the East.
Along with these accomplishments, intelligence, honesty and heart are necessary for greatness.
My 1988 Kentucky Derby choice embodies all of these qualities.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A music review last Sunday about the Juilliard American Opera Center's production of Benjamin Britten's ''Midsummer Night's Dream'' misidentified the singer in the role of Theseus.
He was Scott Wilde.


Culture Shock
LEAD: To the Editor: When I returned home from Europe on a recent trip, the one startling impression that struck me at Kennedy Airport, and as I eventually emerged into city traffic, was the sight of traffic policemen with revolvers sticking out at the ready from their holsters.
Momentarily it was frightening.


Can a Small 'Romance' Seduce Broadway?
LEAD: No careening chandeliers, no raving madman scurrying across a false proscenium.
No roller skates, no barricade, no neon dragons descending from the heights.
Just two couples in two small musical plays about grown-up love in ''Romance, Romance.''


Posting: Broker at the Bank; One-Stop Shopping
LEAD: It may not be a giant step in the evolution of convenience merchandising, but it now is possible to shop for a co-op, condo or house in a bank and then walk over to another desk to sign up for a loan to buy it.


INSIDE
LEAD:  First Meal for Condor Chick
Molloko, the first California condor conceived in captivity, dined on minced mouse at San Diego's Wild Animal Park.
Page 27.
Workers Stress the 3 R's
In this age of high technology, American companies are trying to correct employees' deficiencies in reading, writing and mathematics.


Blood Screening for Cancer Due
LEAD: The American Association of Blood Banks will require testing for the human cancer virus HTLV-1 as soon as test kits are licensed by the Food and Drug Administration, a spokesman said Friday.


Sinkhole Swallows House
LEAD: A large sinkhole quickly swallowed a house and two others teetered on the edge in a subdivision near this central Florida town, the authorities said today.


PLAYING A HAND BY THE NUMBERS
LEAD: To what extent mathematics and bridge go together is an interesting question.
There are indeed some high-level mathematicians who are terrible bridge-players and vice versa, but there is surely some correlation.
Perhaps there is a mathematical-bridge potential that may lie partially dormant.


Chaille R. Latham Weds a Physician
LEAD: Chaille Randolph Latham, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest B. Latham 2d of New York and Nantucket, Mass., and Dr.
Gerald Edward Rodts Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rodts of Dallas and Clearwater, Fla., were married yesterday at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York.
The Rev.
Henry Heaps performed the ceremony, assisted by Msgr.


Olympic Ideals Are Forgotten
LEAD: To The Sports Editor:


Hollywood Comes to Starstruck Meriden
LEAD: LARGE crowds gathered across the street and movie extras earning $50 a day stood patiently in their designated positions while a plethora of cameras, lights, cables and other movie-making gear filled the parking lot at the Uptown Garage in Meriden last Monday and Tuesday.


Hospitals Are Set On Budgets
LEAD: AFTER nearly five months of negotiations and more than halfway through the fiscal year, general hospitals all have approved budgets.


Going With Kids
LEAD: To the Editor: Cynthia Samuels' piece was most timely for our family, which is beginning to consider traveling with its first grandchild.
It also brought back pleasant recollections of traveling with our two children when they were young (a girl 8 and a boy 5 who had his sixth birthday in Rome), and it reminded us of some preparations we made beyond those that Mrs.


Segovia Concert Planned for Saturday
LEAD: A free concert in honor of the guitarist Andres Segovia will be held Saturday at 7 P.M. at St.
Patrick's Cathedral; Mr.
Segovia died last year at the age of 94.
The concert is part of a monthlong series of events sponsored by Casa de Espana, a cultural center assisted by the Spanish Government and the New York Chamber of Commerce.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article in the Arts and Leisure section on April 17 about the pre-Broadway tour of ''Macbeth'' and an article in some copies of the main news section on March 6 about the United States visit of Prince Charles misidentified a theater in Pittsburgh.


Growth at the Opera
LEAD: The New Rochelle Opera is a relatively new local institution.
Started in 1982 by its artistic director, Camille Coppola, who first brought bits and pieces of operas to schools in the county, the company now has a troupe of 30 and is presenting fully staged productions.


Linda Bradshaw Wed in Maryland
LEAD: Linda Patrice Bradshaw and David Karim Lakhdhir, associates in Manhattan law firms, were married yesterday at the Civic Center Mansion in Rockville, Md.
Judge Monroe G. McKay of the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit in Salt Lake City, and the Rev.
Gary M. Gallun, a Unitarian minister, officiated.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  ANTIQUE TIME


MEXICO CANDIDATE TESTS U.S. WATERS
LEAD: Although he is several months away from becoming president of Mexico, Carlos Salinas de Gortari is already moving behind the scenes to establish lines of communication with a force that always looms large in Mexican foreign relations: the United States.


Committee Procedure Defended by Senator
LEAD: In her Feb. 14 Opinion Page article, Phyllis Elston correctly pointed out that I opposed S. 426, which granted the Legislature authority to endorse or reject the pending State Development and Redevelopment Plan.
She also correctly pointed out that I was the only one of five committee members opposed to the bill.


A Difficult Year for the College-Bound
LEAD: TO the considerable relief of hundreds of Westchester high school seniors and their counselors, April is over and college acceptances have been received.


D. B. Park Is Wed To Sidney Allison
LEAD: The Montview Boulevard Presbyterian Church in Denver was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Anne Sidney Allison, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Clark Allison of The Hague and Plandome Manor, L.I., to David Black Park, the son of James B. Park of Denver and Mrs.
Kenneth F. Lewis of Old Lyme, Conn.


JIM'S ORBIT WINS THE DERBY TRIAL
LEAD: This year's contenders for the Kentucky Derby May 7 have seemed close together in ability all year, but they have never been closer than they were today at the finish of the spring's final prep race.


METS WIN; UMPIRE FLEES FANS
LEAD: The Mets prevailed and were happy.
The umpires survived and were just plain relieved.
Pete Rose, whose team lost, said he was injured and incensed and somewhat unsure of what his options for protesting the game were.


Lawsuit Over AIDS Exposure
LEAD: Three hemophiliac brothers who doctors say were probably exposed to AIDS through blood-clotting agents are suing two pharmaceutical companies that processed the product.


Glimpses of Desolation and Redemption
LEAD: Eric Clapton now has his monument: ''Crossroads'' (Polydor 835261), a five-LP, four-cassette or four-CD set that covers the singer-guitarist's career from his first demos with the Yardbirds in 1963 to a September 1987 remake of ''After Midnight'' (commissioned, ignominiously, for a beer commercial).


Review/Theater; Rock-and-Roll Music Against the Law
LEAD: In ''Robin's Band,'' an outspoken little musical set in the near future, there is never any question of who is good and who is evil.
The good guys, costumed in colorful improvised outfits that make them resemble refugees from a postpunk version of ''Hair,'' are assorted street people who have been dispossessed of their homes by greedy real-estate barons and forced to live in ''the undeveloped zone'' of an unnamed major city.


Constance Ann Schlitz Wed in Capital
LEAD: Constance Ann Schlitz, the daughter of Warren J. Schlitz of Shaker Heights, Ohio, and the late Ann Schaffner Schlitz, was married yesterday to Worth Daniels MacMurray, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Frank G. MacMurray of McLean and Madison, Va.
Canon Charles Martin performed the Episcopal ceremony in the great choir at the Washington


PRO &amp; CON: HOW MUCH GOVERNMENT SHOULD DO FOR PARENTS
LEAD: TO meet the growing need of working parents for day care for their children, states are increasingly playing a role.
Local governments, too, are taking a hand.
But many believe that, as with public schooling, only the Government can insure affordable, dependable programs nationwide.


JEWISH SETTLERS SEEK ROOTS IN A HOSTILE LAND
LEAD: ''Here is the heart of Samaria,'' said Ron Nachman, standing on a windswept hilltop near the old Arab city of Nablus. ''Here is the future.''


OBSERVING THE VERY RICH CAN BECOME STILTED VOYEURISM
LEAD: Whom the gods would destroy, they first make rich and famous. ''Onassis: The Richest Man in the World'' may pretend otherwise - actually, it makes quite a point of doing so -but the message comes through all the same.
Aristotle Onassis, his wives, mistresses, family members, various Kennedys and even Winston Churchill all look lonely.


A. L. Adams Wed To Louise Rambo
LEAD: The marriage of Louise de Clercq Rambo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Rambo of the Chestnut Hill section of Philadelphia, to Anthony Lane Adams, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lane W. Adams of New York and New Canaan, Conn., took place yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Chestnut Hill.
The Rev.


Review/Recital; Poe Story With Cello And Piano
LEAD: For his cello recital at the 92d Street Y on Thursday evening, Eric Bartlett presented a pair of New York premieres sandwiched between pieces by Beethoven, Schumann and Brahms.
Larry Bell's ''The Black Cat,'' based on Poe's story, proved the more unusual, if less impressive, of the two - a monodrama or dramatic recitation accompanied by illustrative music.


Noriega Is Seen at an Advantage As Washington Shifts Approach
LEAD: The Reagan Administration's new approach to Panama's leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, is perceived in Panama as a risky move that may not resolve the country's political crisis.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The impression of the I.N.S. agents and officials that Salvadorans come to the United States solely for economic gain reflect a lack of sensitivity and understanding, and derive from ignorance on the part of I.N.S. agents as to the complex motivations and situations of those who have fled El Salvador.


HELL ON WHEELS
LEAD: We're lucky.
We have a house in the country.
The house is in Massachusetts, 137.6 miles from our apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan - if we take the Taconic State Parkway north and then Route 23 east.
If we take the Saw Mill River Parkway and Interstate 684 and Route 22, turning off at Wassaic and proceeding through Sharon, Conn., and Mill River, Mass., then the whole trip is 114.7 miles.


Marguerite F. Karter Wed to H. R. Elisofon
LEAD: Marguerite F. Karter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence B. Karter of New York, and Howard Rory Elisofon, a son of George Elisofon of Brooklyn and the late Sylvia Elisofon, were married last evening at the Explorers Club in New York.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsi performed the ceremony.


Fish and Sauces: An Excellent Spring Marriage
LEAD: WITH the arrival of spring it is time to take a fresh look at fish.
The delicate flavor of fish fillets is adaptable to all sorts of interesting sauces.
White fish such as sole or flounder is ideal with cream sauces gently flavored with curry, saffron or turmeric.
A stronger-flavored fish such as red snapper or sea bass goes very well with a puree of yellow peppers, seasoned with shallots, fresh thyme and a dash of balsamic vinegar.


'It's Playoff Time'
LEAD: MARK JACKSON'S lower lip was sticking out, more in pain than defiance.
He had caught a stray elbow during the horror sequence, and two of his front teeth were feeling loose.


The False Promise of Burden-Sharing
LEAD: Look, say the Presidential candidates: Our allies prosper while the United States strains to provide far more than its share of the common defense.
The allies must be forced, the refrain goes, to do their fair share.
The theme already has been reduced to shorthand: burden-sharing.
Like most slogans, this one reverberates with simplicity, power - and ignorance.


Fawn Hall and Others Named Unindicted Co-Conspirators
LEAD: Fawn Hall, the former secretary to Oliver L. North, has been named by a Federal grand jury as an unindicted co-conspirator in the Iran-contra affair, The Los Angeles Times a reported today.


NBC's Correspondent Expelled From Jordan
LEAD: The Government today ordered an NBC News television correspondent to leave the country after he reported that Jordan is a repressive society.
The reporter, Rick Davis, was given a week to leave.


Lenin and Hegel
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baseball; Relief Is Fleeting For Lowly Orioles
LEAD: Back in the days when the notion of a Baltimore Orioles victory was nothing more than fantasy - why, it seems like only yesterday - everyone up to and including the manager wondered about the climactic moment.


Close the Markets and Prices Will Rise
LEAD: Last Tuesday Nathan Lewin, a partner in the law firm of Miller, Cassidy, Larroca &amp; Lewin, argued before the Supreme Court in favor of keeping the gray markets open.
The court is expected to decide on this question before it recesses in July.
Mr.
Lewin spoke with the Business Forum editor, Joel Kurtzman, about how the consumer benefits from gray markets and why the gray markets should not be closed.


Britain, With Soviet Help, Seizes Afghan Hashish in London
LEAD: Customs investigators in London seized 3.5 tons of Afghan hashish in the first anti-drug operation involving Britain and the Soviet Union, the authorities announced Friday.


Switzerland
LEAD: To the Editor: Switzerland has instituted an entrance fee to use its highways.
They charge 40 Swiss francs (about $24) to enter the country driving a car.
What is unfair is that this charge is a yearly one, so that anyone who drives into Switzerland for a visit of a couple of hours, as we did, is required to pay the fee.


THINKING GIVES EUGENE A HEADACHE
LEAD:  THE KNOCKOUT ARTIST  By Harry Crews.  269 pp.
New York: Harper &amp; Row. $17.95.


COMING TO TERMS WITH VIETNAM
LEAD: The last time I saw the then-infamous Nguyen Thi Binh was in January 1973.
It was during the brief moment when Madame Binh, who was then Foreign Minister of the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government, took center stage with North Vietnamese negotiator Le Duc Tho and American diplomats Henry A.


Fish and Sauces: An Excellent Spring Marriage
LEAD: WITH the arrival of spring it is time to take a fresh look at fish.
The delicate flavor of fish fillets is adaptable to all sorts of interesting sauces.
White fish such as sole or flounder is ideal with cream sauces gently flavored with curry, saffron or turmeric.
A stronger-flavored fish such as red snapper or sea bass goes very well with a puree of yellow peppers, seasoned with shallots, fresh thyme and a dash of balsamic vinegar.


May Day to May 7
LEAD: Salute to Israel


Can River Projects Be Made Fish-Friendly?
LEAD: Many residents of the metropolitan area know that the shad and the alewives and the weakfish living in the waters hereabouts are hardy creatures because they are, after all, New York fish and thus are survivors.
They have been living in New York's bays, rivers and estuaries since long before the arrival of either the Half Moon or the Staten


First Step Is Offered In Homeless Crisis
LEAD: The League of Women Voters of Westchester believes it is imperative to solve the crisis of homeless people in our midst - so often discussed in this section.
A first step is being offered by HELP II.
We support immediate action to adopt the proposed HELP II projects.


TOWARD GIVING UP EGO AND GETTING TOGETHER
LEAD: TRADE groups have always been concerned with lobbying.
But today, ''the number of associations that don't have an active government relations program is so minuscule as to be almost uncountable,'' said Michael D. Lane, executive director of the Associations Council of the National Association of Manufacturers.


4 Arabs and Israeli Wounded in Renewed Unrest
LEAD: Palestinian youths pelted troops with stones today in scattered anti-Israeli protests in the occupied territories, and four Palestinians and a soldier were wounded, military officials and Palestinians said.


Balletic Blend
LEAD:  RAYMONDA  The Bolshoi Ballet, starring Ludmila  Semenyaka (in photo), Irek Mukhamedov  and Gedeminas Taranda.
Choreographed  by Yuri Grigorovitch and Marius Petipa.
Music by Alexander Glazunov.
Kultur.  146 minutes. $39.95.


FICTION
LEAD:  INTIMATE STRANGERS: New Stories From Quebec.
Edited by Matt Cohen and Wayne Grady. (Penguin, Paper, $6.95.) Canadian literature remains, in this country, largely an unknown landscape, one in which only a few figures have much visibility.
And so the large, robust and diverse body of work produced by the generation of French Canadian writers who came of age in the 1970's has been virtually invisible in the United States.


40 Are Hurt in Electrical Fire At Radio-TV Center in Cairo
LEAD: An electrical fire today damaged the 27-story building housing Government radio and television and sent 40 people to the hospital for smoke inhalation, officials said.


Correction
LEAD: In last week's Arts and Leisure section, a short article about the American music planned at Lincoln Center incorrectly described a work by Tobias Picker.
It is a five-movement composition for string quartet and bass.


FORGIVE US OUR DEFICITS
LEAD:  BALANCED BUDGETS &amp; AMERICAN POLITICS  By James D. Savage.
Tables. 350 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.:  Cornell University Press. $27.95.


SCREEN TEST By LINDA WELLS
LEAD: Going to the beach used to be sim-ple.
You headed off with a towel, a paperback book and a bottle of suntan lotion under your arm.


KOCH THINKS OF SKIPPING CONVENTION
LEAD: Although he is Mayor of the largest city in the country, Mayor Koch may not attend the Democratic National Convention in Atlanta in mid-July.
It would be the first time in the memory of veteran politicians that a Democratic Mayor of New York did not go to the convention.


New Arizona Governor Files Financial Data
LEAD: Gov.
Rose Mofford has filed amended financial disclosure forms to cover transactions omitted from sworn documents she filed over the last 10 years, and she has apologized for what she called an honest mistake.


Pier Redevelopment Plans Stir Concerns
LEAD: While some New York City piers continue to receive cargo and many others crumble into the slime, Pier A awaits a restaurant, Pier 84 a permanent concert stage and Pier 10 a floating museum.
A wave of development proposals washing over the waterfront also includes plans for ferry terminals, marinas, condominiums and hotels.


Business Forum; INCOME DISTRIBUTION: A GROWING GAP BETWEEN RICH AND POOR
LEAD: Robert Solow, a Nobel prize-winning economist, said it best, ''Redistribution is something Americans aren't very good at.'' Instead, America's chosen weapon against income inequality has been rapid economic growth.
And in fact, rapid growth is a devastating weapon against this problem, promoting rising wages and salaries and helping low-income workers in other ways.


Protecting the Atmospheric Balance
LEAD: LIKE it or not, we are living in an increasingly complex world.


THE MYSTERIOUS THOREAU
LEAD: I stand in awe of my body, this matter to which I am bound has become so strange to me.
I fear not spirits, ghosts, of which I am one . . . but I fear bodies, I tremble to meet them.
What is this Titan that has possession of me?
Talk of mysteries! - Think of our life in nature, - daily to be shown matter, to come into contact with it, - rocks, trees, wind on our cheeks!


College Students Need Drug-Abuse Education
LEAD: The article on campus drinking  [ ''Campus Drinking: Colleges Confront 'Issue of the 80's,' '' April 10 ]  presents some interesting information on how local colleges are struggling to regulate alcohol consumption among their student bodies, but the analysis lacks sufficient breadth to cover how the colleges are failing today to provide much meaningful education about drug and alcohol abuse.


GYPSY CABS MOVE DEEPER UNDERGROUND
LEAD: One year after New York City launched a drive to tame the wide-open nonmedallion taxi industry by giving the Taxi and Limousine Commission jurisdiction over the cars and drivers in that business, the result has justified neither the worst fears of the car services nor the best hopes of city officials.


Leslie Ginway Plans An October Wedding
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Ginway of Lake Forest, Ill., and Mantoloking, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Leslie McDowell Ginway to Peter Craig Gambee, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Craig Gambee of Weston, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.


DO SURGEONS NEED MORE GOVERNMENT REGULATION?
LEAD: Last year, when a Mexican surgical team reported that a new and potentially dangerous operation could remarkably improve the condition of patients with Parkinson's disease, Dr.
Christopher Goetz, a Chicago neurologist, felt he had to offer the surgery to patients who were besieging him for help.
Assuming that Federal permission would be required to perform the controversial procedure, he and other surgeons sought guidance from the Food and Drug Administration.


The Polish Stalemate
LEAD: The Polish Government remains unwilling to give any recognition or legal rights to Solidarity, the union movement it outlawed.
But unless it does, it cannot effectively govern the country - cannot stop Poland's slide into economic disaster.


Nancy Susan Rose Is Wed To Donnell Robert Dufford
LEAD: Nancy Susan Rose, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Zeldon E. Rose of West Long Branch, N.J., was married last night to Donnell Robert Dufford, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Darwin H. Dufford of El Cajon, Calif.
Rabbi Joseph Goldman officiated at the Channel Club in Monmouth Beach, N.J.


Yonkers Fight Perils Economic Plan
LEAD: A political dispute between the new city administration and the one it replaced last November is jeopardizing participation in an economic development program.


Turnpike Acts to Ease Delays
LEAD: MOTORISTS using the eastern spur of the New Jersey Turnpike between Newark and the Lincoln Tunnel exit are feeling the impact of construction on the western spur, which carries traffic between Newark and the George Washington Bridge exit.


Vickee S. Jordan And B. M. Adams To Marry in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Vernon E. Jordan Jr. of Washington have announced the engagement of Mr.
Jordan's daughter, Vickee Sharee Jordan, to Barry Monroe Adams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl L. Adams Jr. of Maplewood, N.J. and Oak Bluffs, Mass.
The couple plan to marry June 18.


Fresh Air Fund, at 112, Contends With Change
LEAD: The Fresh Air Fund begins its 112th fund-raising campaign today.
It is seeking to raise $1.3 million to give 10,000 children from New York City a taste of summertime in the country.


Poet Wins Fight Against Silence
LEAD: FOR William Meredith, working on his latest volume of poetry, ''Partial Accounts:


AWAITING THE CRACK OF DOOM
LEAD:  NUCLEAR FEAR  A History of Images.
By Spencer R. Weart.  535 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press. $29.50.


Energy Future
LEAD: To the Editor:


CORRECTION
LEAD: In last week's column, several words were dropped from the analysis starting with Black's ninth move.
The sentence should have read: Black could not have kept his pawns unbroken by 9 ...
QxB?! because 10 N-Q5, Q-Q1; 11 P-QB4 is strong, Black being unable to play 11 ...
P-N5? because of 12 Q-R4!


Church Symbol Meets Modern Art
LEAD: It is entitled ''Art of the Madonna,'' a national competition sponsored by the city's oldest Roman Catholic parish and intended to create a contemporary artistic vision of the Madonna and Child, one of the church's most timeless symbols.


Amy Sullivan Is Wed To Thomas E. Pajusi
LEAD: Amy Sullivan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Sullivan of Valley Stream, L.I., and Thomas E. Pajusi, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elmo Pajusi of Pelham Manor, N.Y., were married yesterday in the Lady Chapel at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Anthony Dalla Villa performed the ceremony.


A Bounty of Vocal Concerts Tops the Programs
LEAD: WHEN Johann Strauss wrote his ''Voices of Spring,'' he might well have been describing the bountiful harvest of vocal concerts in Connecticut this week.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.77
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.33
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.67
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.34
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
13.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
17.75


VIRTUOSITY IN ATTACK SHOULD GET PRIORITY
LEAD: The ideal, to achieve a style perfectly balanced for both attack and defense, is seen very rarely.
The games of three world champions, Bobby Fischer, Boris Spassky and Gary Kasparov, are perhaps the best illustrations of the universal man.
Most of the other champions have gravitated toward the attacking pole of an Alexander Alekhine or Mikhail Tal or the defensive pole of an Emanuel Lasker or Tigran


Louise Riskin Married To Eugene Messinger
LEAD: Louise Brooke Riskin and Eugene Francis Messinger were married last evening at the Harmonie Club in New York yes by Rabbi Harold Swiss.


No More Meeses
LEAD: The nonstop controversy over Edwin Meese 3d demonstrates the indispensability of an independent attorney general committed to the rule of law.
Voters must insist that the Presidential candidates specify right now the criteria they would use to choose a nominee.


A Pastiche of American Dishes
LEAD: CINNAMON TEALS, according to the staff of this new Danbury restaurant, is named for a duck.
It is also in a shopping complex called Cinnamon Plaza.
To emphasize the theme, duck decoys decorate one wall, and the menu is graced with duck drawings.


Miss Cunningham Is Wed
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Holy Name in Chicago, Kathleen Cunningham, a daughter of Joan Bennett of Arvada, Colo., and David Cunningham of Lake Oswego, Ore., was married yesterday to Robert H. Jaffee, a son of Mary Silk of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Wilton L. Jaffee Jr. of Aspen, Colo.
The Rev.


MODERATE-PRICED HOUSING: MUST CITY BE FOREVER SHORT OF AFFORDABLE LIVING SPACE?
LEAD: BY even the most conservative estimate, New York City needs 230,000 more places to live.
The rate of housing abandonment has slowed in recent years, but construction of new apartments and houses has remained anemic.


TAKING THE ELECTRIC POWER BUSINESS PUBLIC
LEAD: The electric power industry is watching uneasily as the Long Island Lighting Company tries to fight off a hostile takeover by the public agency created for the purpose of reconsidering Lilco's existence.


A Rose Grows in the Hamptons
LEAD: A RED neon rose sporting a single leaf and solitary prominent thorn glows in the window of C. J. Thorne in Bridgehampton.
This sophisticated yet mellow new restaurant has one of those made-up-sounding names that usually mark yuppie watering holes.


Headliners; By the Billions
LEAD: David Packard never wanted to take his fortune with him, but he wants to be very sure of how it is used.
Mr.
Packard, the 75-year-old board chairman of the Hewlett-Packard Company, last week disclosed his plans for transferring his $2 billion fortune to the David and Lucille Packard Foundation, making it the fifth or sixth largest in the country.


Labor Chief In Hartford Softens Tone
LEAD: Eight months ago, Betty L. Tianti, president of the state A.F.L.-C.I.O., addressed a rally of several hundred striking workers from the Colt Industries firearms plant here and passionately told the locked-out employees that their cause was just and that they should persevere.


Giants Are Loaded On Offensive Line
LEAD: The Giants' demise last season began with health problems in the offensive line.
Now, after the National Football League draft, the Giants face another problem with the offensive line -what to do with all those players.


Post Mortem on Twin Doctors
LEAD: Jeremy Irons, who made a major impact on American audiences with his performances in television's ''Brideshead Revisited'' and with his Tony Award-winning role in the Broadway version of Tom Stoppard's ''Real Thing,'' has been particular in his selection of film roles.
Mr.
Irons, who will turn 40 later this year, has appeared in only seven pictures, none of them made in Hollywood and only two of them, ''The French Lieutenant's Woman'' and ''The


Miss Mohan Wed To James Murray
LEAD: At the Asbury United Methodist Church in Crestwood, N.Y., Lorraine Ann Mohan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Mohan of Milford, Mass., was married yesterday to James Francis Murray, a son of Mrs.
James P. Murray of Tuckahoe, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Murray.
The Rev.
William S. Shillady performed the ceremony.


Review/City Ballet; Images of a Painter Set in Vigorous Motion
LEAD: As a 9-year-old in 1965, Paul Schwartz made front-page news by discovering a leak in Central Park's reservoir during a water shortage in the city.


AS SOVIET PULLOUT NEARS, UNEASY CALM FOR AFGHANS
LEAD: The Afghan soldier on guard in downtown Kabul looked rather smart in his green fatigues, except for one detail.
He had carelessly put on his brass belt buckle so that the hammer and sickle were upside down.


Landlocked Ark Caught in Storm
LEAD: For five years, Kea Tawana, a church caretaker in Newark, put her ''heart and soul, blood and sweat'' into the project.


Three Recitals by Pianists
LEAD: TWO fine young Westchester pianists, and another who is already a world-renowned artist, are enhancing the recital scene this week.
William Wolfram returns to his alma mater today, Cynthia Peterson presents an unusual fusion of music and spirituality on Saturday and Garrick Ohlsson, also on Saturday, closes out the season for Friends of


Christina Brucia Wed To Steven Breitenfeld
LEAD: The marriage of Christina Brucia, a daughter of Justice and Mrs.
James J. Brucia of Roslyn, L.I., to Steven Breitenfeld, the son of Capt. and Mrs.
Ludwig Breitenfeld of Summit, N.J., took place yesterday at Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
The bride's father, a State Supreme Court justice in Mineola, L


Jackson Tried to Free Journalist
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, who helped negotiate the release of a United States pilot who had been shot down over Syria, also played a role in freeing the journalist Jeremy Levin as a hostage in Lebanon in 1985, according to a new book.


WINFIELD TIES R.B.I. MARK AS YANKEES ROLL
LEAD: The month ended suddenly, and when it did, Dave Winfield was there again, smiling about another incredible night and another Yankee victory.


SOVIET NEWSPAPER PRAISES DISSIDENT
LEAD: Roy Medvedev, the independent historian whose fiercely critical books about the Stalin era have won world acclaim but have been banned in his own country, was praised this week by an official newspaper for his work and his role as a voice of conscience.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I recently painted my living room.
The radiator, which is the old-fashioned cast-iron type, has brown stains on it and is peeling in places.
It has been painted many times before.
How can I paint this so it won't develop these dark stains and peel, and can I do this while the heat is on?


Review/Concert; DePriest and Philharmonic
LEAD: James DePreist concluded his two-week visit to the New York Philharmonic with a program of lavishly scored works by Faure, Saint-Saens and Walton.
Given the brilliant edge Mr.
DePreist has brought to his recordings with his own Oregon Symphony lately, the last thing this listener expected from his collaboration with the Philharmonic was the kind of tepid performance he drew from the orchestra on Friday afternoon.


Dr. Lisa S. White Weds a Physician
LEAD: Dr.
Lisa Sue White, an oral surgeon in Methuen, Mass., and Dr.
Barry Stephen Paul, a dermatologist in Boston, were married last night at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston by Rabbi Amiel Wohl.


PLAYING BY THE NUMBERS
LEAD: Former Gov.
Jim Rhodes of Ohio had a favorite trick in campaign speeches: He would take out his wallet, slap it on the lectern, and shout, ''That is where elections are won.''


Former State Official Joins Race for DioGuardi's Seat
LEAD: NITA LOWEY, a former assistant secretary of state in New York, entered the Democratic race for Congress last week, the third member of her party to seek the 20th Congressional District seat held by the two-term Republican incumbent Representative Joseph J. DioGuardi.


Miss Efthimiou Weds S. L. Probasco 3d
LEAD: Alexis Efthimiou, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Basil Efthimiou of Garden City, L.I., and Scott Livingston Probasco 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Probasco Jr. of Lookout Mountain, Tenn., were married yesterday at the Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral in New York.
The Rev.
Milton Basil Efthimiou, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony.


Bowdoin Fraternities Assailed
LEAD: A committee looking into the fate of fraternities at Bowdoin College has recommended that the college retain its fraternities, but it has criticized the organizations for allowing alcohol abuse, drinking by minors and sexual harassment.


Connecticut Bus Plant to Be Closed by Saab
LEAD: Saab-Scania AB of Sweden has announced it will close its bus manufacturing plant here this summer, citing reduced demand for city buses as a reason.


IN THE NATURAL STATE
LEAD: AS OUR species claimed dominion over the earth, we pushed incalculable numbers of plants and animals up to and over the edge of that dark abyss called extinction.
We blame our unenlightened, selfish, exploitive ancestors who killed off the Labrador duck, passenger pigeon and great auk and who brought the bison and whooping crane right to the brink.


Nancy Rachel Stone to Wed Joel B. Poznansky in August
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Stone of Washington of the engagement of their daughter Nancy Rachel Stone to Joel Benjamin Poznansky, the son of Drs.
Jack and Dulcie Poznansky of London.


The Plight of Have-Nots in Victorian Britain in Exhibit at Yale
LEAD: SO Dickensian is the new exhibition at the Yale Center for British Art that its curator, Julian Treuherz, might have left the title at ''Hard Times.'' But Mr.
Treuherz, who is keeper of fine arts at the Manchester City Art Gallery (where the show originated) chose ''Hard Times: Victorian Social Realism'' instead.


Images That Capture the Dark World of Dickens
LEAD: ''Hard Times'' at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven is to painting what ''Nicholas Nickleby'' was to the theater, though on a smaller scale.
It shows Victorian England in a vivid, richly detailed and often terrible light.
It has heroes and heroines by the dozen, though life deals harshly with most of them.


Posting: Fulton Ferry Conversion By the Bridge
LEAD: Living beside one of New York City's bridges may not seem the sanest idea right now, but David H. Ward says the Brooklyn Bridge and 4-10 Water Street, which he is converting into co-ops, have been coexisting serenely for more than a century.
The 1860 warehouse is just south of the 1883 span. ''If you stood on the edge of the bridge and dropped a screwdriver it wouldn't fall on the roof,'' Mr.


Mandatory Water Rationing Set for San Francisco
LEAD: Mandatory rationing of water will begin Sunday for 2.1 million residents of the San Francisco area after two consecutive dry winters and a failure of voluntary efforts.


WHERE THE JOBS WILL (AND WON'T) BE
LEAD: Listed below are selected career possibilities that, from the standpoint of availibility, will provide the most and least security through the end of the century, according to projections by the United States Labor Deptpartment's Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The percentage growth in the number of jobs expected through the year 2000 in each field is indicated next to the job titles.


New Refugees Crowd Camps In Hong Kong
LEAD: Growing numbers of Vietnamese have been arriving in Hong Kong by boat in the past few months, crowding into refugee camps with thousands of other Vietnamese, most of whom have only a slim chance of finding new homes outside the chain-link fences of the bleak compounds.


Charms of Old Houses Lure Buyers
LEAD: LURED by elaborate scrollwork, heavy oak floors and stained glass windows, more and more Connecticut residents have been buying 18th- and 19th-century houses.


Going With Kids
LEAD: To the Editor: Cynthia Samuels' otherwise excellent summary neglected one important warning.
For children, looking at scenery is a crashing bore.


SINCERELY, WOLFGANG ... AND HIS ILK
LEAD: The craft of letter writ-ing is in a low, flickering state, historians of the form admit, kept alive only by irate people who carry on endless, fruitless correspondence with utility company computers.
It was different in earlier times, when there was no telephone, or if there was one it had to be cranked each time.


GRAY DAYS AT BLACK ROCK
LEAD:  WHO KILLED CBS?
The Undoing of America's  Number One News Network.
By Peter J. Boyer.
Illustrated. 361 pp.
New York:  Random House. $18.95.


Communist Rock: Not Dead, Not Red
LEAD: In late January, what seems to be the most popular rock band in the Soviet Union, Avtograf, arrived in North America for an eight-city tour, including a gig at Drums, the midtown club cum disco.
In February, a friend returned from a month in Canton.
She brought with her a cassette of a group called Fresh Air that is apparently the rage not only in its home city but in all of China (its songs are sung in Mandarin, not the


Getting Off the Hook: The Ticklish R.C.A. Issue
LEAD: One of the most controversial provisions of the Fair Housing Act of 1985 was the mechanism that allows suburbs to transfer half of the housing units they were ordered to build, along with sufficient funds to help build them, to willing cities within their regions.


Falcon Gives Arkansas Edge in Relay
LEAD: For the second consecutive day, Joe Falcon led the University of Arkansas to a major Penn Relays victory with a dazzling come-from-behind anchor leg.


A'S ROUT INDIANS TO CAPTURE 6TH IN ROW
LEAD: Jose Canseco hit a three-run homer, and Carney Lansford had three hits as the Oakland Athletics extended their winning streak to six with an 11-3 rout of the Indians today.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL


CARLOTTA AND THE MASTER
LEAD: From our first meet-ing, my relationship with Carlotta Monterey O'Neill was marked by a tantalizing sense of unreality, though it profoundly influenced my entire professional life.
She was the third wife and widow of the playwright Eugene O'Neill, the survivor of a dark and tempestuous 24-year marriage.


AS JOBS INCREASE, SO DOES INSECURITY
LEAD: More Americans of working age are employed today than ever before in the postwar period.
But the sense of well-being and security that once came with holding a job is now disappearing.


Perspectives: Chelsea Offices; New Arrivals in an 'Escape Valve' Zone
LEAD: When a business owns the property in which it is operating, it sometimes finds that it pays to move out and rent the space to others.


Little League: The Sons Also Rise
LEAD: MY 9-year-old loves baseball.
He can't go into a drugstore without wanting to buy trading cards.
He's a Yankees fan who knows the statistics of every player on the team, and whenever we're sitting at the table, or car pooling, he explains the subtleties of the game to me.
He never tires of its intricacies, and sometimes


U.N. Monitoring Team Off to Afghanistan
LEAD: Members of a United Nations team flew to Kabul today to begin preparations for monitoring the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.


PROGRAM TRADING GETS MORE BRUTAL
LEAD: When stock prices collapsed in October, program trading was criticized as one of the chief villains in the financial drama.


Kimberlee Keppler to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Burns Keppler of Garden City and Westhampton Beach, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kimberlee Martha Keppler to Keith Francis Overlander, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Craig Overlander of Eastchester, N.Y.
Miss Keppler is an analyst in global securities and foreign exchange at Chemical Bank in New York.


FRENCH NAVY PARTROL BOAT FIRES ON NEW CALEDONIA SEPARATISTS
LEAD: A French Navy patrol boat shelled a Melanesian separatist camp during a reconnaissance mission today, in the first intervention by the navy in more than a week of ethnic violence in this French-administered South Pacific territory.


When a Feast Requires Spatulas
LEAD: ''Maple taffy on the snow (no limit), boiled potatoes, home-fried potatoes, grilled salted pork, eggs sunnyside up, omelets, homemade bread, maple dumplings (in syrup), eggs in syrup, homemade ketchup and pickles,'' read the menu.


TROUBLE IN THE COCKPIT
LEAD: On the day William Stockton's excellent piece ''Trouble in the Cockpit'' (March 27), on pilot error, appeared, I happened upon the 1981 National Transportation Safety Board's ''Annual Review of Aircraft Accident Data.'' In a compilation of accidents for the years 1970-79, causes of all accidents are compared with causes of fatal accidents.


Outdoors; Stocking of Raritan Angers Fishermen
LEAD: NEW JERSEY'S stocking steelhead trout and chinook salmon in the Raritan River has infuriated the Hudson River Fishermen's Association.


THE BITTER, AND BRACING, COURTSHIP OF IRVING BANK
LEAD: For more than a decade, the Bank of New York Company and the Irving Bank Corporation have been eyeing one another, wondering if a combination might restore their fading status as players in the big-league of banking.


Next Week; Do the Yanks and Mets Need Mascots?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


ROCKETS TIE SERIES WITH MAVERICKS
LEAD: Eric Floyd and Akeem Olajuwon settled their private feud by taking it out on the Dallas Mavericks today.
In the process, they pulled the Houston Rockets even in their three-of-five first-round series with the Dallas Mavericks.


Bronx Murder Suspect Is Arrested in West
LEAD: A California businessman, charged last year in the fatal shooting of his companion, has been arrested as a suspect in a 1981 robbery and shooting death in the Bronx, New York City authorities said yesterday.


Wendy Linder Is Wed To Steven Rosenberg
LEAD: At Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., Wendy Linder, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome J. Linder of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., was married last night to Steven Rosenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Rosenberg of Orangeburg, N.Y.
Rabbi Joel Zion, assisted by Cantor David Benedict, performed the ceremony.


Population Grew by 7.8% in 6 Years
LEAD: GROWTH in the western part of Monmouth County contributed significantly to the county's overall 7.8 percent population increase from 1980 to 1986, according to state and local officials.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  TULIP TIME  With its roots firmly set in Long Island's Dutch past, and don't forget those 70,000 tulips to that dot the campus, Hofstra University holds its annual Dutch Festival today.
This time, from noon to 5 P.M., it has a bit more than the customary walking tours of the Hempstead campus.


Valerie Kindred Wed in Scarsdale
LEAD: The Episcopal Church of St.
James the Less in Scarsdale, N.Y., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Valerie Prescott Kindred, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Estabrook Kindred of Scarsdale, to Scott Cameron Walker, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Theodore R. Walker of Boulder, Colo.
The Rev.
William Jerry


Shoreham Plant: Prepared for Operation, or Defeat
LEAD: To an expert standing on the operating deck at the heart of the Shoreham Nuclear Power Station, the plant looks as poised to produce energy as kindling stacked in a fireplace or water impounded behind a dam.


In Ohio, Unease Over Presidential Race
LEAD: ''The best people don't run,'' said Sylke Benner, a marketing manager, ''and they're the smartest people.''


MONEY PINCH RAISES WORRY FOR THE PARKS
LEAD: America's national parks expect record crowds this summer amid a widening debate over complaints that a lack of money is causing a growing and permanent deterioration of the parks.


Karen Goldberg Married To David Charles Berkey
LEAD: The marriage of Karen Beth Goldberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene R. Goldberg of Scarsdale, N.Y., to David Charles Berkey took place last night at the Puck Building in New York.
Rabbi Jack Stern performed the ceremony.
The bridegroom is a son of Frances Berkey of Scarsdale and the late Benjamin Berkey, who founded Berkey Photo.


In Nursing Homes, AIDS Safeguards
LEAD: NURSING HOMES in the state have begun to adopt Federal recommendations for infection control designed to prevent the spread of AIDS among health workers.


CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of a production error, the picture at the lower right on page 23 in of the Arts and Leisure section today is incorrectly captioned in some copies.
It shows Glenda Jackson and Stratford Johns in Ken Russell's film ''Salome's Last Dance,'' which opens Friday at Cinema 2.


Here's a Little List of Some G. &amp; S. Releases
LEAD: Mention Wimbledon to most people and it naturally means tennis.
But not to this arch-Savoyard, who spent several trips combing the British provinces in the 1960's and 70's in search not of sport but of the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company, which toured extensively before closing down in 1982.
Wimbledon was a convenient venue - the last stop on the District Line of London's underground - and the company was often there in springtime.


Hit-and-Run Driver Kills Two
LEAD: A man and a woman were killed in Manhattan early yesterday when a speeding car careered into them as they crossed the street, the authorities said.


THEY CAN CURSE AND THEY CAN COOK
LEAD: When the audience first meets Pale, the central figure in Lanford Wilson's ''Burn This,'' he is offstage, pounding on a stranger's apartment door, screaming obscenities at an unseen antagonist.
It is well past midnight and Anna, the female character in Mr.
Wilson's play at the Plymouth, looks confused and bleary-eyed switching on a light and peering through the peephole.


Posting: East 30th Condos; A 421-a Trade-Off
LEAD: Lawrence A. Smiley will be the first Manhattan developer to renovate city-owned shells for low- and moderate-income families as part of a new 421-a tax abatement program.
Except he has not yet been shown the buildings.
As Mr.
Smiley completes work on Lexington Parc, whose 73 market-rate condominiums will benefit from the 10-year tax reduction, the Department of Housing Preservation and Development is still choosing two suitable buildings for the 22 apartments he is required to renovate.


Prospects
LEAD: After the Trade Bill  After nearly three years, the Senate ratified a trade bill last week.
The President has vowed to veto the legislation because it contains a provision requiring companies to give 60 days notice before plant closings.
But the bill also gives authority to the President to negotiate at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and paves the way for the upcoming vote in Congress on a free trade agreement with Canada.


Second Round of Nicaragua Talks End
LEAD: The second round of peace talks between the Sandinista Government and contra guerrilla leaders ended today without an accord.
Government officials said a third round would begin May 12, but the contras said they had not agreed to a date.


Pieter van den Berg, Industrial Executive, 84
LEAD: Pieter van den Berg, chairman of North American Philips Corporation from 1948 to 1975, died of emphysema Friday at his home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 84 years old.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bridgeport, Conn.  $138,000
161 Woodside Avenue
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 47-year-old Cape Cod; 1-car garage, gas heat, enclosed sun parlor; taxes $1,975.
Danbury, Conn.  $170,000
205 Clapboard Ridge Road
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; 2-car garage, stone fireplace, 1.4 acres; taxes $1,300.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I recently painted my living room.
The radiator, which is the old-fashioned cast-iron type, has brown stains on it and is peeling in places.
It has been painted many times before.
How can I paint this so it won't develop these dark stains and peel, and can I do this while the heat is on?


Knicks Seek Route To Avert 2d Rout
LEAD: A key tip-in by Dennis Johnson.
A blocked shot by Kevin McHale.
A foul by Kenny Walker and two free throws by Larry Bird.
A few Knick turnovers, some missed shots and a tighter Boston Celtic defense.


Review/Dance; Ballet's Two New Sleeping Beauties
LEAD: Dancers stepped into new roles at performances of Sir Kenneth MacMillan's ''Sleeping Beauty,'' presented by the American Ballet Theater at the Metropolitan Opera House on Wednesday.
The standard of dancing by the leads was high, with Amanda McKerrow and Wes Chapman dancing Princess Aurora and Prince Desire in the afternoon and Cheryl Yeager and Julio Bocca dancing the roles in the evening.


A Pizza Empire Strives for the Wright Stuff
LEAD: There are buildings that are known for the architect who designed them, and there are buildings that are known for the client who commissioned them, and the new headquarters of Domino's Pizza Inc. falls firmly in the second category.
It is no disrespect to Gunnar Birkerts, the architect of this unusual, nearly half-mile-long office building, to observe that his profile is somewhat lower than that of Tom Monaghan, the founder and chairman of Domino's, a national chain of pizza stores specializing in home delivery.


Debuts; Flutist Chooses Program of Rarities
LEAD:  Valerie Holmes


EVICTION OF RENTERS BEGINS IN MARYLAND TOWN  States News Service
LEAD: After four years of apartment living, Richard Sinnott spent the last two months living in his green 1978 Mustang because of a 60-year-old zoning regulation that forced his landlord to evict him.


Consumer Family Does Its Duty
LEAD: WITH the solemn intensity of an Englishman clutching his umbrella, or a Japanese with his camera, Americans carry plastic -credit cards.
Real men may not eat quiche, but real Americans do shop, and in our materialism, we determine our worth by what we own.


God and Mammon on Park Avenue
LEAD:  THE BATTLE OF ST.
BART'S  By Brent C. Brolin.
Illustrated. 288 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.95.


Dukakis Is Concerned About Overconfidence
LEAD: Why does Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts speak incessantly these days about the Boston Red Sox?


The Northeast and the West Are Faring Well - for Now
LEAD: During the last six months, the job market in the Northeast has flourished as steadily as it has over the last several years, flouting the predictions of economic pessimists who read the October stock market collapse as a signal of impending decline.
Unemployment figures are expected to remain low, and wages may rise as companies scramble to find able help.


WHO WILL WIN THE KENTUCKY DERBY?
LEAD: Remember Emerson's advice about what to hitch your wagon to?
The most improved and most improving colt in the country is Risen Star, wonderfully impressive overcoming a troubled trip to beat the Winter Book favorite, Forty Niner, in the Lexington.
STANLEY SOLOMON
New York


4 Washington City Aides Quit
LEAD: The director of the District of Columbia's Department of Human Services and three aides have resigned after reports surfaced that the three used city funds to pay their rent and food bills, officials said today.


Repairing Vinyl Siding
LEAD: VINYL siding has many advantages over wood or aluminum.
However, vinyl siding can crack if struck violently (such as by a tree limb during a storm), especially in winter when freezing temperatures cause vinyl to become brittle.


ASSAD HAS CHANGED HIS POSTURE, IF NOT HIS GOALS
LEAD: President Hafez Al-Assad has a well-earned reputation for rapidly changing tactics while never wavering from his strategic goals.


The Lessons 'Walden' Never Taught
LEAD: I had envisioned a lusciously pastoral process - oak tenons slipping neatly into oak mortises, tankards of ale, robust laughter.
My expectations about building my own house were, I admit, rather unrealistic, due mainly to reading ''Walden'' and a few too many Eric Sloane books.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  ALIAS MADAME DOUBTFIRE  By Anne Fine.  199 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD: A NEW 'SCHOOL FOR WIVES'


Saving Art: Nice Neighbors Help
LEAD: WHEN Ernest Hunter started collecting art during the Depression, he was one of few in his Greenwich Village neighborhood who had a steady income, from working at a local speak-easy.
Many artists who lived nearby were desperate to make a fast dollar and knew that Mr.
Hunter couldn't say no to their paintings and etchings.


Evening Fashion
LEAD: The Light Fantastic: It's Cause Enough


Communism Is Very Much a Western Tradition
LEAD: To the Editor:


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
LEAD: POINTS OF LIGHT by Linda Gray Sexton.
Little, Brown and Company. 308 pages. $16.95.


Commercial Property: Kaufman Astoria Studios; A Casting Call Goes Out for Back-Office Tenants
LEAD: In the seven years since he took over the moribund Astoria Studios, George S. Kaufman has silenced skeptics by putting Queens back on the map as a magnet for television, movie and recording work.


A Tight Squeeze at Video Stores
LEAD: Ed Streit, the proprietor of Hollywood at Home in Rio Rancho, N. M., often feels embattled.
When he opened his video rental store in 1984, migrating from the fast-food business, making money was automatic.
Back then, as Mr.
Streit explained it, ''you could put your store underneath the railroad tracks behind a granary and treat customers like dirt.


Inflation Is Tied to Unemployment, but How?
LEAD: If the rules of economics operated as advertised, the United States would be suffering from inflation today.


Practical Traveler; Tips for Trips With Friends
LEAD: In ancient times when I undertook to advise two young men on significant matters, I told them firmly they should never undertake to marry anyone - well, settle down with anyone - if they had not first taken a long coach train trip with her.
For two years I had traveled to college in Minnesota in coach and in that time I had discarded any number of prospective dates, some potential roommates and a few heroes.


Planning for the State's Future Energy Needs
LEAD: SUCCESSFULLY accommodating the requirements of orderly growth takes thorough planning, perhaps years in advance.
This is particularly true when developing delivery systems to provide energy supplies.
Energy is essential in daily life, and public utilities have a responsibility to plan for adequate facilities to deliver energy when needed.


Waldheim Before the Fall
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Contest Of Ideology On Campus
LEAD: Two students at the University of Massachusetts here, one of them a Communist, have been barred from taking office as co-presidents of the student government.


...and Labeling
LEAD: To the Editor:


Business Forum; GRAY MARKET PRODUCTS: BACK DOOR IMPORTS SHOULD BE BANNED
LEAD: America's gray markets, also called parallel importation, are now big business.
These markets arise when clever traders purchase well-known brand-name products from foreign suppliers and sell them to other domestic middlemen who are not part of the manufacturer's normal distribution chain.
The practice is most likely to occur when currencies change value both substantially and quickly.


THERE'S LIFE IN THE OLD LIEDER RECITAL YET
LEAD: To the Editor:


KING OF THE 'TECHNO-THRILLER'
LEAD: Tom Clancy, insur-ance agent turned supernovelist, grips the wheel of his newest toy, a four-wheel-drive GMC Jimmy, as he shows a visitor around the 80 rolling acres overlooking the Chesapeake Bay where he plans to build a dream house to replace the dream house he built several years ago.


Arrau Date Canceled
LEAD: An appearance by the pianist Claudio Arrau, planned for May 18 at the 92d Street Y, has been canceled due to illness.
The concert, which has not been rescheduled, was the last in this season's Distinguished Artists Series at the Y. Refunds are available by mail from the 92d Street Y box office, 1395 Lexington Avenue.


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Gym Jungle
LEAD: HE resigned as the coach of the United States women's Olympic gymnastic team last November, and now Greg Marsden is telling the world why.
The program run by the United States Gymnastic Federation, he said, has been devastated by political infighting among ''people with nothing better to do than sit around all day, get on the telephone and bother people.


Three Times a Year, The Village Gets an Itch
LEAD: Brimfield, Mass., is a serene New England village, the sort you might like to drive through on a Sunday.
It's a one-street town with a triangular village green, a few red barns, some not too curlicued Victorian houses, a Congregational church, a blue and yellow Sunoco station, a grocery store with posters proclaiming the week's specials, a pizza parlor, a granite-faced bank and Francesco's Italian Ristorante, with a couple of cars out front.


Home Shopping
LEAD: To the Editor:


Woman Slain by Man Wielding 2-by-4
LEAD: A Harlem woman was attacked and killed by a stranger wielding a two-by-four yesterday as she and her son were on their way to church from their home on Lenox Avenue, the police said.


Robert Case Wed To Susie Peterson
LEAD: Mary-Suzanne Peterson, a securities analyst at the First Boston Corporation in New York, and Robert A. Case, a principal in mergers and acquisitions at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Kenneth Jones performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church.


Administration Relaxes Curbs On U.S. Payments to Panama
LEAD: The Treasury Department announced today that it would permit United States citizens and businesses to make some payments to the Government of Panama.
The payments were forbidden under economic sanctions imposed earlier this month to force the ouster of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Adding Sparkle To City Streets
LEAD: New York City's streets may not be squeaky clean, but they may receive a bit of sparkle with a new asphalt called ''glasphalt'' - 20 percent glass.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  TALK BY SIDNEY ZION


CD Players Can Smooth the Roadway
LEAD: The arrival of May and the impending end of school put the nation in the grip of motorized wanderlust.
But if your ''radio'' is still the one that came with the car from the factory, it may well require an updated sound system before it can be considered roadworthy in a musical sense.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending April 16  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill  $265,000  16 East 96th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; entry foyer, high-ceilings, original moldings and details; maintenance $473, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Wallach Management)


A Second Skin Drug Is Called Major Threat for Birth Defects
LEAD: A drug to treat the chronic skin disease psoriasis has recently entered the market and is probably even more likely to produce birth defects than the anti-acne drug Accutane, experts have warned.


Judge Tells U.S. to Stop Coercion Of Salvadorans Seeking Asylum
LEAD: In a resounding rejection of Reagan Administration policy, a Federal district judge here ruled late Friday that the Government had coerced Salvadorans seeking asylum into leaving the country, and must stop the practice.


OUTSIDER'S CANDIDATE: THE FRENCH TRY TO EXPLAIN LE PEN - AND HIS APPEAL
LEAD: France seemed to be in the midst of a boring presidential election campaign until last Sunday.


TROUBLE IN THE COCKPIT
LEAD: No law now requires the airlines to advise the public of the experience and training of pilots or the conditions of the particular planes in which they are about to fly.
Perhaps if such information were required to be posted at the check-in desks, airlines might focus more on the quality of their service.


Murky Waters
LEAD: THE Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives gave his application for citizenship a boost last week, but it will take more than citizenship to clear the way for Jens-Peter Berndt to join the United States Olympic swimming team.
Under International Olympic Committee rules, Berndt, who has been attending the University of Alabama since defecting from East Germany in 1985, needs a waiver from his native country.


Lilly Shiland Is Affianced
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph S. Gallagher of Chappaqua, N.Y., have made known the engagement of Mrs.
Gallagher's daughter Elizabeth Louise Shiland to Stanley George Shoemaker, a son of Mrs.
Marshall L. Shoemaker of Saratoga, Calif., and the late Mr.
Shoemaker.
A September wedding is planned.


Altitude Limit Put on Older 737's Because of Accident Over Hawaii
LEAD: The Government yesterday barred older Boeing 737's like the Aloha Airlines plane torn open over Hawaii from flying above 23,000 feet until they are subjected to a stringent new inspection.


Shelly Westebbe Weds Jeffrey Kealing
LEAD: At St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Alexandria, Va., Shelly Roxanne Westebbe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Westebbe of Washington, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Edward Kealing, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Kealing of Kansas City, Mo.
Msgr.
Frank J. Hendrick performed the ceremony.


Canada Safety Panel Split Over '85 Gander Crash
LEAD: A dispute over the causes of the crash of a United States military charter aircraft two years ago at Gander, Newfoundland, has caused a major split in the Canadian Aviation Safety Board and precipitated the resignation of the board's chairman.


ABOUT BOOKS
LEAD: TWENTY-FIVE years ago, Transaction was the name of a new magazine devoted to social science.
In its first issue, Irving Louis Horowitz, its founder and editor, told how it would serve the ''larger community.''


Miss Siebel Wed To J. B. Mannix
LEAD: Gretchen Reinhard Siebel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Siebel of New York and Amagansett, L.I., was married yesterday to John Brian Mannix, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Mannix of Arlington, Mass.
Edward W. Horne, an East Hampton Town Justice on Long Island, performed the ceremony at the Siebel home in Amagansett.


Color It Red
LEAD: On bad days I wear red.
What's a bad day?
It's one when words won't come; when the typewriter is glum and unproductive; when I've burned the prunes for the second time; when the crevices in my skin make me sad - again.


STAMPS PROMOTE DISNEY AND THE OLYMPICS
LEAD: Collectors of the popular Disney stamps issued by client states of New York's Inter-Governmental Philatelic Corporation can look forward to a new set this Tuesday from Antigua and Barbados.
The set of eight stamps and two souvenir sheets illustrates Disney characters at various Epcot Center sites.


Other Musical Events Scheduled for the Week
LEAD:  Following are some other musical events around the state this week:  TODAY


Q And A
LEAD: Tennis Courses  Question:Do any Northeastern ski resorts run tennis schools with lodging in the summer? - F. T. S., Princeton, N.J.
Answer:Many ski areas in the Northeast have tennis courts, and some - like Waterville Valley, N.H. - will have instructors on duty, but their use for summer courses with rooms included seems to be limited to Vermont.


Condor Hatches and Is Served Minced Mice
LEAD: A tiny bundle of fluff named Molloko, the first California condor conceived in captivity, was being nurtured today by a team of human ''parents'' who served it its first meal, of minced mice.


Composing With the Soloist in Mind
LEAD: A concerto can come into being in different ways.
Most often, an instrumentalist will approach a composer whose music he finds appealing with a request for a concerto.
Occasionally, a composer will write one for a performer whose playing he admires and present it to him.


HEY, I RECOGNIZE THESE GUYS!
LEAD: LIKE a support group of elderly widows, fans of the once-proud Baltimore Orioles have taken to consoling each other and wailing over happier days gone by.
A friend called the other night, and in a broken voice described the Orioles' misadventures in loss No. 20. ''I don't even know these guys,'' he said.


Correction
LEAD: An article on April 3 about Melbourne misstated the exchange rate for the Australian dollar.
It is $1.35 Australian to $1 in United States currency.


Divided World Health Organization Braces for Leadership Change
LEAD: The World Health Organization is beset by unusual political conflict and anxiety as it prepares for a traumatic change in leadership.


Alaskans Ask Soviet to Open Siberian Door
LEAD: Until 1948 when the Cold War slammed shut the back doors of the United States and Soviet Union, Alaskan Eskimos crossed the Bering Strait in motorboats to visit relatives in Soviet Siberia.


U.S. Judge Challenges Sentencing Guidelines
LEAD: A Federal judge says he will ignore recently instituted Federal sentencing guidelines on the ground they violate the Constitution's separation of powers.


Marigrace Brennan to Wed
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Hubert S. Brennan of Elizabeth, N.J., of the engagement of their daughter Marigrace Teresa Brennan to Howard Parsons Wilkes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Wilkes of Short Hills, N.J.
Miss Brennan, a first-grade teacher at the North Street School in Greenwich, Conn., graduated from Boston College.


The New Demand for Manufacturing Engineers
LEAD: Thinking Machines Inc. came up with a design for a supercomputer that could do massive parallel processing - dividing problems into thousands of pieces for simultaneous processing.
The company, in Cambridge, Mass., also rounded up the venture capital it needed to develop the design into a marketable product.


Talking: The Elderly; Reverse Mortgages Catch On
LEAD: Older people struggling along on limited incomes are becoming increasingly aware that reverse mortgage loans will provide them with monthly sums - $500 on average - to help meet the costs of remaining in their homes.


Festivals for Stars and Listeners Alike
LEAD: From the sounds that reach her dressing room, Carol Vaness, the American soprano, can tell a lot about the audiences that gather to hear her sing.


WHO WILL WIN THE KENTUCKY DERBY?
LEAD: Only Private Terms has the breeding and the past performances to make this one of the fastest Derbys ever run.
Private Terms's dam, Laughter, was among the last offspring of Bold Ruler, America's premier sire until his death at the young age of 16.
So, too, was Secretariat.


Dover Tourist Buses Stoned By Ferry Workers on Strike
LEAD: Striking ferry workers pelted busloads of tourists with rocks and bottles today after mistaking them for strikebreakers, the police said.
Later, two ferries docked at Dover as the boat company moved to crush the work stoppage.


Food; JOYS FROM BRAZIL
LEAD: Twenty-eight hours after leav-ing New York, I've sat on two airplanes, shook from side to side in the back seat of a car, putted across a river on a canopied skiff, stood on a ramshackle wooden bus and climbed a rutted, red-clay hill.
All of this has brought me, at last, to the top of a bluff in a remote coastal town of Bahia, Brazil.


COLORADO'S THRIVING CULTS
LEAD: The sprawling grid of tract developments and shopping malls that is Fort Collins, Colo., eventually peters out miles from the city's old cow-town core amid winter-yellow fields and rolling, snow-streaked prairie.
Something like half of this land, split-levels and sagebrush alike, is bought and sold through a single Fort Collins real estate company known as The Group Inc.


N.H.L. Playoffs; Lean Sends Devils to Cup Semifinals
LEAD: John MacLean again proved to be the biggest hero of the spring for the Devils as he scored the winning goal tonight to put the Devils into the Stanley Cup semifinals.


Theatrical Life on the Lower East Side
LEAD: On a rather foreboding block of the Lower East Side, amid art dealers and drug dealers, rats and real-estate speculators, dancers are dancing, actors are acting and R. Jeffrey Cohen, the 30-year-old director of the R.A.P.P.
Arts Center, has grand visions for his new multi-disciplinary arts organization.


Tom Wolfe's Yiddish
LEAD: To the Editor:


WEEK IN BUSINESS
LEAD:  Economic Signals: The Right Mix The economy grew at a 2.3 percent annual rate in the first quarter.
That was off from the 4.8 percent pace set in the fourth quarter of 1987, but economists seemed to think that was almost a good sign.
What really seemed to cheer them was the mix of factors creating the rise in the gross national product, particularly the reduction in inventories of unsold goods and the vigorous growth in capital spending.


Refugees From Sudan Strain Ethiopia Camps
LEAD: Thousands of starving refugees from the Sudan, fleeing drought and civil war in their country's south, are crossing the border into southwestern Ethiopia every month and severely taxing overcrowded relief camps.


DANCE VIEW
LEAD: Lar Lubovitch's new ''Of My Soul'' is an awkward dance.
It is fascinating, as well.
Usually, in dance, awkwardness is undesirable.


Vladimir No Russian
LEAD: To the Editor:


On Language; The Bloopie Awards
LEAD: A SINISTER FORCE for solecism exists on Madison Avenue.
It is the work of the copywrongers.


SHAKEN BY DOWNSIZING, THE GROUPS REGROUP
LEAD: One way that trade associations reflect American business as a whole is that both have been shaken by the recent trend toward consolidation.


Boarding School At State Expense
LEAD: The concept - a free public boarding school specializing in science and mathematics for gifted high school students - has been in operation since 1980, when North Carolina opened the first such school.


Maine Tribe Finds Strength in Music
LEAD: When the Passamaquoddy Indians were fighting to regain ownership of tribal lands in the 1960's and 1970's, Wayne Newell felt uncomfortable protesting against the Federal Government.
It was through his tribe's music that he found strength.


A Voice Familiar With the Disease
LEAD: The article ''New Product Is Offered to Reduce Lyme Disease''  [ April 3 ]  did an excellent job in reporting information as presented by the manufacturer of Damminix, by authorities in the field of Lyme disease, by health officials, etc.
Some additional caveats are in order.


Fewer Diplomats Scoff At a Threat by Britain
LEAD: A new Government policy that threatens diplomats with expulsion if they do not pay parking tickets has sent foreign envoys rushing to pay fines.


Carley A. Miller Becomes Bride Of A. G. Sullivan
LEAD: Carley Anne Miller and Arthur Gary Sullivan, a son of Mrs.
Sidney B. Sullivan of Fredericksburg, Va., and the late Mr.
Sullivan, were married yesterday at the home in Oyster Bay, L.I., of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Lindley G. Miller.
The bride's father, a lawyer and the Village Justice of Upper Brookville, L


The Northeast and the West Are Faring Well - for Now
LEAD: The Western United States has what some economists call a ''Swiss cheese'' economy - pockets of great prosperity and pockets of depression.
While the job market has generally been improving in the last year, the precise outlook depends on the specific region and the specific industry.


BEST SELLERS: MAY 1, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
8
THE ICARUS AGENDA, by Robert Ludlum.
(Random House, $19.95.) A congressman's secret
dealings with terrorists may bring him the
Presidency - or death.
2
3
2
ROCK STAR, by Jackie Collins.


WHO WILL WIN THE KENTUCKY DERBY?
LEAD: Private Terms is a thoroughly professional race horse who does whatever is necessary to win.
He has also carried the Derby weight (126 lbs.) to victory in the Gotham and the Wood Memorial.
ALAN SHUBACK
New York


A Fantasy Flight Into Bygone Skies
LEAD: THROUGHOUT 1987, a calendar entitled ''Ghosts - A Time Remembered'' hung on the wall of my office.
A gift from my father, it reflected our shared fascination with World War II aircraft.


Review/Pop; Sounds of the Middle East
LEAD: Dissidenten, a band from West Berlin, has its ears turned to North Africa.
The songs the group brought to S.O.B.'s on Tuesday, opening a two-night stand, used Moroccan-style melodies, with modal scales and microtonal inflections, in settings that moved from Africa toward Europe as the early set progressed.


South Africa - A Terrorist Nation
LEAD: On April 7, Albie Sachs, a white South African lawyer who had been an active opponent of apartheid, was seriously injured in a bomb explosion as he opened the door of his car outside his home in Maputo, Mozambique.
One week earlier, the African National Congress's chief representative in France, Dulcie September, was gunned down as she arrived at her office in Paris.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Handmade Heritage  FOR many, their heritage was in the assorted shopping bags and baskets they carried into the large room at the State University of New York at Stony Brook.


Susan Hunt to Marry in July
LEAD: Susan Melville Hunt and the Rev.
Mark Hollingsworth Jr., the son of Caroline J. Hollingsworth of Concord, Mass., and the late Mr.
Hollingsworth, plan to marry in July, the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Hunt of Cambridge, Mass., have announced.


TRAVELING BY TRAIN AND DAYDREAM
LEAD:  NOTHING TO DECLARE  Memoirs of a Woman Traveling Alone.
By Mary Morris.  250 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $18.95.


PANDEMONIUM AT THE OPERA
LEAD: To The Editor:


WHAT YOU SEE IS WHAT YOU GET
LEAD:  DUKAKIS  An American Odyssey.
By Charles Kenney and Robert L. Turner.
Illustrated. 260 pp.
Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company. $16.95.
DUKAKIS AND THE  REFORM IMPULSE  By Richard Gaines and Michael Segal.
Illustrated. 247 pp.
Boston:  Quinlan Press. $17.95.
CREATING THE FUTURE  The Massachusetts Comeback  and Its Promise for America.


Repairing Vinyl Siding
LEAD: VINYL siding has many advantages over wood or aluminum.
However, vinyl siding can crack if struck violently (such as by a tree limb during a storm), especially in winter when freezing temperatures cause vinyl to become brittle.


Myriad of Expenses Adds to Dental Costs
LEAD: THE cost of going to the dentist has always been painful and is often considered an additional insult to needing treatment in the first place.


VAN BUREN, 1836-40: LAST SITTING NO. 2 ABLE TO RISE TO NO. 1
LEAD: There rrxhare some similarities between George Bush and Martin Van Buren, the last man to be elected President while serving as Vice President: Both spent most of their lives on the public payroll, and, as Vice Presidents, both were regarded as confidants of their Presidents.


New Policy on Illegal Drugs Permits U.S. to Seize Boats
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has toughened its drug enforcement by allowing the Coast Guard to seize any boat or ship on which even a small amount of contraband is found, Transportation Secretary Jim Burnley said today.


DATA BANK
LEAD: THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
I Q'88
IV Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,902.6
$3,880.8
$3,735.2
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.3
4.8
4.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
IV Q'87
III Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$144.2
$141.9
$144.2
Industrial Production Index
March
Feb.


AIDS Vaccine Test Produces Immune Response in 6
LEAD: The first American test of an experimental AIDS vaccine has produced an immune response in six volunteers, an important step toward developing an effective vaccine against the disease, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases said today.


Repairing Vinyl Siding
LEAD: VINYL siding has many advantages over wood or aluminum.
However, vinyl siding can crack if struck violently (such as by a tree limb during a storm), especially in winter when freezing temperatures cause vinyl to become brittle.


Julia Thomas Has Wedding
LEAD: Julia Anne Thomas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Thomas of Exeter, N.H., and Marc V. Johnson, a son of Anne F. Ryan and C. R. Johnson Jr., both of Greenwich, Conn., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Philip E. Perkins performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Riverside, Conn.


Elizabeth Perle Named Prentice-Hall Executive
LEAD: Elizabeth Perle has been named publisher of Prentice-Hall Press.
She was previously associate publisher of hardcover and trade paperbacks at Bantam Books, where she held positions in marketing and sales.
Prior to that she was employed at Harper &amp; Row and Times Books.
The press is part of the Prentice Hall Trade Division, itself part of Simon &amp; Schuster's consumer group.


THE DATA, AND THE CLAIMS
LEAD: Every Presidential election year provides a forceful reminder that a glass can be portrayed as half empty or half full.
In 1988, the battery of figures Republicans are marshaling emphasize what the White House calls the ''significant and good news'' about the economy; Democrats are trying to accentuate the negative.


WASHINGTON'S PANAMA POLICY IS NOTABLY LACKING IN SUCCESS
LEAD: To hear the Reagan Administration tell it, there was genuine movement last week in efforts to negotiate a peaceful exit for Panama's de facto leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.
But to many critics of United States policy, the Administration's retreat from its original demand that the General go far away from


Car Rentals: Medical Aid, Rates, Routes
LEAD: AVIS EUROPE has added referrals to English-speaking doctors and dentists to its On Call Europe 24-hour phone service.
By calling from Belgium, France, West Germany, the Netherlands, Italy, Switzerland or Britain, Avis renters can get the name and location of the nearest participating doctor or dentist with 24-hour call service.


On Choppy Water, Penn Captures Cup
LEAD: The men's varsity heavyweight crew from Pennsylvania defeated Navy, Harvard and the Severn River this morning to gain possession of the Adams Cup for the second time in the last three years.


ARAB RAGE INSIDE ISRAEL
LEAD: Israeli Arabs need only look at the second-class status of Jews in Moslem lands to appreciate the rights and freedoms they enjoy as an increasingly hostile minority in Israel (''Arab Rage Inside Israel,'' by Ze'ev Chafets, April 3).
But Israeli Arabs want it both ways: they demand full acceptance as Israeli citizens while proclaiming loyalty to an Arab state on the West Bank whose leaders are sworn to the dismantling of Israel.


Spreading Sunshine
LEAD: The new laboratory and classroom facility at the Oregon Institute of Technology in Klamath Falls was designed by Michael R. McCulloch ''to make a transition,'' he says, ''between the inside of campus and the outside, where there's a dramatic backdrop of mountains.'' So its 1,800-square-foot, crescent-shaped skylight, created by the Portland artist Ed Carpenter, is integral to the building's architectural intent.


ONE STRIKE ENDS, BUT 2D POLISH MILL REMAINS CRIPPLED
LEAD: Pressure eased on the Government of Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski today after workers at the steel and armaments plant here accepted a Government pay offer and ended a one-day strike.


Air Couriers
LEAD: To the Editor: My first and only experience with Now Voyager was nowhere near as rosy as the piece would have newcomers believe.
Having booked a trip to Sydney three months in advance, I was informed three days before my departure that the company I was traveling for had no freight to send and my services were not required.


An Era of Tighter Budgets and Leaner Staffs
LEAD: America's 40,000 trade associations represent nearly every kind of trade or commercial venture found in the Yellow Pages, from abrasives to zoology.
In advancing these groups' diverse interests, trade associations grapple with the key problems confronting American business, said R. William Taylor, president of the American Society of Association


Asking Some Questions About Special Education
LEAD: I would appreciate an opportunity to answer recent letters to the Long Island editor that misrepresent my point of view.


Vietnam's Foreign Policy Problems Are Mounting
LEAD: The new Communist leadership in Vietnam, preoccupied with food shortages and other severe economic difficulties, is now facing mounting foreign policy problems as well.


Repairing Vinyl Siding
LEAD: VINYL siding has many advantages over wood or aluminum.
However, vinyl siding can crack if struck violently (such as by a tree limb during a storm), especially in winter when freezing temperatures cause vinyl to become brittle.


Jersey's Parkway, Bus And Train Fares Rise
LEAD: New Jersey bus, train and highway travelers will face higher costs today when ramp tolls on the Garden State Parkway go up to a uniform 25 cents, bus fares increase an average 8 percent and train tickets go up an average 10 percent.


Streetscapes: General Theological Seminary; Restoration Drive Begun For Chelsea Landmark
LEAD: The General Theological Seminary, on the block bounded by 20th to 21st Streets, Ninth to 10th Avenues, is a surprise to most New Yorkers who come suddenly upon the great green double quadrangle hidden by a perimeter of century-old dormitories and classrooms.


Low-Tech Effects
LEAD: To the Editor:


16 Design Showrooms Open in Yorktown
LEAD: IT was the search for a new building in which to expand a long-established family-owned plumbing supply business that eventually led to the development of a new business project, the $9 million Building and Design Center at Yorktown, said Jonas Weiner, one of the owners of Best Plumbing Supply and a principal in the development of the center.


A Tribute to Finland at Katonah
LEAD: DELAWARE started out, in 1638, as New Sweden (which also included parts of New Jersey and Pennsylvania) and because old Sweden encompassed Finland at that time, the colony's settlers were as likely to be Finns as Swedes.


Correction
LEAD: The Practical Traveler column on March 27 about lost and stolen airline tickets carried an incorrect report from Northwest Airlines about its policy.
The service charge for refunding a ticket is $50 for a domestic ticket and $30 for an international ticket.


Delhi Aide Says Libya Conscripted Workers
LEAD: Nearly 100 Indians who traveled to Libya for jobs in a leather factory were swept from the Tripoli airport to a nearby army camp for military training before some of them escaped and sought help from the Indian Embassy, according to a top Indian police official.


Children Select Their Favorite Books
LEAD: THE votes have been counted - all 4,879 of them - and the results are official: on Friday, three local authors and an illustrator will receive the 1988 Washington Irving Children's Book Choice Awards at the Westchester Library Association's annual luncheon at the Westchester Marriott in Tarrytown.


Iraqi Missile With Extended Range Is New Peril to Iran's Cities and Oil
LEAD: Iraq has successfully test-fired a new surface-to-surface missile with a range of 560 miles, far enough to hit Iranian targets in the Strait of Hormuz and increase pressure on Iran's oil traffic through the Persian Gulf.


Thompson's Stamp Will Mark Team
LEAD: WHEN Bobby Knight assembled the United States Olympic basketball team in 1984 his emphasis was on players who could adapt to his personality and conform to his system.


Warm Wrap-Ups
LEAD: Smart wrappings for fall add warmth as well as luxury to wool suits and dresses.
They are rectangular scarves bordered or appliqued with such furs as fox, sable, mink, Persian lamb or chinchilla.


High Court Ignores Alcoholism Research
LEAD: To the Editor:


Befriending the Homeless With Clothing and Caring
LEAD: There are now two fewer friends for the homeless on Long Island.
Their departure leaves a gaping hole in the distribution of children's clothing to the needy.


Floating Garages Off Hudson Proposed
LEAD: AS TRAFFIC congestion increases on Hudson River crossings and PATH commuters scour the Hudson County waterfront for some place to park their cars, a ferry company is proposing to moor floating parking lots along the riverfront.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  ISRAELI JUDGE TO SPEAK  Justice Dov Levin of the Israeli Supreme Court, who presided at the trial of John Demjanjuk for the murder of Treblinka concentration camp inmates, will speak Thursday at the Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. of Bergen County at noon and again in the evening.


Nancy Warshauer Is Wed
LEAD: The marriage of Nancy Gail Warshauer, the daughter of Mrs.
Emanuel S. Warshauer of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Warshauer, to Gregory Elliot Mendel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Mendel of Ocean, N.J., took place last evening at the Metropolis Country Club in White Plains.
Rabbi Mark Winer officiated.


BEHIND THAT ANATOLIAN SMILE
LEAD:  ELIA KAZAN  A Life.
By Elia Kazan.
Illustrated. 848 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Jackson, on Stump in Ohio, Offers Criticism of Dukakis
LEAD: It wasn't Jesse Jackson, Presidential candidate, on the hustings today.
It was Jesse Jackson, adviser, offering the Democratic front-runner unsolicited counsel on how to lead.


Ted Laporte Wed To Ginna Schrum
LEAD: The marriage of Virginia Durald Schrum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Schrum Jr. of Charlotte, N.C., to William Frederick Laporte 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Laporte of New York and Buck Hill Falls, Pa., took place yesterday at the Myers Park United Methodist Church in Charlotte.
The Rev.


Color It Green
LEAD: A LONG line of farmers and gardeners make up my family tree, but when genes for a green thumb were handed out, I was not on the list.


Going With Kids
LEAD: To the Editor: The article about traveling in Europe with children omitted one of the most interesting ways to see Europe: camping.
We traveled extensively with our children (the youngest was 8) on two occasions, and each time we camped, the first time for six weeks, the second for a month.
We have pitched our tents in Oslo, Copenhagen, The Hague, Munich, Lucerne, Vienna and the Bois de Boulogne in Paris.


P.L.O. Faction Talks of More Raids From Lebanon
LEAD: The leader of a P.L.O. faction, buoyed by the Palestine Liberation Organization's reconciliation with Syria, has announced plans to increase attacks against Israel from Lebanon.
At the same time, Israeli troops have been conducting an extensive search in southern Lebanon for suspected guerrillas.


Air Couriers
LEAD: To the Editor: I read with interest the article on courier services (Travel, March 6) as I have flown to Europe the past two years that way - the first time with TNT Skypak and the second arranged by Now Voyager.


Man Is First to Escape From Prison Barge
LEAD: A man accused of burglary became the first inmate to escape from New York City's prison barge when he crawled to freedom yesterday through an air-conditioner opening behind the barge's kitchen, city corrections officials said.


A Seaside City For Kings And Cockneys
LEAD: Brighton is known as the princely resort, and for once the boosters' claim is not hyperbole.
The Prince Regent's Royal Pavilion is as splendid and exotic as Kublai Khan's pleasure dome, and the Regency squares and terraces built for his courtiers and aristocratic friends are a contrast in cool elegance.


FOR THE MACBETHS, MARRIAGE IS MURDER
LEAD: Never mind if they're per-forming in a plush Broadway theater or a spidery little loft in SoHo.
Never mind if they've been directed by Peter Brook or the assistant stage manager's senile great uncle.
There's still a special thrill of anticipation when a major actor or actress tackles a great Shakespearean part.


In French Town, Le Pen Hits a Nerve
LEAD: Last Sunday, municipal officials and war veterans in this Communist-governed town west of Paris went to the monument to the dead to remember those deported to Nazi extermination camps.
As the wreaths were being placed, angry and frightened citizens voted in large numbers for Jean-Marie Le Pen, a presidential aspirant who has dismissed the camps as a ''minor detail'' in the history of World War


THE LITTLE ENGINE THAT COULD
LEAD: All the images about the withering of American industry these last few years seemed a little truer here and felt a little sadder.
Bethlehem Steel and Mack Trucks, the big-name companies that once built the industrial centers of eastern Pennsylvania, were shrinking down or pulling out.
Sometimes, it seemed as if the companies had turned against their towns, testing them to see whether they could take it.


WHO WILL WIN THE KENTUCKY DERBY?
LEAD: There is no distinct standout, but the combination of Woody Stephens, Pat Day and Forty Niner will prevail and win going away in a dynamite race.
HOWARD MORRIS
Rowayton, Conn.


James McCracken, Lauded Tenor And Pillar of the Met, Dies at 61
LEAD: James McCracken, the most successful dramatic tenor yet produced by the United States and a pillar of the Metropolitan Opera in the 1960's and 70's, died yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.


ONE IN A THOUSAND
LEAD: To the Editor:


Justice Dept. Clears Ex-Prosecutor, a Novelist
LEAD: The Justice Department on Friday cleared one of its former prosecutors, the best-selling novelist Scott F. Turow, of allegations that he might have obstructed justice in a criminal investigation.


SNORKS AND POPPLES
LEAD:  THE MAN WHO INVENTED SATURDAY MORNING  And Other Adventures in  American Enterprise.
By David Owen.  215 pp.
New York:  Villard Books. $16.95.


Blanton Neill Married To Kendrick T. Kelly
LEAD: The marriage of Lola Blanton Neill, the daughter of Lucy B. Neill and Julian F. Neill, both of New Orleans, to Kendrick Thomas Kelly, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kendrick A. Kelly of Chappaqua, N.Y., took place yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the ceremony.


Feathers And Fur Fly in Farce
LEAD: IN Edward Lear's well-known rhyme, ''The owl and the pussycat went out to sea in a beautiful pea-green boat.'' They came back, however, in Bill Manhoff's 1964 farce, ''The Owl and the Pussycat,'' which is being revived by the Long Island Stage Company.


POISON PILL TRIAL WINDING TO CLOSE
LEAD: By her daughter's account, Stella Nickell put cyanide in pain relief capsules to poison her husband of 12 years in an effort to gain as much as $176,000 in life insurance benefits.


Legislator, Fighting for Petitions at Malls, Takes Case to Shoppers
LEAD: Assemblyman Daniel Feldman is trying to prohibit mall owners from evicting people who ask shoppers to sign petitions.
Part of his attempt, appropriately enough, involves asking shoppers in malls to sign petitions.


When the Harvest Is Random
LEAD: Some months ago I found myself at the Quad Cinema for the first show of a film called ''John and the Missus,'' which four other people had also come to see.
Under the circumstances, this was astounding.
Ads for the film offered little more than its dismal title and a photograph of unidentified workmen (they turned out to be miners) in an unidentified location (it turned out to be Newfoundland).


FOCUS: Maine; Growth in The Lake Region
LEAD: TOURISTS and people looking for a country style of life near a scenic lake have combined to make this community the fastest growing town in Maine.


When Chairs Were Of Sterner Stuff
LEAD: When Barry Fried-man began to buy Bauhaus art and furnishings from the 1920's and 1930's for his New York gallery a decade ago, collectors were not yet ready to acquire these ''less is more'' originals produced by the German design school.
So the art dealer stored them, studied them and became increasingly convinced of their merits.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: MAY 1, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
(Warner, $4.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis
among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
8
FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $4.95.)
The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his way to
the 80's.


A POIGNANT VISIT WITH GRANDFATHER
LEAD: I smile and nod as I walk by a nurse seated behind the reception desk.
When I first started visiting my grandfather's nursing home a couple of years ago, I always stopped to sign the guest book in the lobby.
But now I feel visiting anonymously is preferable to advertising my presence.


Ramses II Visits a Boston Museum
LEAD: For the next three months, a 40-foot-high model of an ancient Egyptian temple will stand at the front of the Boston Museum of Science.
The building is the temporary home of the imposing Colossus of Memphis, a 3,000-year-old, 57-ton granite statue of Ramses II.


Devils Win Patrick Division Championship
LEAD: John MacLean (15) and teammates after he scored winning goal for the Devils in the third period last night against the Capitals in Landover, Md.
The Devils now meet Boston in the Stanley Cup semifinals.
Section 8. (AP)


Palmer-Barber Charge to Share of Lead
LEAD: The General has sent out a call for his army to muster Sunday at the Onion Creek Club.
Arnold Palmer is in the hunt again.


Miss McAndrews And T. C. Cantrell Will Marry in July
LEAD: The engagement of Siobhan Curran McAndrews to Timothy Clover Cantrell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Cantrell of New Canaan, Conn., has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James J. McAndrews of Madison, Conn.
The couple plan to marry in July.


Halfway Houses: Points of View
LEAD: The letter by Judith Leventhal, clinical psychologist, and Susan Ueber Raymond, health planner  [ March 27 ] , concerns me.


Salvador Ruling Party Picks Candidate for '89
LEAD: The governing Christian Democratic Party has chosen a wealthy businessman, Julio Adolfo Rey Prendes, as its candidate in next year's presidential elections.


Kevin White's Students: His Latest Constituency
LEAD: In his 16 years as Mayor of Boston, Kevin H. White reviled the press, avoided the press and took delight in pointing out its errors.
These days he teaches about the press and government.


DISMISSAL OF CASE IS RULED IMPROPER
LEAD: A judge may not dismiss a criminal case solely because the main prosecution witness is not in the country when the trial is to begin, the state's highest court has ruled.


'They Could Get to Work A Lot Quicker'
LEAD: CHRISTOPHER A. GALLO of Shelton is the president of Connecticut Commuters Inc., a group that is trying to improve life for road and rail commuters.


BRITAIN'S MAVERICK MOGUL
LEAD: Robert Maxwell comes lum-bering toward the waiting helicopter.


Dark Cloud Obscures Winfield
LEAD: EVERY afternoon, the routine is the same.
Dave Winfield leaves his New Jersey home, steers his luxury foreign car across the George Washington Bridge and through the congestion of the Bronx, and parks in the players' lot at Yankee Stadium.
He acknowledges the cheers from the dozen or so fans who have waited patiently outside the entrance to the park.


'Maybe' Is Manila
LEAD: The euphoria of bloodlessly ousting a dictator a little over two years ago has worn off, and the grumbles have resumed.
Practically every major question in the Philippines now has to be answered with ''maybe, too soon to tell.''


Free the Other Europe
LEAD: To the Editor:


BLACK-AND-WHITE OUTSHINES COLOR
LEAD: Recently I was invited to select the worthy entries for a juried exhibition to which anyone with a photograph and five dollars could submit.
This is called ''jurying'' a show, but to my mind it amounts to being prosecutor, judge and jury simultaneously.
Not exactly a fair trial, mind you, but then no one who enters such things really expects objectivity to rule.


LILLA J. SMITH MARRIES DALE R. GONCHER
LEAD: At St.
Peter's Lutheran Church in New York, Lilla Jeannette Smith, a daughter of the Rev.
Elsie N. Smith and Howard Smith of Brooklyn and Quogue, L.I., was married yesterday to Dale Robert Goncher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Goncher of Chesterland, Ohio.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
John S.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  STARLIGHT, by Scott Ely. (Warner, $4.50.) Tom Light, an American sniper in Vietnam, is rumored to have powers over life and death - and a rifle scope that can tell who is about to die.
Last year, our reviewer, Richard Burgin, said this novel is written in ''a pared-down prose that controls and accentuates its author's fury at the war.


TUNISIA RENEWING TIES WITH QADDAFI
LEAD: Since he became President in November, Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali has adopted an aggressive foreign policy of unity among Arab and North African nations that includes re-establishing strong ties to Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  VOYAGES OF DISCOVERY: Captain Cook and the Exploration of the Pacific.
By Lynne Withey. (Morrow, $19.95.) In a time of growing worry about trade with the Pacific Rim countries, the story of the opening of the Pacific itself has on the face of it a certain interest.
Indeed, the possibilities for commerce as much as for knowledge led the sponsors of Capt.


Correction
LEAD: An article on March 20 misstated the date of the purchase of Alaska from Russia.
It was 1867.
A map with an accompanying article misidentified the river that flows past Fairbanks.
It is the Tanana.


2 Former Employees Indicted In Killing of Jersey Executive
LEAD: Two former employees of an asbestos removal company have been indicted in the slaying of the company's president, who was shot to death in the driveway of his Rumson home.


Working With the Right to Know
LEAD: CONGRESS has followed the New Jersey Legislature's lead and enacted legislation that challenges industries to release their grip on chemical information.
Industries' response to this challenge will reflect how much they have learned, in the decade since Love Canal, about dealing with communities.


'Little Shop of Horrors' in Elmsford
LEAD: AT An Evening Dinner Theater in Elmsford on Monday and Tuesday evenings, one can usually see variety attractions (Big Band shows, comedy specials) or a local theater group in the likes of a Neil Simon comedy or an Agatha Christie mystery.


Mystery Deepens in New Delhi Arms Scandal
LEAD: One year after the first disclosures of possible bribery in an arms contract, the Government of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi remains beset by corruption charges and a deepening mystery about who received a series of illegal payments from abroad.


Correction
LEAD: A report in the Travel Advisory on Feb. 28 misstated the days on which the Emily Dickinson Homestead in Amherst, Mass., is open for tours from May through October.
They are Wednesday to Saturday, in the afternoon.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I recently painted my living room.
The radiator, which is the old-fashioned cast-iron type, has brown stains on it and is peeling in places.
It has been painted many times before.
How can I paint this so it won't develop these dark stains and peel, and can I do this while the heat is on?


DATA UPDATE
LEAD:  NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS  (In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
$
FEB. 88
Feb. 87
Change
Starts
1,514
1,809
-16%
Completions
1,425
1,745
-18%
Sales
628
738
-15%
Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce


Price Tags on Art, Cont'd.
LEAD: To the Editor:


BURIED TREASURE IN THE CITIES OF ROCK
LEAD: One can only imagine the astonishment of 19th-century explorers upon finding under jungle creepers and desert sands carefully worked stone figures and large, complex structures.
With ancient texts as their sole guides, they must have fancied that these cities of rock had sprung from the pages of classical literature, rather than the other way around.


Elizabeth Lee Wed to Geoffrey Forman
LEAD: Elizabeth Carol Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Lee of Wyncote, Pa., and the Sea Ranch, Calif., was married yesterday to Geoffrey Varley Forman, the son of Mrs.
Benno Forman of Newark, Del., and the late Mr.
Forman.
The Rev.
Miriam Acevedo-Naters, assisted by the Very Rev.
Geralyn Wolf, performed the ceremony at St.


Crash Legacy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prison a Setting for Hoboken Drama
LEAD: IN HIS new two-character play at the Renegade Theater Company, Alan Brody seems so determined to pound away at truth and reality that he has turned out an implausible play.


Election Fever Grips Mexico (Yes, Mexico)
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHO WILL WIN THE KENTUCKY DERBY?
LEAD: Brian's Time.
The extra eighth of a mile in the Derby will greatly benefit his style.
John Veitch, his trainer, will have to work on getting Brian's Time to break more quickly from the gate and he must hope for a beneficial post position.
Posts 1 and 2 and the outside posts will greatly hurt his horse's chances.


ARAB RAGE INSIDE ISRAEL
LEAD: Ze'ev Chafets reports that in Israel there are ''more than 50 organizations dedicated to Arab-Jewish understanding.'' Query: How many such organizations are there among Israeli Arabs in the West Bank or anywhere in the Arab world?
The answer is: None.
That fact is only one reason why the possibility of reconciliation and peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors is, perhaps, even more remote than Mr.


REBUFFED BY OREGON, PATIENTS TAKE THEIR LIFE-OR-DEATH CASES PUBLIC
LEAD: One after another, the faces of Oregon citizens have been popping up on posters and in videos, begging for donations to pay for organ transplants that their state no longer finances.


FOR BUSH, ISSUES OF EARLY 80'S LIVE
LEAD: Remember the old days?
Vice President Bush asks audiences.
Jimmy Carter.
Malaise.
Geraldine A. Ferraro.
Double-digit inflation.


Trying to Unlock A Big Market
LEAD: Locked-out motorists in Dover, Del., have always relied on the city police to open their car doors for nothing.
The city's locksmiths say they are losing thousands of dollars each year in business to the police.


Review/Dance; 'Utopia' Blends Life And Stage
LEAD: Phyllis Lamhut's new ''Utopia,'' which opened on Thursday at the Westbeth Theater Center (151 Bank Street), will not disappoint those who have come to admire this veteran choreographer's comparatively recent forays into the darkness of history and the heart.
It is a powerful dance that boasts an equally powerful and ambitious score by Ben Hazard and stunning performances from its six leads that are alone worth a trip to the theater.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  My Life as a Dog  Starring Anton Glanzelius, Tomas von  Bromssen, Anki Liden, Didrik  Gustavsson, Melinda Kinnaman,  Kicki Rundgren, Ing-Marie Carlsson.
Directed by Lasse Hallstrom. 1985.
Paramount Home Video.  101 minutes. $79.95.
Rated PG-13.
Some adolescent sex play.


Susan J. Garfield, Loan Officer, Plans To Wed Charles Higginson Jr. in May
LEAD: Susan Jennings Garfield, a loan officer in private banking at the Shawmut Bank in Boston, and Charles Higginson Jr., an oil trader with Catamount Petroleum in Boston, plan to be married May 28.


Affordable Housing Needn't Be Impossible Dream
LEAD: I WAS alone in my kitchen one recent Sunday morning, reading an interview in the Long Island Weekly with David Emilita  [ ''A Planner Balances Quantity and Quality'' ] .
Upon reading his words about affordable housing, I wanted to stand up and applaud.


Review/Rock; NATALIE MERCHANT: STUDY IN CONTRASTS
LEAD: Natalie Merchant, lead singer for 10,000 Maniacs, doesn't want listeners to know exactly what she's up to.
Her lyrics hint and tease at their subjects, only gradually revealing their stories.
And on stage Thursday at the Beacon Theater she was by turns open and oblique, graceful and awkward, sidestepping ordinary rock theatrics as if she'd never seen them.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the County Chamber of Commerce misidentified the man shown.
He was James P. O'Toole, the chamber's immediate past president.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Who knows why they've become ubiquitous, so much so that a party without one or more guests snapping away with little cameras is considered not quite in the swing of things.


Monmouth Seeks to Channel Growth
LEAD: TWENTY-FIVE years ago, what is now known as the Route 9 corridor through western Monmouth County was a scenic two-lane back road dotted with truck farms and, in season, roadside stands selling fresh produce.


FORMING EXPORT ALLIANCES - AND AVOIDING ANTITRUST
LEAD: International trade is a chief concern of many trade association executives.
The newest twist in such programs is the ''generic'' export trading company, introduced last year by the National Machine Tool Builders Association.
This company is generic because, rather than specifically naming the partners, its export trade certificate - which allows joint trade activities to foreign markets - covers the association's entire membership, including new members as they join, said Charles G.


Donald Trump's $1,500 High-Roller Ringside
LEAD: DURING the negotiations for Ali-Frazier I at Madison Square Garden in 1971, each boxer was guaranteed a flat fee of $2.5 million, then a record sum.
But soon it was time to set the ticket prices. ''Some people kept telling me that we could charge $200 for a ringside seat, but I decided that $150 was enough,'' Harry Markson, the Garden's boxing president of that era, recalled with a laugh.


About Men; Learning to Hear The Small, Soft Voices
LEAD: YOU AT A WOMEN'S college?'' a friend said just after I'd been hired to teach English at Smith. ''That's a scandal waiting to happen.'' He never made it clear if I was to be the debaucher or the debauchee.
Another friend, a Smith alumna, told me its students saw the young male faculty, married or not, as ''fair game.


Atomic Craft Aground Off Washington Coast
LEAD: An American nuclear-powered attack submarine ran aground off Fox Island near here late Friday and stayed stuck for 10 hours, until four Navy tugs pulled it free at high tide this morning.


Irving Bidder Extends Offer
LEAD: The Bank of New York announced yesterday that it had extended its tender offer for the Irving Bank Corporation until Friday, when a proxy fight is expected at Irving's annual meeting.


Tennis; An Older McEnroe Just May Be Wiser
LEAD: WITH his racquet bag slung over his shoulder, John McEnroe was in no particular hurry as he walked from the practice court to the locker room at the Horseshoe Bend Country Club in suburban Atlanta last week, pleasant surroundings on what he hopes is the road back to the top of the tennis rankings.


Economic Calendar
LEAD:  Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  Construction Spending ...
March  Factory Orders ...
March  Productivity ...
First Quarter  Tuesday


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 42.9% Gain for Quarter At Grey Advertising
LEAD: Grey Advertising released its first-quarter earnings on Friday, and they were good enough to elicit a cautionary note from Edward H. Meyer, its chairman, who said that while he appreciated the performance, he doesn't want shareholders to expect similar percent gains during the rest of the year.


100 Children to Dance
LEAD: One hundred children from Jacques d'Amboise's National Dance Institute will perform in ''Dancing the New Stories'' on May 10 at Alice Tully Hall.
The event, directed by Mr. d'Amboise and presented by the institute and Lincoln Center's Meet-the-Artist program, will include a tribute to Irving Berlin, based on his song ''God Bless America,'' on the eve of his 100th birthday.


The Boom in Home Health Care
LEAD: In the face of rising hospital and nursing home costs, more Americans are receiving sophisticated medical care at home, from cancer chemotherapy drugs to kidney dialysis.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Information Resources' Shopping Cart With TV
LEAD: Information Resources of Chicago, the nation's third-largest marketing research company, is making an interesting diversification move: into TV-equipped supermarket carts.
It is called ''VideOcart,'' with a capital O. That's right, carts that have 6-by-8-inch video screens mounted on the handles and cued electronically to run commercials when they pass the shelfspace of an advertiser's products.


Bullish on Billy Beer
LEAD: It is going on 11 years since the brother of President Jimmy Carter entered the suds business.
Billy Beer caused something of a sensation when it was introduced, but 12 months later, in October 1978, Reynolds Metals bought nearly 9 million empty Billy cans and melted them, signaling the end for the brew.


Question Box; Ray Corio
LEAD:  QUESTION: Why is the American League sometimes referred to as the junior circuit?


Suspect Held in Fatal Clubbing Dies in Custody
LEAD: A man with a history of mental illness, who apparently went berserk and clubbed a woman to death with a two-by-four in Harlem Saturday, collapsed in a crowded cell at Police Headquarters yesterday and died soon afterward.


Market Place; Revising Realty Partnership Plans
LEAD: SPONSORS of limited real estate partnerships are like badly wounded soldiers.
Having been dealt a blow by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and by further tax changes last year, the sponsors are ever so slowly recovering.


Why Fear the Speech of Foreigners?
LEAD: Americans treasure the right to speak freely -for everyone except foreigners whose views the Government considers offensive.
That's because of the McCarran-Walter Immigration Act of 1952, a vestige of the McCarthy era that blights the nation's willingness to be a marketplace of ideas.
Congressional efforts to overhaul this objectionable law at last should get a lift from a recent ruling by a United States Court of Appeals.


Courtesy on the Lawn
LEAD: Standing in the special visitors gallery last Wednesday as Prime Minister Brian Mulroney arrived on the south lawn of the White House was the comedian Red Skelton.


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
West Germany's eight bourses reported that trading volume fell in April by nearly 28 percent, to 163.7 billion marks, or $95.4 billion, from 226.5 billion marks, or $135 billion, in March.
There were only 19 trading days in April, compared with 23 in March.
Also, average daily stock sales in April fell to 8.6 billion marks, or $5.1 billion, from 9.8 billion marks, or $5.8 billion, in March.


Killing Rent Protections Doesn't Build Housing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Devils Reaching Farther
LEAD: THE ultimate for the Devils this season was to make the playoffs.
Then the ultimate became being the Patrick Division champions.
Now, the ultimate goal is to have their names engraved on hockey's most coveted prize.


Robertson Backers Spark Melee at Meeting
LEAD: A district Republican convention here turned into a melee when supporters of Pat Robertson clashed with backers of Vice President Bush, officials said.


For Burma, Peace Talks in a Neutral Land
LEAD: To the Editor:


At a Le Pen Rally, Little Fraternite for Mitterrand
LEAD: Jean-Marie Le Pen, the leader of the ultra-right National Front, called on his supporters today not to vote for President Francois Mitterrand on May 8, but he declined to endorse the Socialist head of state's conservative challenger, Prime Minister Jacques Chirac.


Many Arabs Working in Israel Voice Mixed Views on Unrest
LEAD: Most mornings, Zhame Daragma, a Palestinian from the West Bank town of Tubas, climbs into his car and drives north into Israel where he shows up on time for work in this quiet Jewish village.


Auto Racing; Parsons Gains His First Nascar Victory
LEAD: Phil Parsons won the first Nascar race of his career today, holding off Bobby Allison and Geoff Bodine to win the Winston 500 at Alabama International Motor Speedway.


SENATE CAMPAIGNS RAISING HUGE SUMS FOR RACES IN FALL
LEAD: Eight months before a general election that will probably include some of the most costly Senate contests ever waged, the 27 incumbents facing re-election had amassed $63 million to finance their campaigns.


Let the Healing Begin On the West Bank
LEAD: To the Editor:


Two Palestinian Groups Clash in Lebanon
LEAD: Rival Palestinian factions renewed clashes this evening in Beirut's Shatila refugee district, Palestinians said.


Emphasizing Bygone Days Of Bunnyism
LEAD: A few women displayed rabbit ears on headbands.
Many wore dresses notable for their decolletage, and nearly all teetered on stiletto heels similar to those that were once part of their uniform.


Robin H. Winter Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Robin Hally Winter, a daughter of Mrs.
Howard Norton Blitman of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Nantucket, Mass., and Dr.
Leo Winter Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Erik Ferens Tinkhauser, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Emerich Rudolf Tinkhauser of Freeport, L.I., and Lenox, Mass.
Rabbi Jack Stern Jr. performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club in New


Britain Studies A Time Shift
LEAD: Britain is considering whether to synchronize its clocks with its partners in the European Community to smooth the way for European trade liberalization in 1992.
The issue was addressed Friday in a debate in Parliament, but no final decision was reached.


Winfield Trade On Hold
LEAD: George Steinbrenner's three-way deal involving Dave Winfield, which would send the Yankee outfielder to Toronto and bring Kevin Bass to New York, may have struck an unforeseen obstacle: Lou Piniella.


Now Russia Wants to Learn The Way U.S. Managers Do
LEAD: Professors from America's leading business schools may soon be teaching Western business practices to top civil servants and managers in the Soviet Union.


Sri Lanka Blast Kills 26 on Bus
LEAD: A bus filled with shoppers was blown apart today and at least 26 passengers were killed when Tamil rebels detonated explosives that had been buried in the ground, military officials said.


Taiwan Trade Talks End
LEAD: United States trade negotiators ended four days of talks in Taiwan Friday, saying they had reached no agreement on the vital issues of copyright, tariff cuts and access for United States financial institutions.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Jordan Scores 55 In Bulls' Triumph
LEAD: Michael Jordan scored 55 points to become the first player to score 50 or more in two consecutive National Basketball Association playoff games as Chicago beat Cleveland, 106-101, today.
The Bulls took a 2-games-to-0 lead in their Eastern Conference series.


Review/Pop; Up From the Malls, Tiffany on Tour
LEAD: Last summer, Tiffany was singing 20-minute sets at shopping malls with her backup on tape.
Now, after four hit singles have helped sell four million copies of her debut album, ''Tiffany,'' the 16-year-old singer is fronting a band on her first full-fledged concert tour, which came to the Westbury Music Fair tonight.


Outdoors: Wily Wild Turkeys
LEAD: THE pleasures of hunting wild turkeys are certainly not confined to shooting these wonderful birds.


One Dies, 4 Hurt In Copter Crash Into East River
LEAD: One person was killed and four others were injured yesterday when a sightseeing helicopter crashed into the cold East River minutes before it was to land at the 34th Street heliport in Manhattan.


Review/Television; Supreme Court Justices: America's Judicial Stars
LEAD: The Supreme Court was once remote and mysterious, the Federal equivalent of Mount Olympus.
It may even be argued that the remoteness was a source of power: Olympus could command in a way that politicians could not.
A Justice had a divine calling.
Divinity, however, is hard to sustain in a media age.


Beijing to Close Top Ideological Journal
LEAD: Red Flag, the theoretical journal of China's Communist Party for three decades and long a stronghold of hard-line Marxists, will shut down this summer, the official New China News Agency reported today.


Federal Study to Label Nicotine as Addictive
LEAD: An upcoming report by Surgeon General C. Everett Koop will declare that nicotine is an addictive drug, the head of the Federal Office of Smoking and Health said today.


Analysts See Higher Bond Yields
LEAD: The economic forces that have pushed up interest rates by more than three-quarters of a point since early March could become more intense this quarter.


Young Crack Addicts Find There's No Help for Them
LEAD: Growing numbers of poor, young teen-agers are abusing crack in New York City, but there is practically no place for parents or social-service agencies to send them for drug treatment, according to experts in drug abuse and youth issues.


USG Suitor Alters Terms Of Its Bid
LEAD: In the latest round in its battle to gain control of the USG Corporation, Desert Partners L.P. said yesterday that it would pay $45 a share in cash for 39 million outstanding shares if a friendly deal could be worked out.


No Accord By OPEC On Oil Cuts
LEAD: The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ended four days of meetings early today without an agreement on a production cut.
OPEC officials said the cartel would meet again next month.
The failure here is bound to depress oil prices by at least $1 a barrel, an analyst said, because the oil markets had been anticipating some kind of decision to reduce output, which would have propped up oil prices.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Medical Buildings Inc., Milwaukee, a builder and designer of health-care facilities, named Michael A. Carlson president and chief executive to replace John Lundeen, who has resigned but who will continue in an executive capacity for new-business development.


Seattle Symphony Players Vote to Change Unions
LEAD: In a move that could affect musicians around the country, members of the Seattle Symphony Orchestra have voted to leave the American Federation of Musicians and join a new union for representation in contract talks this year.


In Vietnam, Craft Project Breaks Mold
LEAD: Although the world has heard how resilient Vietnamese refugees have transformed neighborhoods in Paris, Chicago or Los Angeles over the last decade, the story of Thu Duc didn't get publicity.


A Buckeye's Endorsement
LEAD: When Vice President Bush visited Ohio State University, he picked up one legendary Buckeye's endorsement from beyond the grave.


The Client Whom Ad Agencies Hate to Love
LEAD: Pacy Markham says that someday he will write his memoirs of two decades in the advertising business, and the chapter devoted to his trauma and torment will be entitled, ''Sentenced to the Gallos.''


More Credit Is Due To Catholic Schools
LEAD: To the Editor:


Celtics Waste No Time
LEAD: Rick Pitino threw the coaching book at the Boston Celtics today.
The Knicks trapped and they pressed.
They tried a small lineup and a big lineup.
They played Patrick Ewing and Bill Cartwright, their 7-foot centers, with three guards.


G. E. Mylonas, 89, Archeologist Who Led Greek Excavations, Dies
LEAD: George E. Mylonas, an internationally recognized authority on Greek archeology and a longtime teacher at Washington University in St.
Louis, died April 15 after suffering a heart attack in Athens, where he lived.
He was 89 years old.


Big Board Expresses Optimism After Testing Computers
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange will know within a few days whether an unusual test of its computer systems was a success, according to officials for the Big Board.


Sensitive to Suspicion
LEAD: Pentagon officials in charge of developing the space-based defense system terminated the funds for an advisory panel of computer experts just as a Senate subcommittee was about to make public the findings of an investigation into possible improprieties involving panel members and multimillion-dollar research contracts.


Roar of the Lion Echoes In Land of the Longhorn
LEAD: In Texas, the land of longhorns and mustangs, the talk is all of lions.


Thai Fishermen Again Brutalizing Vietnam Refugees, Survivors Say
LEAD: Vietnamese refugees sailing for Malaysia say they are being brutalized and robbed by Thai fishermen roaming the Gulf of Thailand and the South China Sea.


Agency Plays Pervasive Role in High Court Case
LEAD: There is a little-known but powerful section of the Justice Department, the Office of Legal Counsel, that serves as the executive branch's brain trust on the most fundamental issues of Presidential power.


Ending the Cold War
LEAD: Seven prominent Americans and seven prominent Soviet officials have been meeting over the last three and a half years on a project entitled: How to End the Cold War.


INSIDE
LEAD:  House Aide Falls to Death  The chief aide to a Maryland Congressman plunged from the 24th-floor of a hotel in Manhattan the day an article on his activities was published in Washington.
Page B1.  26 Slain on Sri Lanka Bus  At least 26 passengers were killed on a Sri Lankan bus when Tamil rebels set off buried explosives beneath it, military officials said.


Review/City Ballet; Comedy and Art in 2 New Works
LEAD: The mood picked up Saturday night with the New York City Ballet's American Music Festival at the New York State Theater.
There were two new works: ''The Unanswered Question,'' a poetic fantasy by Eliot Feld to Charles Ives's music, and ''Into the Hopper,'' a comedy piece choreographed by Bart Cook to William


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 3 Companies Being Acquired
LEAD: There is a rush on to acquire sales promotion companies, and it must be a reflection of the fact that larger slices of the marketing pie are being diverted to that discipline.


The Money Race: 1988 Senate Candidates
LEAD: Funds raised through March 31. Asterisk denotes incumbent.
$
Total
Cash on
receipts
hand
Ariz.
Dennis DeConcini (D)*
$2,150,026
$1,525,938
Keith DeGreen (R)
77,355
4,546
Calif.
Pete Wilson (R)*
7,092,737
2,327,863
Leo T. McCarthy (D)
2,441,515
750,082
Conn.


The Metropolitan Museum's Diplomat at the Top
LEAD: He's no longer Mr.
Ambassador, though he jokes that he occasionally uses the title ''to get dinner reservations.'' Yet William H. Luers, the president of the Metropolitan Museum and a former United States Ambassador to Czechoslovakia and Venezuela, still plays a diplomat's role.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Team Joins Keye/Donna To Open in New York
LEAD: Tod Seisser and Jay Taub, one of three creative-director teams at Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver, have left the agency to help a Los Angeles agency try the difficult job of gaining a foothold in New York.


Max Feldberg, Retailer, 90
LEAD: Max Feldberg, a founder of the Zayre Corporation, a large national retail company, died of heart failure last Tuesday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
He was 90 years old and lived in Palm Beach, Fla.


American League; Athletics Win 7th Straight
LEAD: Stan Javier drove in two runs with a bases-loaded single, and Mark McGwire doubled in two more runs during a six-run ninth inning today as Oakland rallied to beat the Cleveland Indians, 8-4, for the Athletics' seventh straight victory.


Trade Bill Options: Pass, Fail or Punt
LEAD: For the last 15 years, Representative William D. Ford, whose constituents are blue-collar and white-collar auto and steel workers in the western suburbs of Detroit, has been trying to legislate prior notice of factory shutdowns or layoffs.


Books of The Times; Elmore Leonard's New Thriller, 'Freaky Deaky'
LEAD:  Freaky Deaky  By Elmore Leonard  341 pages. Arbor House/William Morrow. $18.95.


U.S. and Japan In Farm Talks
LEAD: Japan's agriculture minister will remain in Washington in an effort to break the deadlock in negotiations over barriers against the sale of more United States beef and oranges in Japan.


New York Plans New Aid for Mothers on Welfare
LEAD: New York State is moving to set up a program that gives thousands of poor, single mothers guaranteed child-support payments and new incentives to get off the welfare rolls.


Treasury to Announce Size of Refunding
LEAD: Treasury financings this week include today's regular auction of three-month and six-month bills, followed by an auction of one-year bills on Thursday.
On Wednesday the Treasury is expected to announce the size of next week's quarterly refunding.
Most analysts expect the Treasury will sell between $26 billion and $27 billion of 3-year and 10-year notes and 30-year bonds.


Defendant Is Awarded Custody of 2 Children
LEAD: A Wall Street investment analyst charged with murdering his wife may keep custody of his children, a Manhattan judge has ruled.


Lukas's Filly Looming Large in Kentucky Derby
LEAD: SIX months ago at Hollywood Park, D. Wayne Lukas played five aces and still kept a trump up his sleeve.


One Killed and 4 Injured as Helicopter Plunges Into the East River
LEAD: A diver examining the pontoons of a helicopter, at top, that crashed into the East River yesterday, killing one passenger and injuring three others and the pilot.
Above, two victims rescued from the water are led away by rescue workers.
Page B3.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about assistant chefs misstated the background of a chef at Montrachet in Manhattan and misspelled his name.
The chef, Brian Whitmer, became the head chef at Montrachet without first serving as sous-chef there.


In Northern California, The Music Sounds Just as It Used To
LEAD: Bustling from cult marginality into the mainstream, the original-instruments movement has attracted greater attention than any other recent trend in the performance of classical music.
And no part of the United States has a more active, intensely interconnected early-music community than the San Francisco Bay Area.


Olympic Notebook; Cuban Participation Remains Very Iffy
LEAD: Expectations of Cuba attending the Seoul Olympics are changing again, in fact, this time they are diminishing.


Dukakis Campaign's 737 Jet Passes Special Safety Check
LEAD: The Boeing 737 being used by Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, the model whose roof tore off in flight in Hawaii last week, underwent a special safety check today and was declared free of hazards.


Review/Theater; A Small-Scale Romantic Musical Moves Uptown
LEAD: ''Romance Romance,'' lately the littlest big musical Off Off Broadway, has made it uptown, in a slightly enhanced production that loses nothing of the charm and intelligence of the original and gains a thoroughly winning performance by Alison Fraser.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-15  Most Arabs holding jobs in Israel have showed up for work regularly, except for the most violent weeks of the Palestinian uprising, according to the Government.
That frustrates the uprising's leadership.
Page A1


Marathon; Marathoners' Times Good as Gold?
LEAD: With four miles to go, she knew the race was hers.
With 100 yards to go, she looked more like a sprinter.
Crossing the finish line in the fastest time by an American woman in almost three years, Margaret Groos looked fresh enough to head straight for the victory party.


Furor Over Air Canada Offering
LEAD: When the Canadian Government announced last month that it would offer 45 percent of the equity in Air Canada, the state-owned airline, to the public, it stirred a political furor.
In the House of Commons, Edward Broadbent, a leading opposition figure with the New Democratic Party, denounced the move as ''a triumph of Conservative ideology over good, common Canadian sense.


Beazer Group Discloses Holdings
LEAD: More than two-thirds of the outstanding common shares of the Koppers Company are owned by or have been tendered to the investment group that made a $1.7 billion hostile takeover bid for the company, the group said.


Blunder Costly in Yankees' 5-1 Loss
LEAD: It happened in the seventh inning, in a game the Yankees were already losing, on a day that was cold and dreary and mostly uneventful.
And when the afternoon was done, something did not seem right.


Dr. Louis Potters Weds Dr. Lenore J. Brancato
LEAD: At St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University, Dr.
Lenore Jasmine Brancato, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo J. Brancato of Danbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Louis Potters, a son of Mrs.
Milton Potters of South Orange, N.J., and the late Dr.
Potters.
The Rev.
Stanley Moseley, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Burt Siegel performed the ceremony.


Cronyn and Tandy Hailed By American Academy
LEAD: Hume Cronyn and Jessica Tandy, the peerless first couple of the American theater, were honored by the American Academy of Dramatic Arts last night at a gala tribute at the St.
Regis Hotel.


500 Clash With Police in Gdansk Amid May Day Protests in Poland
LEAD: About 500 people clashed with the police in the northern city of Gdansk today, and official May Day parades in several other Polish cities were countered by demonstrators bearing banners of the banned Solidarity trade union.


May Day Marches on 2 Sides of Berlin Wall
LEAD: Thousands of marchers on both sides of the Berlin wall marked May Day within a mile of each other, with both groups carrying placards bearing Communist slogans and both under the watch of huge police forces, but otherwise worlds apart.


Bruins' Tenacity Returns
LEAD: TERRY O'REILLY, the Bruins' bully-turned-coach, actually cringed his way through the series with Montreal that earned Boston the privilege of facing the Devils in the Prince of Wales Conference championship series, which begins tonight.


Laura Kavesh, a Columnist, Is Married
LEAD: Laura Beatrice Kavesh, a columnist for The Chicago Tribune, and Dr.
Steven Stern, an assistant professor of psychiatry and psychology at the Northwestern University Medical School, were married yesterday in Chicago.
Rabbi Michael Siegel performed the ceremony at the Anshe Emet Synagogue.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


DUKAKIS SAYS BUSH HAS BLANK RECORD
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts today assailed Vice President Bush for campaigning as if his opponent were Jimmy Carter and said Mr.
Bush's record was ''a blank slate'' and therefore hard to judge.


Housing Jersey's Homeless: Counties Pushed to Bear Load
LEAD: Almost 800 homeless families in New Jersey are facing eviction from the motels where they have been living as the state moves to enforce a limit on emergency housing.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Hollywood Creatures


The Fish Are Running; The Homeless Benefit
LEAD: The shad are running in the Hudson, and Bob Gabrielson decided to donate part of a day's catch to the homeless.


Ortega Denounces 'Pseudo-Leaders' of Labor
LEAD: With Nicaragua facing its first major labor conflict since the 1979 revolution, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra denounced opposition labor organizers today as ''pseudo-leaders who receive money from the C.I.A.''


5 West German Groups Raise Growth Estimate
LEAD: West Germany's five leading economic research institutes have raised their forecast for the country's growth this year, in line with Government predictions, but they foresee a slowdown in 1989 because of sagging domestic demand.


Stephens: Winning Colors Will Fail
LEAD: Forty Niner erased any doubts about his fitness for the Kentucky Derby Saturday with a fine one-mile workout this morning, and his trainer then predicted that the colt would help keep the filly Winning Colors from winning the race.


Christian Broadcasting Unit Drops 2 Swaggart TV Shows
LEAD: The Christian Broadcasting Network has canceled two shows produced by the Jimmy Swaggart ministry because Mr.
Swaggart refused to stop appearing on them, a spokesman said today.


Business and the Law; Outlook Cloudy On Securities Bills
LEAD: PROSPECTS for changes in takeover and insider trading laws are rapidly diminishing on Capitol Hill, according to some legislators, regulators and lobbyists.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of May 1,1988:  MONDAY


Reds Fans' Assault Leaves Bad Taste
LEAD: Three hours before the game, Dave Pallone's official blue blazer hung on the door of the umpires' dressing room in the basement of Riverfront Stadium.
It was wrapped in a local dry cleaner's plastic and was stapled with a receipt showing the Reds had picked up the bill for $3.


House Aide Dies in Plunge From a Hotel
LEAD: The chief of staff to a Maryland Congressman died yesterday when he plunged from a 24th-floor window of the Helmsley Palace hotel in Manhattan, the police said.
They said it was apparently a suicide.


Cyclists Pedal for Youth
LEAD: Participants in the 12th annual Citibank/American Youth Hostel Five Boro Bike Tour on Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive yesterday.
Riders included unicyclists, recumbent bicyclists, cycling families, Olympic riders, children, cycling pros and riders out for fun, more than 22,000 in all.
Of the $6 registration fee for participants in the bike tour, $2 will go toward the development of a 477-bed hostel.


Rona Silver Married To Dr. Kevin Loshak
LEAD: At Temple Beth Am in Merrick, L.I., Rona Silver, the daughter of Jean Silver of Merrick and the late Stanley W. Silver, was married yesterday to Dr.
Kevin Loshak, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elias Loshak, also of Merrick.
Rabbi Ronald N. Brown officiated.
Mrs.
Loshak, a sales marketing planner in advertising at The New York Times, graduated from the State University at Albany, as did her husband.


British Trade Deficit Cut
LEAD: Britain's merchandise trade deficit narrowed unexpectedly and sharply in March to a seasonally adjusted $1.61 billion from $2.48 billion in February, the Government said Friday.
Nevertheless, the deficit was much wider than the deficit a year ago, which came to $703 million.
Britain's total trade deficit also narrowed sharply.


WHITE HOUSE SEEKS INCREASE IN SALES OF ARMS OVERSEAS
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has told Congress that it wants to increase arms sales abroad substantially this year to more than $15 billion worth of weapons.
This is $3.3 billion more than the United States sold to other countries last year.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Lendl Overcomes Edberg: Ivan Lendl came back from a shaky start to defeat Stefan Edberg yesterday in the final of the $500,000 Challenge in Atlanta.
Edberg won the first set, 6-2, but Lendl took the next two sets, 6-1, 6-3, to win the exhibition tournament, held at Horseshoe Bend Country Club.


Officer Who Quit Cites Avon's Smaller Focus
LEAD: John S. Chamberlin, who resigned last week as president and chief operating officer in an unexpected development at Avon Products Inc., said yesterday that the move was mostly the result of changes in Avon's business since he took his post three years ago.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; Keeper of That Statistical Song and Dance
LEAD: Samuel M. Ehrenhalt has an odd passion for statistics.
Nothing sets him to dancing like a good strong quarterly report in employment.
A steep trend line in new-business formations makes him break into song.


At Texas Air, Safety and Public Take a Back Seat; Standards Sought
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gooden Silences Reds, 11-0
LEAD: In the end, after all the increased security and worry about another outbreak of rowdyism in the stands, the Mets provided the most effective form of crowd control today.
It took them barely five innings to quiet Riverfront Stadium and just one more to begin emptying it.


Rise in Exports Spurs Job Boom in Midwest
LEAD: Spurred by the declining value of the dollar, a resulting pickup in exports and a rapid upgrading of its factories, the industrial establishment of the Midwest has begun almost overnight to catch up with the the rest of the country's economic recovery.


Pro Football; Jets' Fences Need Mending
LEAD: Coach Joe Walton and most of the Jets' veterans will be reunited tomorrow for the first time since their season ended in bitterness and name-calling.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  International Report


Studies Find More Reading for Information and Less for Fun
LEAD: The plethora of new trade publications, self-improvement books and special-interest consumer magazines and newspaper sections is testimony to a change in America's reading habits.
Now a number of studies are documenting just how much those habits have changed.


'PRINCESS' LABEL LINKED TO BIGOTRY
LEAD: A year and a half ago, Michael Brodsky, president of the Hillel chapter at Syracuse University, asked Dr.
Gary Spencer to speak on the topic of JAP's, or Jewish American Princesses.


Warmth in Waders
LEAD: A classic boot-foot wader made of rubber is all that most fly fishermen need to complement the cache of tackle they take with them to the river.
But for the sportsman who wants comfort and warmth, there's the boot-foot wader with a neoprene top.


Publishers Add Zeros To Book Bids
LEAD: Only a few years after vowing never again to throw big bucks after big books, the publishing industry is spending huge sums in pursuit of authors.
And while the risks are as enormous as they used to be, the way the big money is spent today is significantly different.


Israeli Punished in Arab's Death
LEAD: The deputy commander of an Israeli Army unit was suspended today after one of his men shot and killed a Palestinian in the West Bank village of Faqua, the army said.


At Texas Air, Safety and Public Take a Back Seat
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: The Market Place column in Business Day on April 22 incorrectly characterized the plans of Burt Sugarman's lawyer, Edward Brodsky.
Mr.
Brodksy said he would appear in Federal court in Richmond contesting a move by Media General Inc. to have Mr.
Sugarman's lawsuit dismissed.


Belfast Journal; The Laurels of Peace Were Green (for a Season)
LEAD: When the two Nobel laureates lost their aura a decade ago and the throngs of peace marchers drifted away from the ghettos, there was no shortage of critics to gloat over the failure of ''the fur coat brigade.''


U.S. PLAN FOR LEASE IN SPACE OPPOSED
LEAD: A group of key Senators has rejected President Reagan's proposal for government leasing of much of a no-frills space station that would be commercially developed and owned.
The Senators instead ordered an independent assessment of the proposed station's merits.


WHO RAISED WHAT
LEAD: Reports to the Federal Election Commission tell how much money each candidate has raised.
Chart showing 33 contests, page B8.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ogilvy Turns Seductive For Watches
LEAD: HOW strange it is that an adver= tiser with a budget of only $1 million for television should be planning to use 60-second spots instead of something shorter to make the money go further - get more messages for the buck.


Study Is Cautious on China's Growth
LEAD: China is fast developing into one of the world's leading exporters, chiefly to finance its growing demand for food imports, the Central Intelligence Agency reported today.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly  DISARMAMENT COMMISSION - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


U.S. Escorts Gulf Tankers
LEAD: United States warships escorted three Kuwaiti oil tankers northward through the Persian Gulf today after reports that Iranian gunboats were sighted near the Strait of Hormuz, maritime officials said.
The convoy was the first since Washington announced on Friday that it would protect neutral ships in the gulf.


Aliens Leave Shadows In the Race for Amnesty
LEAD: Antonio Garcia Gonzalez has spent most of the past year shining shoes, selling Mexican newspapers and candies and smiling a nearly toothless smile outside the legalization office.


Volkswagen Price Rise
LEAD: Volkswagen United States said it would raise the prices of its Fox models by an average of 5 percent, or $359 a vehicle, effective Monday.
The company attributed the increase to economic pressures in Brazil, where the car is manufactured.


3 British Servicemen Are Killed In I.R.A. Attacks in Netherlands
LEAD: Three British servicemen were killed and three wounded in a bombing and a shooting in the Netherlands today, and the Irish Republican Army said it had carried out the two attacks.


61 Scientists Are Chosen For National Academy
LEAD: The National Academy of Sciences, often described as the nation's most prestigious honorary society for scientists, has announced the election of 61 new members.


Sports of The Times; How Devils Regrouped
LEAD: THE goal came from nowhere, a looping shot, more or less chipped into the air, rising over a diving player, obscured by two grappling players, then fluttering over the right shoulder of Sean Burke, the goalie of the New Jersey Devils.


The Tie-Up of '88
LEAD: I am writing this with an old-fashioned, user-hostile pen while riding, if that verb can be used, in a New York City taxicab.


Smokers Adjust to New York Curbs
LEAD: Alan Dyer, a 27-year-old computer technician, walks the city streets trailing a fog of cigarette smoke because the New York City's new anti-smoking law forbids him to smoke in his office.
Ed Kelly, a 52-year-old operations officer at the Israel Discount Bank of New York, regularly stands outside the bank's entrance like an underdressed doorman, puffing away at a quick lunchtime cigarette.


Dr. Diane Benezra and Peter Jay Kurshan Marry
LEAD: At Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., Dr.
Diane Amy Benezra, a daughter of Edith Benezra of Lauderhill, Fla., and the late Max Benezra, was married yesterday to Peter Jay Kurshan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond P. Kurshan of Woodmere, L.I., and New York.
Rabbi Joel Y. Zion officiated.


Mary Fisher Wed To an Executive
LEAD: Mary Alice Fisher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Agnew Fisher of Greenwich, Conn., and David Kinne Carmichael, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank K. Carmichael of Northford, Conn., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Joseph Amato performed the ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church in Riverside,


Afghan Doctor Tells of Nation's Mental Scars
LEAD: Each Afghan refugee bears the reactions and disturbed mental life of war and exile, an Afghan psychiatrist says.


Metro Matters; Parting Shots By a Molder Of Public Images
LEAD: Herb Schmertz voted to move the Mobil Corporation's headquarters from Manhattan to suburban Washington.
Now he'd like to shift the nation's capital away from Washington.


A Late Starter Punches Toward Seoul
LEAD: IT is the stuff of fantasies, something that Jerome James might daydream about while cruising the streets of Sioux Falls, S.D., in his police car.


Rally on Knight Remarks
LEAD: About 300 people marched on the Indiana University campus tonight, demanding that Bob Knight, the school's basketball coach, apologize publicly for his televised statement on rape and stress.
The protesters also called on administrators to reprimand Knight and to make rape-awareness workshops mandatory for athletic teams.


Golf; Moody's Putt Wins Legends Playoff
LEAD: Tommy Aaron, the 1973 Masters champion, produced a legendary shot today when he holed out from 115 yards at the par-4 16th hole on the Onion Creek Club for an eagle that led to a playoff in the 11th annual Liberty Mutual Legends of Golf.


Review/Operetta; Sincere Zeal And Hamminess In 'Pinafore'
LEAD: The Light Opera of Manhattan, which presents a year-round operetta season, has weathered hard times in recent years.
In 1986, after the death of its founder and the loss of its theater, the company suspended operations under the weight of a hefty deficit.
But a new board put LOOM's finances straight, and last June the company was reborn.


Jackson Says There'll Be 'No Deal' at Democratic Convention
LEAD: For those wondering about his intentions at the Democratic National Convention, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson offered this today:


West's Envoys End Boycott Of May Day Fete in Moscow
LEAD: Western ambassadors attended the annual May Day parade in Moscow today for the first time in eight years, ending a boycott prompted by the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.


East Bloc Aircraft Deal
LEAD: Interflug Airline, the East German carrier, has agreed to buy two Airbus A-310s, but the deal needs approval from the Western alliance's agency, known as Cocom, that regulates technology sales to Communist countries, Monday's edition of the weekly Der Spiegel said.


Sports World Specials
LEAD:  A Blaze of Glory


National League; Cards Hammer Dodgers, 9-0
LEAD: John Tudor, making his second start of the season, pitched six hitless innings today before he was removed for a pinch-hitter, and the St.
Louis Cardinals had 15 hits en route to a 9-0 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers.


Bridge
LEAD: With five months remaining before the 1988 World Team Olympiad, scheduled in Venice in October, national organizations are making the moves needed to select their teams.
The United States teams will be determined by playoff matches scheduled in Memphis in June.


Ben Lexcen, Designer Of Innovative Yacht
LEAD: Ben Lexcen, who designed the yacht that ended the 132-year reign of the United States in America's Cup racing, died Sunday night.
He was 52 years old.


Economy Increased Pace in April, Purchasers Say
LEAD: The economy expanded at a faster rate in April after three months of slow growth, the National Association of Purchasing Management said in its monthly report scheduled to be released today.


Maxwell Bid Reported
LEAD: Robert Maxwell, chairman of the Maxwell Communications Corporation, is trying to buy a West German publishing company that prints dictionaries and encyclopedias, a local newspaper said.
The Saturday edition of the Mannheimer Morgen quoted a spokesman for Bibliographisches Institute and F.A.
Brockhaus A.G.


New Famous Amos Owner Wants Bigger Market Share
LEAD: ''Mental real estate'' is how Jeffery B. Baer, a Denver investor and entrepreneur, described the reason for his family's acquisition of the Famous Amos Chocolate Chip Cookie Corporation ''It needs to be developed,'' Mr.
Baer, Amos's new chairman, said after the Friday announcement. ''It's not a piece of ground, but the principle is the same.


Money Managers Stress Rockefeller Expertise
LEAD: Two members of the Rockefeller family, David Elliman and his brother, Christopher J. Elliman, have teamed up with Cynthia Flowers and Arthur S. Penn to form a registered investment advisory and management firm called Stillrock Management.
Since 1981, David Elliman has been running a firm called Elmrock Inc., devoted exclusively to the financial affairs of the


A Writer Turns Shards of a Life Into a History
LEAD: Eduardo Galeano, a novelist from Uruguay who has completed a subjective, fragmentary and unconventional three-volume history of the Americas, has what might be called a tragic sense of life.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is my last chance.
I know if I don't at least try, I could be sent back to El Salvador, and that is worse.''  - Maria Sanchez of Houston on the alien amnesty program that ends Wednesday.  [ A16:4. ]


Dr. Marleen Meyers Wed to S. M. Rogovin, Lawyer
LEAD: Dr.
Marleen Iva Meyers and Stanley Marc Rogovin were married yesterday at Temple Emanu-El in New York by Rabbi David Posner.


Celtics Teaching Difficult Lessons
LEAD: Coach Rick Pitino stood in a hall at the Boston Garden, sifting through the ashes of the Knicks' second playoff loss.
Nearby, Coach K. C. Jones was explaining how his Celtics had set the fire.


At Texas Air, Safety and Public Take a Back Seat; Poor Performance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Standing Small in Central America
LEAD: When Ronald Reagan took office, his advisers called for the smack of strong measures in Central America.
This President wanted results, they said, not human rights reports or Panama Canal treaties.
Results meant getting rid of the Sandinistas in Nicaragua and crushing guerrilla forces in El Salvador's civil war.


Baby Talk for Runners
LEAD: Joan Benoit Samuelson, the reigning Olympic marathan champion and the mother of a 7-month-old daughter, will headline a pregnancy and fitness clinic in New York on Saturday, May 7.
Also offering suggestions on how women can stay in shape during and after pregnancy will be Dr.
MOna Shangold, author of ''The Complete Sports Medicine Book for Wome,'' Glroia Averbuch, a national-class runner and author of ''Free to Be the Complete Athlete,'' and Cameron


On Your Own: Tennis; Give Your Racquet A Tuneup for Outdoors
LEAD: WOULD you drive off on a cross-country trip this spring or summer without getting your car tuned up first?
Probably not.
And you shouldn't embark on an active schedule of outdoor tennis without getting your racquet tuned up.


Robberies Drop 26% Since Worst Year
LEAD: Robbery, which some experts say is the best indicator of how safe a city is, has dropped 26 percent in New York City since 1981, and the police attribute the drop to new anti-robbery teams, computer tracking of robbery patterns and other recent innovations.


Bolinas Journal; Skateboards Ruffle A Hippie Paradise
LEAD: Better known for defending Black Panthers, Hell's Angels and members of the Symbionese Liberation Army, J. Tony Serra has lately directed his anti-establishment advocacy toward protecting a skateboard ramp that his sons built and the neighbors want torn down.


Equipment Sales Increase
LEAD: An Increase of 8.9 percent last year in consumer dollar purchases of athletic footwear and sporting goods equipment - camping, exercise, racquets, baseball/softball and inflatables - were among year-end findings of a 1987 quarterly sales trends study announced by the Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; At Networks, Cheap Is Chic, So Please Pardon the Robots
LEAD: ONE recent Saturday night, Connie Chung, the anchor of the weekend version of ''NBC Nightly News,'' was reading an urgent story about the Middle East, when she began to disappear.


Fitness; Exercies and Healthy Diet Lead Crusade Against Cholesterol
LEAD: ANYONE who is serious about fitness must eventually confront the fat, or lipids, in his or her blood.
An ambitious weekly exercise effort aimed at a healthy heart can provide a false sense of overall fitness if blood lipids are out of kilter.


The Editorial Notebook; Who's a Terrorist, and When?
LEAD: With remarkable speed, yesterday's terrorists turn into today's statesmen.
Consider the Middle East rebellion by a stateless people against an occupying army whose soldiers were special targets in a campaign to seize world attention.


Condor Chick Doing Well
LEAD: The first California condor conceived in captivity ate a hearty diet of chopped mice today as keepers kept a close eye on the chick that boosted the number of the endangered birds to 28. ''The appetite of the bird is very good,'' said Martha Baker, spokeswoman for the San Diego Wild Animal Park, where the chick was hatched with human help on Friday.


Police-Fire Feud Is Set Off Again By Copter Death
LEAD: The New York City Fire Commissioner said yesterday that the police had erred in preventing firefighters from trying to help free a man trapped in a helicopter in the East River Sunday, but the Police Commissioner replied that the firefighters had no business being at the scene.


USX Expects Gains
LEAD: The USX Corporation's chairman, David M. Roderick, said today that the company would record ''materially enhanced profitability'' this year and next.
The company, the parent of USS, the nation's largest steelmaker, should generate $1 billion in excess cash this year, he said at the annual shareholders meeting here today.


Chicago Rivet &amp; Machine Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Chicago Rivet &amp; Machine Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,613,710
4,767,461
Net inc
383,715
b286,006
Share earns
.53
.39
b-After a loss of $102,061 from discontinued operations.


First Republicbank
LEAD: The First Republicbank Corporation will propose to reduce the size of its board to 16, from 33, at its annual meeting on June 28.
Albert V. Casey, the new chairman of the bank holding company, had suggested the smaller board last week, and the board backed that proposal, a company spokesman said.
Mr.


Few Surprises Seen as Likely At Primary in Capital Today
LEAD: Political suspense will be in short supply Tuesday when voters in the District of Columbia go to the polls for their 1988 Presidential primary.
There is no serious doubt that Democrats will overwhelmingly endorse the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and none at all that Republicans will back Vice President Bush.


Tutu and Botha Joust Over Theology
LEAD: It is not every day that a head of government tries to instruct a major Christian leader on the true meaning of Christianity, but that is what President P. W. Botha of South Africa tried earlier this year.


Critic's Notebook; Beware Film Trailers, for Which Beauty Isn't Truth
LEAD: It is the coldest fact of a film critic's life: movies may be art or escapism, but they are always consumer products.


GV Medical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GV Medical
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
940,663
246,282
Net loss
878,702
763,646





ARCO Lifts Profit by 68%
LEAD: ARCO's first-quarter profit rose 68 percent, mainly because of higher margins from chemical operations and its refining and marketing business, the company reported today.


Galoob, Lewis Toys reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Galoob, Lewis Toys (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,781,000
6,043,000
Net loss
2,809,000
3,484,000


CCX Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CCX Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,100,000
13,556,000
Net inc
b615,000
c3,446,000
Share earns
.15
-
9mo sales
25,259,000
32,879,000
Net inc
b229,000
c4,568,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $253,000 for both the quarter and 9 months, and tax credits of $209,000 and $78,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Bristol-Myers Files Petition for Inquiry
LEAD: The Bristol-Myers Company has filed a petition contending that South Korea has failed to provide adequate patent protection for the company's pharmaceutical technology.
The petition urged the United States trade representative, Clayton K. Yeutter, to investigate, the company said.


Ribi Immunochem Research reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Ribi Immunochem Research (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
129,773
131,880
Net loss
467,498
132,580


Washington Talk: The Military; An Impossible Dream May Soon Be Possible
LEAD: For more than a decade, the prospect of closing a military base in this country has been about as good as that of carrying moonbeams home in a jar.
The legislative obstacles have been too large.


Derby Unseats Lesser-Known
LEAD: If loyalty had much to do with horse racing, the jockeys riding in the Kentucky Derby here Saturday would include such unfamiliar names as Jack Lauzon, Rafael Meza, Mike Smith, Chris Valovich and B. J. Walker.
Each of them rode one of this year's Derby starters in his first start, but all of them will be watching the


Two Leaders Challenge The 'Big Science' Trend
LEAD: In a departure from past practice, leaders of eminent research organizations are beginning to suggest that many of the nation's most glamorous ''big science'' projects may have to be scaled down to permit financing of other, less visible scientific endeavors that will probably be more important in the long run.


BankAmerica Names New Vice Chairman
LEAD: Robert W. Frick, a vice chairman of the BankAmerica Corporation and head of its world banking group, is resigning to pursue other interests, the San Francisco-based company said yesterday.


Idaho Power Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Idaho Power Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
102,865,961
96,332,058
Net inc
10,157,336
b26,300,827
Share earns
.27
.74
b-Includes an accounting change gain of $11.3 million.


Seoul Ruling Party Replaces Hard-Liners With Moderates
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo replaced the head of the governing party with a moderate today and indicated that he would cooperate with the opposition after a major election setback.


Bonn to Sell Remaining Viag Stake
LEAD: The West German Government, continuing its disposal of its corporate holdings, will sell its remaining 60 percent stake in Viag A.G., the giant energy, chemical and metal enterprise.


Commodore International Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Commodore International Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
200,300,000
169,500,000
Net inc
b9,600,000
1,000,000
Share earns
.30
.03
9mo rev
655,900,000
616,300,000
Net inc
b43,600,000
c26,500,000
Share earns
1.37
.83


Copperless Superconductor
LEAD: In a new twist in the search for high-temperature superconductors, researchers at A.T.&amp;T.
Bell Laboratories have found a material that differs radically from all the new compounds discovered over the last two years: it contains no copper.


New York State Needs Consistent Election Laws
LEAD: To the Editor:


Integrated Genetics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Integrated Genetics (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,436,431
3,405,678
Net loss
923,974
b136,648
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Is It All Quiet In West Bank, Or Just a Lull?
LEAD: Occupied West Bank, May 2 - Adel, a 20-year-old Palestinian who was a university student before the uprising closed the schools, has heard the Israeli Government predicting victory over the Palestinian uprising.


Keystone International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Keystone International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
80,064,000
68,900,000
Net inc
7,083,000
4,485,000
Share earns
.27
.18


Alco Standard Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Alco Standard Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
904,750,000
751,633,000
Net inc
23,320,000
16,765,000
Share earns
.50
.38
6mo rev
1,726,859,000
1,454,603,000
Net inc
45,968,000
27,541,000
Share earns
.98
.64


Rise Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Rise Technology
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
199,000
822,000
Net loss
581,000
320,000


Fairfax Executives Purchase Ms. and Sassy
LEAD: A group of executives of John Fairfax Ltd. said yesterday that it had exercised an option to buy Ms. and Sassy magazines from the publishing concern, the second largest in Australia.


Why There Are No Issues
LEAD: The mysterious disappearance of issues from Presidential politics has agitated voters for months.
Some are so upset by the very idea that, in conscientious horror, they deny it.
Why of course there are issues troubling most Americans, letter-writers to The Times insist, and the thing to do is press the candidates to address them.


Patrick Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Patrick Industries Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
31,575,000
28,102,000
Net inc
b338,000
88,000
Share earns
.25
.06
b-Includes a gain of $125,000 from an accounting change.


American Heritage Life Inestment Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Heritage Life Inestment Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b2,601,664
c4,158,041
Share earns
.57
.89
b-After a capital loss of $101,378.
c-Includes a capital gain of $1,702,523.


Afghan Fundamentalism Bodes Ill for Women
LEAD: To the Editor:


Circle Awards to 'Butterfly' and 'Phantom'
LEAD: ''M.
Butterfly'' won the Outer Critics Circle award yesterday for best Broadway play, and ''The Phantom of the Opera'' was named best Broadway musical.


long, Bitter Debate From the 50's: Views of Kazan and His Critics
LEAD: One might say that Elia Kazan's greatest quarrels are behind him.
The man who directed ''All My Sons'' and ''Death of a Salesman'' on Broadway and both the stage and screen versions of ''A Streetcar Named Desire,'' then, just when he was riding highest, ''named names'' before the House Committee on Un-American


Hein-Werner Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Hein-Werner Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
28,940,000
12,859,000
Net inc
871,000
343,000
Share earns
.38
.29
Shares outst
2,280,801
1,181,573


American Passage Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to March 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Passage Marketing (OTC)
Qtr to March 28
1988
1987
Revenue
7,993,000
7,653,000
Net loss
123,000
c357,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo rev
16,361,000
15,290,000
Net loss
b856,000
c536,000
Share earns
-
.14


Town &amp; Country Jewelry Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Town &amp; Country Jewelry Manufacturing (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
40,783,000
30,761,000
Net inc
2,346,000
2,139,000
Share earns
.23
.23
Yr sales
149,820,000
107,204,000
Net inc
7,657,000
5,935,000
Share earns
.79
.67


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the financing of Senate races gave an incorrect breakdown of party affiliation in some editions for incumbents seeking re-election.
Of the 33 races, 6 have no incumbents running, 15 have Democratic incumbents running and 12 have Republican incumbents running.


American Telemedia reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Telemedia
Year to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,627,389
481,076
Net loss
8,793,561
3,294,253


Bear Stearns Revamps Its Top Management
LEAD: The Bear Stearns Companies announced yesterday that it had dismantled its system of co-presidents and named one of them, James E. Cayne, to be president.
The other, E. John Rosenwald Jr., was elected vice chairman.
Alan C. Greenberg remains chairman and chief executive.


C-Tec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*C-Tec Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
34,641,000
33,188,000
Net inc
2,670,000
b3,227,000
Share earns
.48
.59
b-After a loss of $341,000 from the disposition of discontinued operations.


Rodman &amp; Renshaw Capital Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Rodman &amp; Renshaw Capital Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,326,064
11,128,893
Net inc
561,588
1,137,956
Share earns
.14
.27
Shares outst
3,944,328
4,225,998
9mo rev
28,053,517
29,363,367
Net loss
490,578
b2,933,333
Share earns
-
.70


Gaullists Bemoan Chirac's Lack of 'the Look'
LEAD: ''He doesn't have the look of a president,'' said the Gaullist legislator, brutally candid. ''The French want to be reassured, and Chirac does not reassure them.''


Lacrosse Notebook; 4 Teams Seek 3 Lacrosse Bids
LEAD: The major points of contention in the college lacrosse season are the ninth, 10th and 11th positions for the Division I tournament with C. W. Post, Rutgers, Virginia and Yale the contenders.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.88
6.98
7.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.07
5.99
5.66
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.45
6.37
6.01
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.68
8.65
8.33
30-YR.


Provident American reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Provident American
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,337,728
7,651,909
Net loss
b152,668
b62,467
b-Includes realized investment gains of $16,500 and $31,859 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Battle Mountain Gold Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Battle Mountain Gold Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
37,100,000
24,500,000
Net inc
15,800,000
8,800,000
Share earns
.24
.14


Tech-Sym Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Tech-Sym Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
29,325,000
24,017,000
Net inc
2,042,000
1,977,000
Share earns
.31
.30
Results for the year-ago quarter included a non-recurring gain of about $420,000, or 6 cents a share, from business interruption insurance proceeds, and for equipment destroyed in the July 1986 fire at the company's Florida-based unit.


Union and Chrysler Concur on Plant Closing
LEAD: Officials of the United Automobile Workers said today they have reached a tentative agreement with the Chrysler Corporation over the closing of an assembly plant in Kenosha, Wis.


Paris Business Forms reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Paris Business Forms (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,180,000
8,297,000
Net inc
650,000
500,000
Share earns
.17
.13
6mo sales
21,527,000
16,096,000
Net inc
1,049,000
944,000
Share earns
.27
.24


Afghan Fundamentalism Bodes Ill for Women; Nothing Like Iran
LEAD: To the Editor:


Productivity by U.S. Businesses Increases
LEAD: American businesses increased their efficiency in producing goods and services at an annual rate of nearly 1 percent last quarter.


Precious Metals Are Down; Wheat Falls and Corn Is Up
LEAD: Precious metal futures prices plunged yesterday after the failure of oil ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to agree on production cuts.


Marathon Trials Raise Hope
LEAD: The results of the women's Olympic marathon trials Sunday in Pittsburgh have resurrected hope for a medal in Seoul, where none existed after Joan Benoit Samuelson announced she would not run because of injuries.


The Unholy War
LEAD: There is a clear path to peace in the Middle East, a road that can lead to solutions for Palestinian Arabs and Israelis.
It lies there plain for the world to see.


Sensor Control reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Sensor Control
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,311,710
890,667
Net inc
212,178
115,018
Share earns
.10
.08
Shares outst
2,221,518
1,501,198
9mo sales
3,746,631
2,745,870
Net inc
479,851
333,709
Share earns
.22
.27
Shares outst
2,221,518
1,243,292


The March on Trenton Brings Rallies and Olympia Dukakis
LEAD: They came to the Capitol today to be seen and heard: the homeless, the elderly and municipal officials and employees looking for more state aid; clammers supporting a new licensing bill, and Olympia Dukakis.


Corporate Management reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Corporate Management
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
605,479
672,502
Net inc
32,286
b93,810
Share earns
.01
.05
Yr rev
2,409,863
1,806,026
Net inc
97,047
b170,969
Share earns
.04
.07
b-Includes tax credits of $51,212 and $70,851 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Myland Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Myland Laboratories Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,737,000
24,183,000
Net inc
7,679,000
6,208,000
Share earns
.21
.17
Yr sales
96,017,000
95,135,000
Net inc
25,208,000
23,308,000
Share earns
.70
.65


Washington Talk: Briefing; Star Struck
LEAD: Andrea Mohin, a staff member of Roll-Call, a Capitol Hill publication, recently asked six members of Congress ''who would be the star in a movie about your life.''


Israeli, No. 157, Upsets Jaite
LEAD: He thrust his arms in the air and rushed to the net for the traditional congratulatory handshake.
It is a familiar sight at Forest Hills, which is celebrating its 75th anniversary this year, although not what you would expect to see in the first round of a tournament.
For a young Israeli ranked No.


Latin American Solution Is Seen for Panama
LEAD: A former Venezuelan President, who has played an active role in trying to end the Panamanian crisis, has asserted that Latin American mediation now offers the best hope of persuading Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to step down from power.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.I notice I lose about 5 pounds overnight but gain it back during the day. Why?


Big Winner of TV Game Show Gets 5-Year Fraud Sentence
LEAD: The biggest single-game winner on the television game show ''Password,'' who was arrested when a viewer recognized him as a fugitive, was sentenced today to five years in prison for insurance fraud.


Fair, Isaac Cos reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Fair, Isaac Cos
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,599,000
4,899,000
Net inc
333,000
678,000
Share earns
.06
.14
Shares outst
5,834,000
4,733,000
6mo rev
8,760,000
9,346,000
Net inc
633,000
1,235,000
Share earns
.11
.26
Shares outst
5,834,000
4,721,000


Rhodes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Rhodes Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
52,151,000
51,673,000
Net inc
881,000
916,000
Share earns
.11
.10
Yr sales
239,547,000
234,512,000
Net inc
11,919,000
12,044,000
Share earns
1.39
1.40


Fujitsu GTE Systems Ads Go to Tycer-Fultz
LEAD: Fujitsu GTE Business Systems of Phoenix, a year-old joint venture by the companies that share the title, has taken its advertising to Tycer-Fultz-Beldack of Palo Alto, Calif.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Return to Moscow
LEAD: The Russians may have thought they had seen the last of Richard N. Perle, the former Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Policy who had a reputation for hard-line positions on arms control.


Capital Holding Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Capital Holding Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b50,560,000
b81,580,000
Share earns
1.04
1.58
b-Includes capital gains of $9,594,000 for the latest quarter and $41,972,000 for the year-earlier period.


Acme Spurns Offer
LEAD: The Acme Steel Company's president, B. W. H. Marsden, said he had rejected a proposed partnership with a group of Minnesota-based investors.
The partnership was suggested by the investor Irwin L. Jacobs. ''We share Mr.
Jacobs's belief that the steel industry, and particularly Acme Steel, present a solid investment opportunity,'' Mr.


Fruit Flies' Many Songs
LEAD: THE 500-plus fruit fly species of Hawaii have long been honored by biologists for the spectacular diversity of their shapes, making them one of the world's most striking examples of evolutionary branching.
Now, scientists have also documented remarkable variety of another sort, in courtship songs.


South Africa Apparently Shifting Loyalty to Support Mozambique
LEAD: Apparently reversing alliances, South Africa is negotiating to train and equip as many as three battalions of Mozambican Government troops, a South African official asserted here today.


Jung Played a Role In Early Third Reich
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lyphomed Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Lyphomed Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
42,813,000
38,997,000
Net inc
3,531,000
4,719,000
Share earns
.12
.16


Pirates' Chief Adds To Rickey Legacy
LEAD: Behind the return of the Pittsburgh Pirates to solid respectability, if not quite yet to true pennant contention, is a man who combines some of baseball's time-tested virtues with an inclination toward innovation and individuality.


Geo International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Geo International Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
43,325,000
18,733,000
Net inc
1,676,000
215,000
Share earns
.10
.01
6mo sales
85,374,000
37,613,000
Net inc
3,819,000
853,000
Share earns
.22
.05


Ex-Judge Serving Term For Bribery to Be Freed
LEAD: A former Queens judge who was convicted of accepting bribes to fix cases will be released next week on parole after serving 26 months of a five-year sentence.


New Threat to A.H. Robins's Plan
LEAD: A coalition of Dalkon Shield claimants, lawyers and consumer and health advocacy groups yesterday called on all women with Dalkon Shield claims against the A. H. Robins Company to vote against the company's proposed reorganization plan.


Careers; Attracting Students to The Sciences
LEAD: ''WE'RE not nerds,'' Harold J. Raveche, the president-elect of the Stevens Institute of Technology, said last week, taking aim at the stereotype perpetuated in some popular films.


Indiana, All but Ignored by Hopefuls, Is Casting Judgment on Them Today
LEAD: Indiana has had its days and weeks in the sun of Presidential nominating politics, but not this year.


Twin Barbers, No Waiting
LEAD: Well, almost no waiting, as Elizabeth, above left, and Dorothy Barton tend to tonsorial duties at the Bowery Residents Committee Senior Center in Manhattan.
The twin sisters, from Irvington, N.J., make 18 trips a month to various shelters to cut the hair of people who cannot afford barber shops.
The two part-time barbers are also full-time cheese-puff makers, right, at a food plant in Maplewood, N.J.


Jefferson-Pilot Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Jefferson-Pilot Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b23,505,000
c28,471,000
Share earns
.60
.71
Shares outst
39,202,599
40,250,558
b-After a loss on investments of $234,000.
c-Includes a gain on investments of $4,503,000.


Southern Mineral Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Southern Mineral Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
814,000
541,000
Net inc
272,000
b44,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


Review/Theater; Banker and Tyrant in a Latin Imbroglio
LEAD: In Robert Litz's ''Domino'' (at the Perry Street Theater), one cannot tell the missile-rattlers from the revolutionaries.
Everyone is equally suspect - and expediency is the key to temporary survival.
Although Mr.
Litz's political conscience is undeniable, his satire is impaired by familiarity and by a shortage of specificity.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Monarch Capital Corp., Springfield, Mass., a financial services concern, announced that Ronald P. Freres had joined the company as senior vice president and chief financial officer.


Calprop Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Calprop Corporation (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,406,991
5,084,378
Net inc
1,188,326
69,848
Share earns
.31
.02


S.E.C. Aide Indicates Possible Drexel Trading Violation
LEAD: An official of the Securities and Exchange Commission indicated today that a trading practice by a number of employees of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. involving the issuance of junk bonds may have violated Federal anti-manipulation statutes and be subject to S.E.C. enforcement actions.


Hutchinson Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Hutchinson Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Sales
27,217,000
18,746,000
Net inc
914,000
b1,518,000
Share earns
.23
.40
6mo sales
52,002,000
33,400,000
Net inc
1,685,000
b2,352,000
Share earns
.43
.62


Scientists Plan Oregon Dig
LEAD: Archaeologists looking for evidence of prehistoric settlements plan excavations at seven sites along two miles of the Snake River in Hells Canyon this summer.


Hako Minuteman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Hako Minuteman Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,633,000
6,438,000
Net inc
573,000
477,000
Share earns
.16
.16
Shares outst
3,668,385
3,049,338


Pete Rose Is Suspended 30 Days
LEAD: Pete Rose, whose fiery style on the field was a trademark of his unparalleled 24-year playing career, was suspended yesterday from managing the Cincinnati Reds for 30 days following a volatile dispute with an umpire.


Total Assets Protection Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Total Assets Protection Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,359,846
3,003,484
Net inc
b65,471
b30,483
Share earns
.02
.01
b-Includes a tax credit of $22,260 and $10,364 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Allegis Sells 50% Stake In Reservation System
LEAD: The Allegis Corporation said yesterday that it had sold 50 percent of its Apollo computer reservation system to USAir and four major European carriers.
The system will be operated as a joint venture by Allegis, which owns United Airlines Inc., and the five other airlines.


American Restaurants LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Restaurants LP (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,087,000
4,589,000
Net inc
227,000
189,000
Share earns
.28
.24


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


Reforms Sought In R.E.A. Lending
LEAD: The Agriculture Department said it had sent recommendations to Congress for a scaled-back program for the Rural Electrification Administration lending program.


Washington Talk: Briefing; We Want You!
LEAD: The Vietnam Veterans Memorial has become one of the most visited public sites in the capital, so much so, that the National Park Service, which is responsible for the low, black granite wall, is seeking volunteers to help orient viewers.


Production Operators Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Production Operators Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,021,000
9,829,000
Net inc
786,000
466,000
Share earns
.11
.06
6mo rev
23,181,000
21,391,000
Net inc
1,538,000
1,229,000
Share earns
.22
.16


Koch Honors 7 Careers With Mayor's Arts Awards
LEAD: Mayor Koch presented the Mayor's Awards of Honor for Art and Culture to seven artists yesterday at Gracie Mansion.


Cracks in Metal Found on Jet in Hawaii Accident
LEAD: Apparent cracking from metal fatigue has been found around rivets on a structural part of the Aloha Airlines jet that was torn open over Hawaii Thursday, and key sections will be flown to Washington for analysis, a Federal official said yesterday.


American Museum Historical Documents reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Museum Historical Documents
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
660,833
325,309
Net inc
b35,523
c132,487
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
1,294,205
875,628
Net inc
b57,912
c990,117
Share earns
.01
-


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I am with you, but I am not the one who started the strike.
I am neither for nor against the strike.
But I am a shipyard worker, so I join you.''  - Lech Walesa.  [ A8:1. ]


Dawson Geophysical Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Dawson Geophysical Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,262,000
1,488,000
Net loss
456,000
100,000
6mo rev
4,619,000
2,714,000
Net loss
2,252,000
467,000


Rule Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Rule Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
9,710,000
8,863,000
Net loss
1,047,000
c408,000
Share earns
-
.17
6mo rev
17,769,000
17,280,000
Net loss
b832,000
c647,000
Share earns
-
.27
b-Reflects litigation reserves of $875,000 and non-recurring charges of $655,000 related to inventories.


Italian Bank Raises Bid For Irving
LEAD: Banca Commerciale Italiana, the Italian bank that is bidding for the Irving Bank, announced yesterday that it would seek a majority control in Irving instead of its current offer for 45 percent of the bank.


Marks &amp; Spencer, Brooks Brothers
LEAD: The British retailer Marks &amp; Spencer P.L.C. has completed its purchase of the United States clothier Brooks Brothers for $750 million from the Campeau Corporation.
Campeau, the Toronto-based retailer and real estate company that bested R. H. Macy &amp; Company in a bid for Federated Department Stores Inc., arranged the Brooks Brothers sale to help finance the


American Health Cos reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Health Cos (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,499,000
11,948,000
Net inc
2,684,000
c2,328,000
Share earns
.39
.33
Yr rev
45,201,000
41,192,000
Net inc
b8,945,000
c7,357,000
Share earns
1.27
1.12
Shares outst
7,077,296
6,599,927


Penta Systems International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Penta Systems International
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,454,282
4,355,027
Net loss
494,373
290,732
The company said the further losses were due to additional marketing expenses and increased staffing.


Florida East Coast Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Florida East Coast Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
45,954,000
40,175,000
Net inc
9,153,000
7,654,000
Share earns
.99
.83


11 Paintings Are Slashed At New-York Society
LEAD: Eleven paintings, most of them 19th-century American works, were slashed at the New-York Historical Society on April 3, a museum spokeswoman said yesterday.
There are no suspects in the incident.


Koch Was Elected as Mayor, Not Mullah
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance; 'Daze,' Prisoners Of City Life
LEAD: Nina Martin's ''Modern Daze,'' presented Saturday night at Performance Space 122, is a bright, fast-spinning pinwheel of a theater-dance piece about contemporary life in urban America.
The men and women who scurry about the stage, dressed in colorful trash couture designed by Annette Zindel, may be in a daze.


Grey Advertising Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Grey Advertising Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
530,905,000
437,025,000
Net inc
2,005,000
1,421,000
Share earns
1.61
1.02
Revenue represents gross billings.


Zero-Coupon Bond Product Is Introduced by Salomon
LEAD: Salomon Brothers announced the creation of a new zero-coupon bond product yesterday, saying it will offer $3 billion face amount of Fico Strips, which represent principal and coupon obligations of a $750 million bond issue of the Financing Corporation.


Prima Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Prima Energy Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
381,000
347,000
Net inc
152,000
29,000
Share earns
.11
.02
9mo rev
1,090,000
1,029,000
Net inc
522,000
190,000
Share earns
.36
.13


Allison's Place reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Allison's Place
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,481,000
9,056,000
Net loss
3,313,000
b184,000
Share earns
-
.07
Yr rev
37,086,000
32,3397,000
Net loss
4,473,000
b315,000
Share earns
-
.13
b-Net income


High-Stakes Wager in Las Vegas
LEAD: The real high-rollers on the gaudy, neon-lighted Strip these days do not have dice or cards in their hands.
They are holding blueprints.
The owners of this city's hotel-casinos have embarked upon a building spree that is unprecedented even for a town that has enjoyed three decades of virtually uninterrupted growth and prides itself on its Wild West boom-town mentality.


LTV Profit Rises 26.5%
LEAD: Bolstered by rising demand for steel and declining costs, the LTV Corporation reported today that its earnings increased 26.5 percent in the first quarter.


Franklin Computer reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Franklin Computer (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
13,694,000
9,026,000
Net inc
2,143,000
509,000
Share earns
.42
.12
Shares outst
5,116,502
4,143,788
Yr sales
44,218,000
23,924,000
Net inc
2,819,000
b4,356,000
Share earns
.58
-
Shares outst
4,843,082
3,510,498


Talley Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Talley Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
74,754,000
65,952,000
Net inc
1,892,000
b2,306,000
Share earns
.15
.20
Shares outst
9,675,000
11,451,000
b-Includes a loss of $225,000 from discontinued operations.


Population Growth
LEAD: The growth rate of the world's population is higher than many experts predicted only a few years ago, according to a new study.
The global population, now more than 5.1 billion, is now growing by about 1.7 percent a year and is expected to reach 6 billion by the year 1998, according to the Population Reference Bureau, a research organization in Washington.


Media Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Media Products
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
973,531
442,400
Net inc
27,850
b82,115
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Wedtech Aide Testifies on Plan To Kill Founder
LEAD: A former Wedtech executive testified yesterday in the racketeering trial of Representative Mario Biaggi and six others that Wedtech executives had discussed assassinating the company founder.


Rig Count Falls by 28
LEAD: The number of working oil and gas rigs in the United States fell by 28 last week, to 880, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
The rig count, the widely watched industry index of drilling activity, totaled 780 a year ago.
Baker Hughes's rig count reflects the number of rigs actively exploring for oil as of last Friday, not the number of rigs producing oil.


NBC to Buy Cable Service
LEAD: The National Broadcasting Company said yesterday that it had signed a letter of intent to buy Tempo Television, a cable service owned by Tempo Enterprises Inc. of Tulsa, Okla.


J&amp;J Snack Foods reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*J&amp;J Snack Foods
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Sales
16,026,000
9,583,000
Net inc
536,000
533,000
Share earns
.18
.18
6mo sales
31,046,000
17,441,000
Net inc
1,246,000
1,064,000
Share earns
.41
.36


Hickam, Dow B Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Hickam, Dow B Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,767,000
2,779,000
Net inc
210,000
208,000
Share earns
.10
.10


HUNGARY GEARS UP FOR CHANGE AT TOP
LEAD: A special meeting of Hungary's Communist Party will discuss whether to replace its 75-year-old leader, Janos Kadar, who has led the country since 1956, Prime Minister Karoly Grosz said today.


Reviews/Music; Queens Symphony's 'Sounds From the Left Bank'
LEAD: For the past three years, the Queens Symphony has presented some of its players in a series called ''Sounds from the Left Bank'' - the bank in question being Queens, and the sounds being contemporary chamber works.
In keeping with the title, an artsy, informal and intimate atmosphere surrounds these Sunday afternoon concerts at Project Studios One (46-01 21st Street, Long Island City), an old school building converted into artists' studios and a gallery.


Dinosaur Eggs Yield Glimpse of Their Embryos
LEAD: EVERY gigantic dinosaur started out as a tiny embryo in an egg, but only now have paleontologists, applying advanced medical imaging technology, discovered some of those embryos preserved inside fossilized eggs.
The new findings are yielding important insights into the full life cycle of dinosaurs.


Supertex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Supertex Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,935,000
3,507,000
Net inc
1,085,000
b865,000
Share earns
.09
-
Yr sales
18,941,000
12,131,000
Net inc
2,836,000
b2,566,000
Share earns
.23
-
b


Ruling Said to Help in Policing Prices
LEAD: Yesterday's Supreme Court decision upholding a manufacturer's ability to stop supplying a discount retailer broadens the power of producers to control the prices of consumer goods, corporate lawyers and antitrust experts say.
It will also almost certainly cause some retailers to limit discounts, particularly for electronics goods and clothing.


Albany Nears Alcohol Limits For Stadiums
LEAD: Sales and consumption of alcohol would be prohibited in at least 6 percent of the seats at major professional sports stadiums and arenas under a bill agreed to by key state legislators.


T.L. van Winkle, 65, Atomic Researcher And Priest, Is Dead
LEAD: The Rev.
Thomas Leo van Winkle, an atomic scientist who later became a Roman Catholic priest and the headmaster of Portsmouth Abbey School in Portsmouth, R.I., died of lymphoma Saturday at Jane Brown Hospital in Providence.
He was 65 years old.


Regency Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Regency Electronics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
13,760,000
18,561,000
Net loss
26,000
b661,000
Share earns
-
.06
9mo sales
51,948,000
52,632,000
Net loss
490,000
b338,000
Share earns
-
.03


Bid Made for Arkansas Best
LEAD: At a time when many classmates are still paying off the burdensome loans they took out for business school, Emanuel R. Pearlman announced yesterday that he would attempt his first hostile takeover.


14 Die, Dozens Trapped in India As Wing of a Hospital Collapses
LEAD: A new wing of a children's hospital collapsed today in Kashmir, and at least 14 people died in a crush of bricks and concrete.
Dozens of children, their moans growing fainter, were trapped.


Plant-Notice Rule Assailed By Reagan
LEAD: In a speech before the United States Chamber of Commerce today, President Reagan heatedly denounced a provision of the recently passed trade bill that would make companies provide 60 days' notice of plant closings or large layoffs.


Books of The Times; First Volume in Biography of an Irish Leader
LEAD:  The Hereditary Bondsman  Daniel O'Connell, 1775-1829  By Oliver MacDonagh  Illustrated. 328 pages.
St.
Martin's Press. $29.95.


Cold Water as Survival Aid
LEAD: Submerged in cold lakes and rivers, human beings have survived without oxygen for otherwise fatal lengths of time because low temperatures slow the body's metabolic rate and restrict the flow of blood to non-vital areas.


STV Engineers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STV Engineers Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,421,000
15,537,000
Net inc
b15,000
23,000
Share earns
.01
.02
6mo rev
36,668,000
30,740,000
Net inc
b34,000
164,000
Share earns
.02
.11
b-Includes a charge of $68,000 and $134,000 from the amortization of contract rights for the latest and 6-month periods, respectively.


Cullinet Plans To Lay Off 400
LEAD: Cullinet Software Inc. said yesterday that it will lay off about 400 employees, or 17 percent of its work force, as part of a restructuring and realignment.
Cullinet, based in Westwood, Mass., said the move will result in a write-off of about $8 million in fiscal 1988, ended April 30, but will reduce expenses in fiscal 1989 by about $25 million and should allow it to regain profitability after two years of losses.


J.P. Morgan Gets Financing
LEAD: J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, the bank holding company, said yesterday that it had secured $400 million in financing on its new headquarters buildings at 60 Wall Street.


Chess
LEAD: Considering the fine crop of young grandmasters in Iceland, it was not surprising that one of their number, 27-year-old Jon Arnason, won the 13th Reykjavik International Open Tournament.
Arnason topped a strong Swiss-system field of 54 players with an 8 1/2-2 1/2 score and was awarded $9,000.


Political Marketing; Picking Spots for Candidates' Spots
LEAD: If you are buying television time for George Bush commercials, ''60 Minutes'' is a good bet, but ''Saturday Night Live'' is not.


House Votes Bill Giving Benefits To Veterans Exposed to Radiation
LEAD: The House gave final Congressional approval today to a bill granting new benefits to veterans who were exposed to radiation when the United States occupied Japan in 1945 or in postwar tests of American nuclear weapons.


Updating WordStar
LEAD: WORDSTAR, the venerable word-processing program that just last year was resurrected in a greatly improved version called WordStar Professional Release 4, has been updated again in WordStar Classic Release 5.
The company says it has more than 200 new features and improvements.


Henry P. C. Keuls, Inventor, 96
LEAD: Henry P. C. Keuls, a New York inventor, died Saturday at the Red Bank (N.J.) Convalescent Center after a brief illness.
He was 96 years old and lived in Middletown, N.J.


Oil Prices Decline Almost $1
LEAD: Oil prices fell sharply yesterday after the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries backed away from a proposal to cut production in concert with seven other oil-producing nations.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Bob Wenzl, the new head basketball coach at Rutgers, has named two aides: Ed Jordan, a former player with Rutgers and the New Jersey Nets, and Jeff Mitchell, an assistant coach at Jacksonville. . . .
The Chicago Bears announced the release of the former All-Pro defensive back Todd Bell and the backup tight end Tim Wrightman.


BMC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BMC Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
38,471,000
32,640,000
Net inc
256,000
56,000
Share earns
.05
.01


Geraghty &amp; Miller Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Geraghty &amp; Miller Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,769,000
6,955,000
Net inc
612,000
283,000
Share earns
.13
.07
Shares outst
4,714,000
3,999,000
The company went public in February.


Lumex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Lumex Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,187,000
16,816,000
Net loss
153,000
b681,000
Share earns
-
.16
b-Net income and includes a loss of $38,000 from discontinued operations.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Horvath Upset in Italian Open: Iwona Kuczynska posted the first upset in the Italian Open women's championships yesterday, routing Kathleen Horvath of Largo, Fla., the 12th-seeded player, 6-4, 6-0.
Only three seeded players - Horvath, Isabel Cueto of West Germany, No. 10, and Judith Wiesner of Austria, No.


Ionics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Ionics Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,300,000
15,135,000
Net inc
436,000
389,000
Share earns
.12
.10


Accident Study Cites Double-Trailer Trucks
LEAD: LARGE double-trailer trucks, those highway behemoths with two trailers behind a single cab, are two to three times more likely to be involved in crashes as other heavy trucks, a study in Washington State has found.


As Tick Season Approaches, Battle For Money for Lyme Disease Grows
LEAD: As warm weather and another tick season approach, health officials and citizens groups are pressuring state and local governments in Connecticut, New York and New Jersey to mount an aggressive fight against the rapid growth of Lyme disease.


Sunrise Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Sunrise Medical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 25
1988
1987
Sales
40,170,000
37,365,000
Net inc
575,000
849,000
Share earns
.13
.19
9mo sales
122,717,000
102,055,000
Net inc
2,303,000
2,149,000
Share earns
.52
.50


A Look at Carnegie Hall From Behind the Stage
LEAD: For those who want to know what goes on behind the scenes at Carnegie Hall, there are guided tours every Tuesday and Thursday.
The tours last 40 minutes and include a film featuring artists who have appeared at the hall, among them Arturo Toscanini, Benny Goodman, Judy Garland and the Beatles.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-19


Market Place; Analysts Choose Niche Favorites
LEAD: AS a directionless first half in the stock market nears its close, the attention of stock pickers is naturally turning to selections based on what the economy will be like in the last half of 1988.


LPL Investment Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LPL Investment Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
142,391,000
24,803,000
Net inc
1,360,000
624,000
Share earns
.17
.04
The company said the latest period includes results for Amphenol Corp., acquired effective May 31, 1987.


International Telecharge reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*International Telecharge (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
32,783,290
2,125,808
Net inc
2,725,975
b910,355
Share earns
.15
-
b-Net loss


UGI Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UGI Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
20,776,000
15,385,000
Per share
2.00
1.51


Par Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Par Technology (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,574,000
14,909,000
Net inc
146,000
467,000
Share earns
.02
.06


Ad Pages Rise by 1.4%
LEAD: The Publishers Information Bureau, a sister organization to the Magazine Publishers of America, has announced that its member publications in March showed a 1.4 percent gain in ad pages over March 1987, to 14,407, while ad revenues clocked a 3.6 percent gain, to $483.6 million.
The revenue figure is an estimate.


China to Push Grain Output
LEAD: China, which produced less grain than expected last year, is trying to increase output by raising state grain prices and encouraging use of agricultural machinery, according to a United States intelligence report released today.


Morgan Olmstead, Kennedy &amp; Gardner Capital Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Morgan Olmstead, Kennedy &amp; Gardner Capital Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,531,000
13,147,000
Net loss
1,222,000
b493,000
Share earns
-
.14
b-Net income


Lincoln National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Lincoln National Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b53,600,000
c105,700,000
Share earns
1.20
2.31
Shares outst
42,300,000
44,800,000
b-After a capital loss of $4.5 million.
c-Includes capital gains of $46.7 million.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: Debt


Indian Bureau Finds Its Schools Delivering a Weak Education
LEAD: The Bureau of Indian Affairs has found that Indian children score worse on tests than 79 percent of other students in the United States, and has asked Indians how the bureau can strengthen the instruction of their children.


Elxsi Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Elxsi Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,703,000
6,228,000
Net inc
215,000
241,000
The company said the latest first quarter includes non-recurring gains on $1.3 million and $1.5 million in the 1988 and 1987 first quarters, respectively, from disposal of surplus assets.


Psicor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Psicor Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,271,000
6,980,000
Net inc
497,000
275,000
Share earns
.13
.07
6mo rev
17,855,000
13,210,000
Net inc
888,000
480,000
Share earns
.23
.13


North Says Criminal Charges Against Him Are 'an Honor'
LEAD: Oliver North told graduates today at the university founded by the Rev.
Jerry Falwell that he is proud of the criminal charges against him.


Hurdles for Dukakis
LEAD: Though Michael Dukakis now appears likely to be the Democratic Presidential nominee, an eclectic assortment of Democrats and political ''experts'' have suggested to me that he still needs to clear several obstacles before they'll consider him a strong general election candidate: 1.
The Jackson problem.


Radiation Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Radiation Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,216,000
9,984,000
Net inc
1,532,000
627,000
Share earns
.31
.11
Shares outst
4,916,000
5,564,000
9mo sales
29,038,000
29,997,000
Net inc
3,207,000
2,502,000
Share earns
.62
.45
Shares outst
5,209,000
5,578,000


Teknowledge Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Teknowledge Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,542,000
4,569,000
Net loss
1,118,000
721,000
9mo rev
11,789,000
15,435,000
Net loss
9,146,000
b88,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income and includes an extraordinary credit of $43,000.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Painting Sells for Record  Jackson Pollock's ''Search'' was sold for $4.8 million, a record for any postwar artwork.
The buyer was a Japanese collector.
Page C13.
Devils Slip in Opener  The Boston Bruins, with two goals in the final period, defeated New Jersey, 5-3, in the opening game of their Stanley Cup semifinal series.


Sea Galley Stores Inc reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Sea Galley Stores Inc (OTC)
(
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,088,000
12,751,000
Net inc
b183,000
b165,000
Share earns
.06
.06
b-Includes a tax credit of $62,000 and $57,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Bruins Win but Aren't Happy
LEAD: Taking a 3-0 lead against the visiting Devils tonight was easy, but restoring dominance once a Devil rally tied the game at 3-3 was not.
The Bruins, suggested Rejean Lemelin, had to reach for a more volatile emotion, something approaching hate, before they could produce the sort of playoff game that insures a 5-3 victory.


Copelco Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Copelco Financial Services (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,319,000
9,031,000
Net inc
1,031,000
892,000
Share earns
.19
.22
Shares outst
5,505,000
4,000,000
6mo rev
21,893,000
15,570,000
Net inc
2,169,000
1,812,000
Share earns
.39
.44
Shares outst
5,527,000
4,000,000


Parlex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Parlex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,388,045
9,242,061
Net loss
1,327,710
b521,095
Share earns
-
.20
9mo sales
27,045,076
26,888,888
Net loss
98,476
b1,707,520
Share earns
-
.66
b-Net income


3M Buys Pattis Group, Magazine Representative
LEAD: The 3M Company, owner of Media Networks, which allows companies to place local advertising economically in national magazines, has acquired the Pattis Group in Chicago, a major national advertising representative for magazines.
Details of the sale were not made public.


McGraw-Hill Drops College Publication
LEAD: McGraw-Hill Inc. has suspended publication of Business Week Careers, its five-year-old magazine for college students because of an inability to attract new advertisers.
The closing last week came several months after the company had begun efforts to attract older readers.


PATTERNS
LEAD:  Citywear as Weaponry


McGregor Released
LEAD: After more than two years of steadily declining performances from a pitcher who won a total of 135 games in the last 10 seasons, the Baltimore Orioles released Scott McGregor.
The 34-year-old left-hander, whose 138 victories are the fifth-highest total in Oriole history, had an 0-3 record with an 8.83 earned run average this season.


Boy, 8, Drowns in Creek
LEAD: An 8-year-old boy drowned after he slipped and fell into a creek while searching along the bank for returnable cans and bottles, the police said.
The victim, Roderick Hines, who was submerged for more than an hour in Rondout Creek, was pronounced dead Sunday night at Kingston Hospital.
He was walking with three other youths, one of whom tried unsuccessfully to rescue Roderick with a stick.


County Aide in Atlanta Guilty Of Extortion in Zoning Plot
LEAD: A. Reginald Eaves, who rebounded from a brief reign as Atlanta's public safety commissioner to win a seat on the Fulton County Commission, was found guilty of extortion Monday in connection with payoffs for zoning votes.


Maryland Legislator Terms His Aide's Death 'Tragedy'
LEAD: Representative Roy Dyson, Democrat of Maryland, today termed the apparent suicide of his chief of staff Sunday a tragedy, but he did not comment on what the motive might have been.


Jeff Malone Leads Bullets
LEAD: Jeff Malone scored 8 of his 35 points in overtime tonight to lift Washington to a 114-106 victory over the Detroit Pistons and keep the Bullets alive in the opening round of the National Basketball Association playoffs.


Southwall Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Southwall Technologies
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,032,000
3,067,000
Net loss
985,000
b174,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income and includes a tax credit of $78,000.


Smith Stops Mets, Piniella Watches
LEAD: Zane Smith, the left-handed pitcher coveted by the Yankees and the Toronto Blue Jays, enhanced his and the Atlanta Braves' status last night.


California Biotechnology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*California Biotechnology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,360,000
3,014,000
Net loss
1,687,000
1,583,000


Agatha Christie Rights Change Hands
LEAD: The mystery writer Agatha Christie and the western writer Max Brand have been dead 12 and 44 years, respectively, but their many books are still valuable publishing properties.
Thus the Putnam Berkley Group announced yesterday it had purchased the publishing rights to the books of both authors - 87 of Miss Christie's, 156 of


Hooper Holmes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Hooper Holmes Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,944,000
16,016,000
Net inc
395,000
303,000
Share earns
.13
.10


TESTIMONY AT END IN COCAINE TRIAL
LEAD: Defense attorneys for Carlos Lehder Rivas, who is on trial on charges of leading a Colombian drug smuggling ring, said today they would rest their case without calling any witnesses.


Republic Automotive Parts Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Republic Automotive Parts Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
21,305,000
21,100,000
Net loss
684,000
640,000


Construction Spending Surges 1.5%
LEAD: Construction spending surged 1.5 percent in March, the biggest increase in almost a year, as government spending offset weakness in other areas, the Government reported today.


Not Guilty Plea In Death of Boy Left Untreated
LEAD: A Christian Scientist couple who tried to heal their dying son through prayer rather than medical treatment pleaded not guilty today to manslaughter charges.


Fans Rally for Orioles, and Vice Versa
LEAD: Appearing in numbers and creating decibel levels normally reserved for a pennant race, the suffering followers of the Baltimore Orioles tonight transformed a dreadful season into a raucous celebration of forgiveness.


Factories' Orders Rose 1.6% in March
LEAD: Orders to the nation's factories registered a surprising 1.6 percent gain in March as strong export demand and heavy military orders reversed weaknesses in the previous two months.


The Color of Spring
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Editorial Notebook; Reforming China: Nuts and Bolts
LEAD: ''We are building socialism with Chinese features,'' say China's leaders.
Right.
But what about cooking oil?
Should the Government end its subsidy?
What would be the reaction from residents of the cities, whose meat and chicken prices went up 17 percent last year?
Behind the grand slogans of reform, there must be people fitting together all the endless little pieces.


Atlantic Richfield Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Atlantic Richfield Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,608,000,000
3,780,000,000
Net inc
b401,000,000
239,000,000
Share earns
2.20
1.31
b-Includes a gain of $21 million from a minority interest in the earnings of a subsidiary.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  AMERICAN LEAGUE - Upheld the two-game suspension of Mitch Williams, Texas Rangers pitcher, for fighting.
BALTIMORE (AL) - Released Scott McGregor, pitcher.
Recalled Jay Tibbs, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.
Placed Bill Scherrer, pitcher, on waivers for assignment to Rochester.


Savings Bonds Will Pay 6.90%
LEAD: United States savings bonds will earn interest at a rate of 6.90 percent in the next six months, the Treasury Department announced today.


People
LEAD: * Leslie Wood was promoted to senior vice president at Backer Spielvogel Bates.


Panta Systems International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Panta Systems International
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,454,582
4,355,027
Net loss
494,373
290,732


Sports of The Times; Giamatti's Alert on Crowd Control
LEAD: THIRTY days.
It sounds like a sentence that a county judge would hand down for a misdemeanor like petty larceny.
Then the judge would rap his gavel.
Next case.


Gould to Sell Unit to AEG
LEAD: Gould Inc. will sell its industrial automation unit to the AEG division of Daimler-Benz A.G. of West Germany for $290 million, the company said yesterday.
Gould, which makes computers and electronics for military and industrial use, said it would use the money to buy back up to 20 percent of its stock.


Genrad Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Genrad Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
49,244,000
48,301,000
Net inc
851,000
b1,375,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss anad includes a loss of $2,634,000 from discontinued operations.


Koch Was Elected As Mayor, Not Mullah; The Bad Example
LEAD: To the Editor:


Equestrians Chosen
LEAD: The United States Equestrian Team has announced the five riders chosen for the 1988 Olympic team in the three-day event, which along with show jumping and dressage make up Olympic equestrian events.
They include Bruce Davidson of Unionville, Pa., who has been on three Olympic teams, two of which won the gold medal (in 1976 and 1984) and one the silver (in 1972), and who has twice won the individual world championship.


NEW FACES EMERGE IN PHILANTHROPY
LEAD: In the field of philanthropy, Hispanic and Asian people have mainly been perceived as recipients of charitable assistance, but this outlook may be slowly changing.


William H. Van Rensselaer, Accountant, 51
LEAD: William H. Van Rensselaer, executive director of the National Association of State Boards of Accountancy, died of lung cancer Sunday at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 51 years old.


Gibson Greetings Cards Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Gibson Greetings Cards Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
63,916,000
56,067,000
Net inc
5,984,000
3,199,000
Share earns
.39
.20


A Sinkhole Swallows a House in Florida
LEAD: The roof of a $70,000 home protruding from a 20-foot-deep water-filled sinkhole that opened up Friday in a residential section of Sebring.
Bill Pivnick escaped injury as the hole, one of Florida's largest, opened to 200 feet wide.
Mr.
Pivnick said his insurance would cover most of the loss. (AP)


CAMPAIGN IN OHIO SEEN AS REHEARSAL OF CONTEST IN FALL
LEAD: With Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis the overwhelming favorite in the Ohio Democratic primary Tuesday, the campaign has turned into a dress rehearsal of the general election campaign as Mr.
Dukakis and Vice President Bush exchanged barbs and challenges.


Leasing Company In Aircraft Talks
LEAD: The International Lease Finance Corporation is in advanced negotiations with three aircraft makers for an order of up to 120 jets totaling more than $4 billion.
The company said it was talking with the Boeing Company, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and Airbus Industrie, as well as three engine makers.


Dollar Mixed in Quiet Day; Gold Drops $5.40 on Comex
LEAD: Gold prices fell and the dollar turned mixed against major foreign currencies in sluggish trading yesterday as traders reacted to falling oil prices.


Review/Music; An Organ-Saxophone Mix
LEAD: The combination of saxophone, organ and the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine is not on the face of it an enticing proposition.
But how agreeably the soprano saxophone, as played by Anders Paulsson, floated through this vast and gloomy space on Sunday evening!


Biscayne Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Biscayne Holdings (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b1,107,000
b962,000
Share earns
.14
.12
b-Includes tax credits of $418,000 and $394,000 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


Baldwin Piano &amp; Organ Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Baldwin Piano &amp; Organ Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
27,851,000
23,281,000
Net inc
1,582,000
1,450,000
Share earns
.40
.35


Tech-Ops Landauer reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Tech-Ops Landauer (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Revenue
5,175,000
4,514,000
Net inc
1,394,000
1,064,000
Share earns
.66
.52
6mo rev
9,828,000
8,525,000
Net inc
2,571,000
1,951,000
Share earns
1.21
.96


Israel Moves Troops Into Lebanon In a Search for P.L.O. Infiltrators
LEAD: The Israeli Army announced tonight that it had sent forces into southern Lebanon in search of Palestine Liberation Organization guerrillas who have tried to slip into Israel and take hostages twice in the last week.


Corrections Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Corrections Corp of America (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,837,145
4,017,994
Net loss
366,436
385,731


Dennis M. Horan, 56, A Lawyer and Author
LEAD: Dennis M. Horan, a lawyer who represented individuals and groups fighting abortion and who wrote extensively on the legal aspects of euthanasia, died of a heart attack at his home in Chicago on Sunday.
He was 56 years old.


Phillips Adopts A 'Tin Parachute'
LEAD: The board of the Phillips Petroleum Company has adopted a ''tin parachute'' to provide better severance pay and benefits should a job be lost without just cause within two years of a management change.


Tacoma Boatbuilding Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Tacoma Boatbuilding Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,463,000
5,611,000
Net inc
31,000
10,000


Uni-Marts Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Uni-Marts Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
31,716,434
27,326,630
Net inc
548,445
349,887
Share earns
.09
.05
Shares outst
6,235,009
6,711,641
6mo sales
65,739,027
55,339,867
Net inc
1,285,369
794,727
Share earns
.20
.14
Shares outst
6,289,534
5,850,772


NAC Re Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NAC Re Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
55,046,000
35,365,000
Net inc
b3,637,000
b2,705,000
Share earns
.51
.37
b-Includes a realized investment loss of $11,000 for the latest quarter; the year-ago quarter includes a realaized investment gain of $750,000 and a tax credit of $188,000.


Thompson's President Shifts Base to Chicago
LEAD: Stephen G. Bowen Jr., 44-year-old president of J. Walter Thompson USA, is shifting his base of operations to Chicago from worldwide headquarters in New York.


Travelers Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Travelers Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b71,200,000
b142,500,000
Share earns
.66
1.39
Shares outst
101,282,377
99,758,550
b-Includes realized investment losses of $19 million for the latest quarter; the year-ago quarter includes realized investment gains of $33.7 million.


Davis Jury Selection Is Halted Over Bias Issue
LEAD: A Bronx judge yesterday suspended jury selection for the latest trial of Larry Davis to hear charges from prosecutors that defense lawyers had been systematically excluding white people as jurors.


Tiny Memorial Tiles of the Holocaust
LEAD: As a 10-year-old named T. J. took up his brush and painted the words: ''Why Hate?
Why Hate Kids?'' on a bisque tile, he explained earnestly, ''The whole thing probably got started because of hate and I think they got everybody else to hate too.''


Back Bay Journal Welcome to a Newcomer: Cable TV
LEAD: After prolonged deprivation, residents of the elegant historic brownstones and posh condominiums that make up Beacon Hill and Back Bay are finally getting what people in the city's more modest neighborhoods have had for years: cable television.


Margo Nursery Farms reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Margo Nursery Farms
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,560,000
1,025,000
Net inc
136,000
80,000
Share earns
.08
.06
Shares outst
1,669,100
1,296,000


Medicine Shoppe International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Medicine Shoppe International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,898,098
4,927,361
Net inc
1,336,072
1,009,019
Share earns
.25
.19
6mo rev
11,642,864
9,660,500
Net inc
2,639,404
1,986,937
Share earns
.49
.37


Ivory Coast Debt Accord
LEAD: Ivory Coast and its commercial bank creditors have agreed to reschedule its external medium-term debt and a $150 million multicurrency loan.
The rescheduling involves debt maturing between Dec. 1, 1983, and Dec. 31, 1995, with repayment between June 10, 1993, and Dec. 10, 2002, Banque Nationale de Paris said today.


American Fiber Optics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Fiber Optics (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,066,000
907,000
Net loss
38,000
139,000
9mo sales
2,614,000
2,756,000
Net loss
370,000
417,000


Transtector Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Transtector Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,418,359
-
Net inc
260,053
-
Share earns
.07
-
The company changed its fiscal year end to Dec. 31 from Feb. 28.
For the first quarter ended May 31, 1987, it reported a loss of $168,386, on sales of $1,735,693.


Pioneer Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Pioneer Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,599,000
15,910,000
Net inc
2,968,000
2,948,000
Share earns
.49
.48


Safeguard Scientifics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Safeguard Scientifics Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
52,753,000
19,109,000
Net inc
b1,359,000
b2,624,000
Share earns
.27
.55
b-Includes securities gains of $1.4 million and $2.6 million for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


USG Sets a Restructuring To Fend Off Desert Partners
LEAD: Moving to fend off a hostile tender offer from Desert Partners L.P., the USG Corporation announced yesterday that its board had approved a recapitalization and restructuring involving the sale of some businesses and other assets.


Pollock Work Brings a Record Price
LEAD: Jackson Pollock's ''Search,'' a 1955 painting vibrantly spattered with red, black, green, yellow and white, was purchased at Sotheby's last night for $4.8 million, an auction record for the artist and for any postwar artwork.


Coast Guard Role in Persian Gulf Is Shelved by the Administration
LEAD: Yielding without a fight to Congressional opposition, the Pentagon today abandoned its plan to add Coast Guard vessels to the fleet protecting merchant ships in the Persian Gulf.


Bans Dot Baseball's History
LEAD: The 30-day suspension that Manager Pete Rose of the Cincinnati Reds received yesterday from A. Bartlett Giamatti, the president of the National League, recalls several notable bans involving managers and players.


PRIESTS IN BOLIVIA PETITION VATICAN
LEAD: Longstanding unhappiness among Bolivian priests over the number of foreigners serving as Roman Catholic bishops here has erupted into a public issue as the country prepares for its first papal visit.


TPA of America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TPA of America (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
21,771,000
8,958,000
Net loss
10,852,000
753,000
Yr rev
72,525,000
27,912,000
Net loss
15,261,000
995,000


Albert H. O'Neil Corporate Executive, 84
LEAD: Albert H. O'Neil, former vice president of the Freeport Sulphur Company Inc., died of Alzheimer's disease on Friday at Anne Arundel Hospital in Annapolis, Md.
He was 84 years old and lived in Annapolis.


Business and Health; Maxicare's Plan To Cut Losses
LEAD: LIKE most big health maintenance organizations, Maxicare Health Plans Inc., the nation's largest for-profit H.M.O. company, has been squeezed between rising medical costs and stiff competition for major customers.
Now, Maxicare is seeking to rid itself of about 800,000 unprofitable subscribers in a restructuring aimed at cutting losses, which hit $256 million last year.


I.R.A. Attacks Make Wary Britons Even More So
LEAD: British troops in West Germany were advised today not to cross into the Netherlands, but military spokesmen ruled out extraordinary security measures after the killings of three off-duty British airmen Sunday.


Boston Pops at Carnegie
LEAD: It will not do to be severe about the current provision of music from the Boston Pops Orchestra, which came to Carnegie Hall on Saturday night with John Williams on the podium and on the program.
The organization exists for listeners who like the sound of a large, expert symphony orchestra and who prefer, among the various kinds of music to which that sound can be applied,


In Brazil's Northeast, Misery Molded by Man and Nature
LEAD: Frequent rains over the last few weeks have transformed the rolling hills surrounding this small town into luxuriant sugar cane fields, dispelling fears that the perennial scourge of drought will once again strike Brazil's northeast this year.


Champion Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Champion Products Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
41,393,000
35,589,000
Net inc
1,643,000
871,000
Share earns
.48
.26


Sauve Can't Save Devils
LEAD: The Devils started their Stanley Cup semifinal series with the Bruins tonight the same way they started their previous two series, by losing the opening game.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  The Supreme Court made it easier for manufacturers to stop supplying discount dealers in order to protect other merchants from price competition.
Upholding a lower court ruling, the Court ruled by 6 to 2 that a manufacturer's agreement with one dealer to stop supplying a price-cutting dealer would not necessarily violate the Sherman Antitrust Act.


Almost Perfect
LEAD: Ron Robinson of the Reds being congratulated by John Franco last night in Cincinnati.
Robinson came within one pitch of a perfect game, and Franco got the final out, in a victory over the Expos.
Page D32. (AP)


New Clue on Pain
LEAD: Scientists have found specialized nerve sites where a natural pain-causing substance attaches itself, adding evidence that the substance plays a key role in the body's perception of pain.


Chihuahua Journal; To Lay Waste a Dynasty: A 'Northern Barbarian'
LEAD: His supporters here drive cars with bumper stickers proudly identifying themselves as ''Northern Barbarians.'' And as he campaigns across northern Mexico, Manuel Clouthier makes it clear that nothing would please him more than to topple the political dynasty that has governed Mexico for six decades.


110 Protesters To Face Charges At Wesleyan U.
LEAD: The police arrested 110 students blocking the entrance to a Wesleyan University administration building today, the 15th day of a protest by students demanding that Wesleyan divest itself of holdings in companies that do business in South Africa.


Focus Shifts at Nicaraguan Peace Talks
LEAD: Peace talks between the Sandinista Government and contra leaders have begun to touch on key military and political questions, and the basic differences between the two sides have become more clearly defined than ever.


Bridge
LEAD: If, in a trump contract, a declarer plays toward a K-Q combination in the dummy, many defenders step up with the ace because the declarer might have a singleton.
They have it backward.
In most situations a defender should play second hand low because the lead might be a singleton.
Playing low may indeed mean that the ace does not score, but it holds the declarer to one trick in the suit.


U S West Has Lyonnaise Link
LEAD: U S West Inc., the Denver-based regional telephone company, said yesterday that it had agreed to purchase a 10 percent stake in Lyonnaise Communications, a French cable television concern.


Thousands at Gdansk Shipyard Join Polish Strike
LEAD: Thousands of shipyard workers in Gdansk went on strike Monday, demanding higher pay and the legalization of the Solidarity trade union and expressing unity with striking workers at a southern steel plant.


Medical Dilemma: Necessary Drugs With Intolerable Dangers
LEAD: SIX years ago, when the Food and Drug Administration recognized that the acne drug Accutane was one of those rare breakthroughs that could swiftly relieve a heartbreaking ailment, but could also cause tragic birth defects, the Federal agency had two choices.


Troubled Seas: Global Red Tides of Algae Bring New Fears
LEAD: LATE last August, off the coast of Naples, Fla., microscopic algae began to reproduce quickly, thriving and exploding in a matter of days into a huge toxic bloom that dominated the coastal environment.


Biden to Have 2d Operation To Repair an Artery to Brain
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. on Tuesday will undergo his second operation this year to repair an aneurysm in an artery supplying blood to the brain, his office announced.


NASA Sets Priorities For Research in Space
LEAD: The space agency has developed a master plan setting out priorities for scientific research.
The outline, made public last week by the Office of Space Science and Applications, gives priority to completing existing projects and orbiting four ''Great Observatories.''


A Higher Net Is Expected at 3M
LEAD: The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company expects its second-quarter earnings to exceed last year's levels, its chairman, Allen F. Jacobson said, while warning that its growth could slow later this year.
The 3M Company's earnings should exceed the $240 million, or $1.05 share, report for the second quarter of 1987, he said.


By Design; For Summer, Changing the Guard
LEAD: Now is the time to tackle the wardrobe closets.
One of these mornings, summer is going to come bursting in and the right clothes should be at the ready.


New Caledonian Kidnappers Demand Independence Talks
LEAD: Melanesian separatists holding 23 hostages refused to release their captives today unless France named a Paris-based mediator to start talks on independence for the South Pacific territory.


Pacific Telecom Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Pacific Telecom Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
126,343,000
121,957,000
Net inc
13,394,000
6,732,000
Share earns
.35
.18
The company said that although the 1988 first quarter operating income of $17,925,000 was comparable to the $18,676,000 level reported in 1987, net income increased due to a gain on the sale of the company's background music company assets and as a result of additional interest income related to partial resolution of a dispute with an


A Sampling of Books
LEAD: IT'S time to catch up on some reading.
The following are some books to pass the time while awaiting all the new-product announcements that lead up to the Comdex spring computer trade show.


Dukakis, Jackson: Too Far Left
LEAD: The Presidential campaign hits a time warp whenever issues of foreign policy and national defense are discussed.
It seems like 1972, with the leading Democrats offering an apparent mixture of neo-isolationism, third world radicalism and defense cuts, while Vice President Bush, the presumed Republican nominee, appears to lack any deep convictions about


Anaren Microwave Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Anaren Microwave Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,137,793
7,167,533
Net inc
90,225
466,338
Share earns
.02
.11
9mo sales
19,049,359
21,403,187
Net inc
846,585
1,310,219
Share earns
.20
.31


Robert Half International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Robert Half International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
45,114,000
15,841,000
Net inc
2,724,000
b2,049,000
Share earns
.23
.18
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $648,000.
Share earnings reflect a 3-for-2 stock split paid in February.


Plant Genetics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Plant Genetics
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,324,000
1,562,000
Net loss
265,000
599,000
9mo rev
4,691,000
3,179,000
Net loss
1,197,000
1,963,000


American General Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American General Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b117,482,000
b152,707,000
Share earns
.88
1.01
Shares outst
137,926,051
151,657,506
b-Includes realized investment gains of $4,681,000 for the latest quarter and $4,768,000 for the year-earlier period.


Prices of Bonds Continue to Slide
LEAD: Bond prices slipped further in light trading yesterday, as market participants shrugged off the positive implications of falling oil and commodity prices and instead chose to concentrate on new signs from the Government that point to vigorous economic growth.


MBIA Inc() reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MBIA Inc()
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
36,500,000
36,700,000
Net inc
23,200,000
20,400,000
Share earns
.62
.54


Meditrust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Meditrust (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,326,000
6,037,000
Net inc
2,999,000
3,355,000
Share earns
.28
.31


Supreme Court Roundup; Court Delays Effort to Deport a Man Accused of Nazi War Crimes
LEAD: The Supreme Court ordered further proceedings in lower courts today to determine whether a New Jersey man accused of helping the Nazis kill more than 2,000 Jews in Lithuania should be stripped of his naturalized citizenship.


Component Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Component Technology Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 17
1988
1987
Sales
6,322,000
4,249,000
Net inc
375,000
282,000
Share earns
.26
.14
Shares outst
1,451,797
1,945,017


Eye Care Centers Ads Assigned to Chiat/Day
LEAD: Eye Care Centers of America, now part of Sears, Roebuck, has assigned its advertising account to Chiat/Day in Los Angeles.


Southeastern Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Southeastern Savings &amp; Loan (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
229,000
b1,116,000
Per share
-
.50
b-Net income


Timberline Software reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Timberline Software (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,163,000
1,936,000
Net inc
95,000
65,000
Share earns
.04
.03


Agent Pleads Guilty
LEAD: Lloyd Bloom, a sports agent, pleaded guilty yesterday in Tuscaloosa, Ala., to one misdemeanor charge for his dealings with a University of Alabama basketball player.
He will testify for the state at the trial of his former associate, Norby Walters.


Pravda Criticizes Party Practices
LEAD: The Communist Party newspaper Pravda published a front-page critique today of the way the party has ruled the Soviet Union, arguing that the system that has emerged in the last 70 years is dictatorial and destructive.


Feeding Time for Starved Bridges
LEAD: ''The bridge is in bad shape. What can we afford to do this year?''


Aerospace Rivals To Review Projects
LEAD: Airbus Industrie, the four-nation consortium, and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation - rivals in aerospace - will review their progress on setting up joint ventures next month.
Henri Martre, the chairman of Aerospatiale, the French state-owned airline that belongs to the consortium, said that ''on the strategic level, it is natural that there should be an alliance between Airbus and McDonnell Douglas'' to compete against the Boeing Company of Seattle.


Jewlcor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Jewlcor Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
92,679,000
83,185,000
Net loss
562,000
1,861,000
Share earns
-
.55
Yr sales
270,760,000
235,476,000
Net loss
956,000
8,361,000
Share earns
-
2.44
Prior year results include a gain of $5,821,000, or $1.70 a share, from the sale of a minority interest in Gruen Marketing Corp.


Methodists Vote to Retain Policy Condemning Homosexual Behavior
LEAD: The chief policy-making body of the United Methodist Church voted today to maintain its position that homosexual behavior is ''incompatible with Christian teaching'' and a bar to the ordained ministry.


5-Second End of Building, 81
LEAD: The 10-story Corbett Building came down in five seconds Sunday after engineers set off 185 explosives inside the 81-year-old structure.
It was the first time the implosion method of demolition had been used in Portland, and hundreds of people lined downtown rooftops and streets to witness the early morning blast.


5 Inquiries Focus on Suspect in Slaying Who Died in Police Custody
LEAD: Five investigations by hospitals and criminal-justice agencies were under way yesterday into the tangled case of a man who died in police custody after clubbing a woman to death with a two-by-four and being beaten by bystanders in Harlem.


Yankees Throw Everyone at White Sox
LEAD: By the 12th inning tonight, the Yankee bullpen was exhausted.
So John Candelaria, who three nights ago threw a complete game to beat the Texas Rangers, volunteered for relief.
It was precisely what Billy Martin wanted to hear.


Blinder International Enterrises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Blinder International Enterrises Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 29
1988
1987
Revenue
26,105,000
30,499,000
Net loss
422,000
b1,060,000
Share earns
-
.02
Yr rev
138,600,000
117,200,000
Net inc
7,400,000
8,000,000
Share earns
.10
.13
Shares outst
75,500,000
63,500,000


Aided by Alien Insects, Ficus Trees Proliferate
LEAD: ALIEN fig wasps invading south Florida have perked up the sex life of the Ficus tree.
They have what the trees had been missing: a knowing and generous way with pollen.


Sri Lanka Vote Hailed as Step Toward Peace
LEAD: A set of local government elections in Sri Lanka, won by the ruling party of President J. R. Jayewardene, are being hailed by Indian and Sri Lankan officials as a major spur for the Indian-sponsored Sri Lankan peace accord.


HIGH COURT BACKS DISCOUNTER CURBS BY MANUFACTURERS
LEAD: The Supreme Court issued a ruling today that could make it easier for manufacturers to stop supplying discount dealers in order to protect other merchants from price competition.


American Barrick Resources Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Barrick Resources Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
34,700,000
24,400,000
Net inc
5,600,000
b5,700,000
Share earns
.10
.11
b-Includes a special gain of $6.8 million from sale of an investment.


Philip Crosby Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Philip Crosby Associates (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,425,000
12,793,000
Net inc
1,178,000
1,017,000
Share earns
.17
.14
Year-ago first quarter net is restated to reflect the reversal of a tax credit.


Fisher Scientific reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Fisher Scientific (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
229,400,000
220,200,000
Net inc
8,800,000
4,300,000
Share earns
.24
.12
The company said cost-control efforts and elimination of lower-margin products and accounts resulted in the improved net.


Our Towns; Playing Tee-Ball: Chaos Control In the Suburbs
LEAD: The inventor of Tee-Ball should win the Nobel Prize for Suburban Living.
In the old days, they let 6 and 7-year-olds pitch to each other and the score was 117-93 in the bottom of the first when the ump finally called the game about midnight on account of darkness.
All the parents got abnormal blood pressure and the next day, entire teams were rushed to the school nurse's office, suffering from exposure.


503 Held in Abortion Protest on E. 85th St.
LEAD: A total of 503 opponents of abortion rights were arrested yesterday, carried on stetchers and taken by bus to the Police Academy after they prevented the opening of a gynecologist's office in Manhattan.


Japan's Trade Surplus Declined in March
LEAD: Japan's trade surplus declined in March for the third consecutive month, the Government reported today, and Japanese investments in the United States have slowed.


Gainsco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Gainsco Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,667,000
4,227,000
Net inc
1,506,000
462,000
Share earns
.31
.09


Police Haute Couture: Eternal Creases and Ease of Draw
LEAD: The New York City Police Department held a fashion show at Headquarters yesterday.
There were only two models and no runway, but the creations on display represented police haute couture at its hautest: a snappy new, low-maintenance uniform with permanent creases, gold-plated buttons that do not need burnishing - or buttoning, for that matter - a lighter weight jacket with space-age insulation and ''patent leather look-alike shoes'' that never need polishing.


Soviet and American Scholars Exchanging Ideas on History
LEAD: As the leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union prepare to discuss current problems at a summit meeting in Moscow this month, Soviet and American historians are exchanging ideas about the past.


Unifast Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Unifast Industries
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,000,066
6,303,959
Net loss
b2,412,129
c660,593
Share earns
-
.43
Shares outst
1,682,307
1,543,230
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $2,951,451, which included a writedown of certain intangible assets of $2,245,000.


System Integrators reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*System Integrators (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,927,000
13,601,000
Net inc
1,331,000
628,000
Share earns
.11
.05
6mo rev
32,139,000
29,671,000
Net inc
2,929,000
2,545,000
Share earns
.24
.21


Baseball; Near-Perfect Game Lifts Reds
LEAD: Ron Robinson pitched eight and two-thirds perfect innings tonight before a pinch-hitter, Wallace Johnson, singled to left field as the Cincinnati Reds beat the Montreal Expos, 3-2.


Homeless, Not Helpless in Philadelphia
LEAD: To say that Edith Morris was happy would be putting it mildly.
After nearly five months of living in a public shelter for the homeless, the 28-year-old mother and her two daughters had a permanent home again: a bright, airy, six-room row house in a pleasant neighborhood in the Olney section of northeastern


Guaranty National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Guaranty National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
38,857,000
33,687,000
Net inc
b4,756,000
b5,145,000
Share earns
.40
.41
b-Includes tax credits of $646,000 and $1,794,000 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


Lebenthal Relinquishes His Firm's Presidency
LEAD: ''I've torn away from myself one feather in my cap,'' said James A. Lebenthal, who is relinquishing the presidency of Lebenthal &amp; Company, the municipal bond firm, to Peter J. Sweetser, while remaining chairman.


Greiner Engineering Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Greiner Engineering Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
21,743,000
19,865,000
Net inc
526,000
567,000
Share earns
.33
.33


Time Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Time Management
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
570,894
84,487
Net loss
351,385
387,523


Republic Gypsum Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Republic Gypsum Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,853,000
12,660,000
Net inc
122,000
571,000
Share earns
.01
.05
9mo sales
39,270,000
43,216,000
Net inc
1,308,000
3,444,000
Share earns
.13
.33


Reliability Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Reliability Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,360,000
7,219,000
Net loss
846,000
b457,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-Net income


Koch Was Elected as Mayor, Not Mullah; No Double Talk
LEAD: To the Editor:


Suns Coach Dismissed
LEAD: The Phoenix Suns announced the dismissal of Coach John Wetzel.


Criterion Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Criterion Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,404,000
11,632,000
Net inc
1,228,000
1,746,000
Share earns
.17
.23


NBC Replies on Knight
LEAD: NBC is standing by its decision to broadcast the controversial comments on rape and stress made by Bob Knight, the Indiana University basketball coach, saying the remarks were used in context and were ''relevant to his opinions of stress.''


Painewebber Residential reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Painewebber Residential (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,427,303
1,262,587
Share earns
.24
.21


Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith Gets Yellow Pages Ads
LEAD: The B.F.
Goodrich segment of the Uniroyal Goodrich joint venture has its advertising at Grey Advertising.
A week ago the Uniroyal part went to Wyse Advertising in Cleveland.


Kenilworth Systems reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Kenilworth Systems
Year to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
395,767
2,649,969
Net loss
786,483
2,120,934


Gas System Studies Canada Asset Sale
LEAD: Columbia Gas System Inc., a major United States carrier of natural gas, is considering the sale of its Canadian oil and gas properties to provide more money for its domestic operations.
The company said that it would not reduce its commitment to oil- and gas-related activities but wanted to focus on domestic concerns closer to its market areas.


Cyanamid Shares Jump on Rumors
LEAD: The American Cyanamid Company's stock jumped $2.75 a share yesterday, to $53.50, on the New York Stock Exchange, but analysts were skeptical of rumors that the drug and agrichemical company would receive a takeover offer.
The analysts said that potential bidders would probably be deterred by American Cyanamid's price tag of about $5.8 billion and by its desire to remain independent.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allied-Signal Inc., Morristown, N.J., said its Bendix Automotive Group and Hankuk Brake Industrial Co., Seoul, South Korea, had formed a venture to produce brake components and friction materials in Korea.


Spoof of 50's Rock-and-Roll
LEAD: American pop has always allowed a strain of pure silliness.
That is all perfectly well, except that in the 1950's, as the rock-and-roll revolution was gathering momentum, artificial sweetness and twittering nonsense threatened to swamp the airwaves.


Why I'm Boycotting Oreo Cookies (Alas)
LEAD: Bluntly and for paranoid reasons, RJR Nabisco Inc., manufacturer of Camel and Winston cigarettes and many supermarket food products, has shut its traditional advertising agency for the domestic market out of its future business.
Why?
The agency, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton, produced an effective television commercial celebrating Northwest


Appeals Court Offers Sympathy, Not Money
LEAD: While criticizing what it deemed bureaucratic bungling, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit said today it was powerless to help a Texas woman who lost $1,100 because of bad advice from Social Security Administration employees.


Paxson Lifting Celtics
LEAD: Danny Ainge, who led the National Basketball Association with 148 baskets from 3-point range, was a key in the Knicks' defensive plans for their playoff series against the Boston Celtics.


Sturm, Ruger &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Sturm, Ruger &amp; Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
28,824,000
26,899,000
Net inc
3,777,000
2,418,000
Share earns
1.12
.72


U.S.-Japan Talks Go On
LEAD: The United States and Japan continued high-level negotiations today in their dispute over increasing the sale of American beef and oranges in Japan.


Ex-Officer at Macmillan Named Henry Holt Chief
LEAD: Bruno A. Quinson, who resigned recently as president of Macmillan's trade and reference division, has been named president and chief executive of Henry Holt Inc.


Reseach Industries Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Reseach Industries Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,493,000
1,107,000
Net inc
129,000
b48,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
4,323,000
4,591,000
Net inc
377,000
269,000
Share earns
.08
.06


Melamine Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Melamine Chemicals (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,947,000
8,235,000
Net inc
1,671,000
1,029,000
Share earns
.31
.23
Shares outst
5,450,000
4,644,599
9mo sales
23,320,000
22,216,000
Net inc
4,686,000
2,955,000
Share earns
.89
.64
Shares outst
5,254,727
4,644,599


R. H. Hinckley, 96, Ex-U.S. Aide
LEAD: Robert H. Hinckley, the former chairman of the Civil Aeronautics Authority, died Saturday at his home in Eden, Utah.
He was 96 years old.


School Pictures Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*School Pictures Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,169,559
1,866,520
Net loss
324,054
361,675
9mo rev
15,820,529
14,190,118
Net inc
2,682,297
b1,996,478
Share earns
1.24
1.42
Shares outst
2,167,911
1,411,286


American Precision Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Precision Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,493,000
9,043,000
Net inc
700,000
305,000
Share earns
.12
.05


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about American policy on Panama misstated the Reagan Administration's reaction to a proposal by Jose Blandon, a former aide to Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Giving Away Is the Name Of the Game
LEAD: FOR a newcomer to the world of premiums, the 50th anniversary of the Premium Incentive Show at the Javits Center offers insights into the history of this growing segment of marketing.
The vehicle is a gallery of outstanding promotions of the last half-century, set up by the Thalheim Exhibition Group, owner of the show.


Dravo Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Dravo Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
57,357,000
54,473,000
Net loss
335,000
b4,170,000
b-Includes a loss of $3,723,000 from discontinued operations.


First Capital Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*First Capital Holdings (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
168,032,000
34,843,000
Net inc
12,183,000
10,338,000
Share earns
.46
.49
Shares outst
20,708,000
21,259,000
Results for the year-ago quarter have been restated to reflect the adoption of certain financial accounting standards.


Harvey Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Harvey Group Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,980,546
8,692,724
Net loss
405,709
cd324,744
Share earns
.16
.13
Yr sales
31,738,546
28,819,724
Net inc
b652,709
d22,744
Share earns
.25
.01


MARONITE PRIEST KILLED IN LEBANON
LEAD: The killing of a prominent Maronite Catholic priest, apparently by Christians, has stunned Christian areas of Lebanon and deepened concern about growing friction between Christian factions.


Crystal Brands Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Crystal Brands Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
86,849,000
88,358,000
Net inc
3,816,000
3,448,000
Share earns
.43
.38


Diagnostek Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Diagnostek Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,340,000
1,160,000
Net inc
515,000
166,000
Share earns
.05
.01
Yr rev
14,864,500
3,169,580
Net inc
b417,560
487,300
Share earns
.03
.05
b-After a loss of $663,816 from marketable securities.


Maneuvering Picks Up in Debate on Clean Air
LEAD: Legislation to control urban air pollution and acid rain has been stalled in Congress, but there is finally movement in both houses.


Delegate Count
LEAD: Current breakdown of Presidential preference of delegates to national political conventions, compiled by The New York Times.
Preferences are based on state laws, party rules, delegates' public statements and projections from early results in caucus states.
DEMOCRATS  Dukakis 1,279


Europe Prices Up at 2.6% Rate
LEAD: Consumer prices in the European Community rose four-tenths of 1 percent in March, nudging its 12-month inflation rate up to a provisional 2.6 percent from a revised 2.4 percent in February.


Nameless Ballots Allowed
LEAD: Ballots without candidates' names will be available for the first time to an estimated three million Americans abroad who are eligible to vote on Nov. 8.


Quebec Pact Loses Support in Rest of Canada
LEAD: A year ago, much of Canada was celebrating what many took to be the end of 20 years of uncertainty about Quebec's place in Canada.
But 12 months of reflection have taken their toll, and it now appears that a constitutional agreement between the French-speaking province and the rest of Canada may never be ratified, at least not without major changes.


Sound Advice reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Sound Advice
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
13,050,702
8,621,368
Net inc
388,131
228,083
Share earns
.13
.08
9mo sales
41,774,978
26,801,782
Net inc
1,717,109
1,026,275
Share earns
.57
.34


Telecast Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Telecast Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
949,885
580,839
Net loss
863,994
215,503


Scientific Software- Intercomp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Scientific Software- Intercomp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,662,000
6,315,000
Net loss
1,614,000
b67,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income and includes a loss of $87,000 from discontinued operations.


Review/Recital; Guitarist's Mix Of 20th-Century Compositions
LEAD: Ana Maria Rosado played an ambitious program of 20th-century guitar music at Merkin Concert Hall on Sunday evening, but although her spirit was willing, her technique was often weak.
At her best, she gave carefully shaded readings of Falla's ''Homenaje'' and Ponce's ''Theme, Varie et Finale,'' and she rose to the challenges of Francis Schwartz's ''We've Got (Poly


A New Model: Rethinking Estee Lauder
LEAD: Estee Lauder called her son Leonard one day last week and told him he had to start coloring his hair.
She had seen him on television that morning talking about the company's new perfume, Knowing, and decided that his gray hair made her seem old.


Indicator of Imminent AIDS Is Discovered
LEAD: A study has found that AIDS virus carriers show a sharp increase in virus-infected white blood cells in the year before they develop the disease, information doctors say might help them improve patient care.


Cadmus Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Cadmus Communications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
39,959,000
29,602,000
Net inc
1,489,000
1,566,000
Share earns
.25
.26
9mo sales
111,816,000
85,328,000
Net inc
3,555,000
3,447,000
Share earns
.59
.58


Chefs International Inc reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Chefs International Inc (OTC)
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,686,733
20,464,213
Net loss
7,488,000
1,063,319
The latest year includes a loss of $5,433,860 due to the sale and closing of restaurants and the writedown of restaurants held for sale to their estimated net realizable values.


Bronx Democratic Leader Seeking Signal From Cuomo on Backing District Attorney
LEAD: With a primary fight for the nomination for district attorney likely, the Bronx Democratic leader, Assemblyman George Friedman, is looking for a signal from Governor Cuomo before deciding whether to support the Governor's interim appointee, Paul T. Gentile, for a full term.


Photo-Control Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Photo-Control Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,103,001
3,792,725
Net inc
8,399
65,397
Share earns
.01
.04
9mo sales
10,218,303
10,429,069
Net inc
124,915
190,647
Share earns
.09
.13


Industrial Training Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Industrial Training Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
920,000
716,000
Net inc
59,000
b21,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
2,546,000
2,426,000
Net inc
171,000
117,000
Share earns
.15
.12
b-Net loss


American Family Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Family Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b27,138,000
b28,374,000
Share earns
.34
.35
b-Includes capital gains of $3,184,000 for the latest quarter and $8,344,000 for the year-earlier period.


Hospitals Use Charity to Fend Off Tax Collectors
LEAD: FOR reasons not altogether altruistic, Intermountain Health Care Inc. recently opened a clinic here to treat homeless men and women.
The nonprofit hospital chain also began providing health care at a local soup kitchen and at a center for Indochinese refugees.
And it expanded health services on Indian reservations and for the rural poor.


Network Bulletins: What's News?
LEAD: Shortly after 1 P.M. yesterday, viewers of NBC's ''Days of Our Lives'' saw their soap opera interrupted by a bulletin from NBC News, a special report from John Palmer reporting that an Israeli force of 2,000 troops was moving toward the Bekaa region of Lebanon.


IRT Campaign: a Pitch To the Power-Lunchers
LEAD: Faced with the challenge of selling a product many people regard with disdain, disgust and even outright fear, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has reinvented the subway.


Baseball; Stewart (7-0) Keeps Athletics on a Roll
LEAD: Dave Stewart became the first pitcher in the major leagues to win seven games, and Carney Lansford and Mike Gallego each batted in three runs as the Oakland Athletics beat the Detroit Tigers, 8-2, today for their ninth straight victory.


A Pulitzer Winner Who Can Go Home Again
LEAD: David Mitchell sat at his rolltop desk, an old Royal typewriter to his left and a Macintosh computer to his right, and thumbed through the latest issue of The Point Reyes Light, the weekly newspaper at which he won a Pulitzer Prize nine years ago.


Cherry Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Cherry Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
49,778,000
42,548,000
Net inc
2,293,000
487,000
Share earns
.51
.10
Yr sales
194,598,000
160,555,000
Net inc
7,370,000
2,732,000
Share earns
1.63
.60


Oil Prices Stabilize on Hopes for a Production Agreement
LEAD: Oil prices steadied around the world today as spokesmen for several oil-producing nations said they had not abandoned hope of cooperating with the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries on steps to reduce production and bolster prices.


The Poor Don't Think America's Decline Is a Myth; Science Diverted
LEAD: To the Editor:


Zane Smith a Brave Somebody Wants
LEAD: Lou Piniella thought he would take in a ball game and be as invisible as possible.
He would go directly to the Diamond Club at Shea Stadium, avoid the press room and watch Zane Smith pitch against the Mets without anyone knowing he was there.
So the first person he saw when he stepped off the elevator outside the Diamond Club was a reporter.


UNR Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNR Industries Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
99,659,393
74,282,764
Net inc
b6,895,979
b236,810
Share earns
1.87
.06
b-Included tax credits of $1,100,000 and $80,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Bronx District Attorney Race Opens, Bitterly
LEAD: Opening what promises to be one of the most bitter primaries in years, Philip T. Foglia formally announced yesterday that he would run against Bronx District Attorney Paul T. Gentile for the right to represent the Democratic Party in the elections this fall.


Canadian Oxy Buying Moore Unit
LEAD: Southdown Inc., which is acquiring a rival cement maker, Moore McCormack Resources Inc., said it would sell Moore's energy assets to Canadian Oxy Offshore Petroleum Ltd. for $148.8 million.
Canadian Oxy is a subsidiary of Canadian Occidental Petroleum Ltd., which is about 48 percent owned by the Occidental Petroleum


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Aaron Rents Inc., Atlanta, a furniture rental and sales company, announced that Lee Hulsebus had resigned as president, chief operating officer and a director.


United Brands Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*United Brands Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
849,100,000
775,200,000
Net inc
18,104,000
14,380,000
Share earns
1.22
.91
The company attributed its higher earnings to substantially higher profits in its Chiquita fresh fruit operations.


Acuson Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Acuson Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
35,823,000
21,511,000
Net inc
5,742,000
3,139,000
Share earns
.25
.14


Sony-Symbolics
LEAD: The Sony Microsystems Company, Sony's Palo Alto, Calif., unit that markets technical computer work stations, said it had formed a strategic alliance with Symbolics Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., a leading supplier of work stations and software for artificial intelligence applications.
Under the agreement, Symbolic will resell Sony's new work stations and act as a service organization.


Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
60,170,000
49,888,000
Net inc
967,000
b30,066,000
Share earns
.09
2.91
b-Included a gain of $10,000,000 from an accounting change and also included gains totaling $20,219,000, or $1.96, from the sale of investments in Fairfield and Bridgeport, Conn., cable systems and the Tulare, Calif., cable system.


Metzenbaum Wins Easily; Indiana Chooses Bayh
LEAD: Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum of Ohio, one of the most liberal members of Congress, easily won the Democratic nomination for a third term yesterday, paving the way for a November battle against George Voinovich. the Republican Mayor of Cleveland.


Pushing the Possible in Poland
LEAD: Poland in 1988 begins to resemble Poland in past years of crisis.
Again, workers challenge the Communist Party's power and legitimacy.
Again, the outcome will reverberate far beyond Poland, in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.


Gazing Skyward for Answers Below
LEAD: The belief that human lives are shaped by the positions of the planets probably dates from the third millenium B.C., but, despite its great antiquity, astrology remains as entrenched in folklore as ever.


Moog Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Moog Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
76,259,000
75,035,000
Net inc
343,000
c2,664,000
Share earns
.04
.30
6mo sales
150,307,000
141,699,000
Net inc
b4,787,000
c3,660,000
Share earns
.54
.41


Review/Film; 'Mala Noche' on Skid Row
LEAD: Other people's obsessions are more often funny than tragic.
As Feydeau understood, there's something innately farcical in the sight of an otherwise rational being in the pursuit of a doomed desire.
It's a measure of the talent of Gus Van Sant that his ''Mala Noche,'' opening today at Film Forum 1, remains as steadfastly, honestly grim as the Portland,


Real Estate; How to Sell Retail Space In Manhattan
LEAD: FOR nearly 10 years the developers of residential condominiums in New York City have found a receptive market for their apartments.
But retail space in these residential buildings has been hard to sell despite the pressures of rising store rents in many parts of the city.


U.S. CITES INCREASE IN BIOLOGICAL ARMS
LEAD: American intelligence agencies suspect as many as 10 nations of developing biological weapons, Reagan Administration officials said today.
Aside from the Soviet Union, the officials refused to name the countries, saying the information was secret.


American Teaching Of the Arts Is Assailed
LEAD: A potentially controversial plan to steer arts education away from performance and exhibition and toward more disciplined study was made public today by Frank Hodsoll, chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts.


Loyola Capital Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Loyola Capital Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,510,000
2,889,000
Share earns
.50
.57


Summer Games to Sport a Host of Stars
LEAD: Sports fans shouting their approval for sports stars who were introduced yesterday at a City Hall luncheon.
The athletes will participate in the New York Summer Games next August on Randalls Island. (NYT/Neal Boenzi)


AFGHANISTAN CHIEF VISITS INDIA TODAY
LEAD: India announced today that Najibullah, the Afghan leader, would visit New Delhi for meetings with Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi this week, at a time when many analysts doubt the ability of Mr.
Najibullah to remain in power for long.


Millipore Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Millipore Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
145,440,000
116,557,000
Net inc
11,879,000
9,812,000
Share earns
.43
.35


Xyvision Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Xyvision Inc.  (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,010,000
8,744,000
Net loss
b281,000
c730,000
Share earns
-
.12
Yr rev
34,788,000
26,805,000
Net loss
248,000
c4,246,000
Share earns
-
.75
b-Includes a reversal of a tax credit of $7,000.


4 Powers Meet to Explore Ways to End Angola War
LEAD: Representatives of the United States, South Africa, Cuba and Angola met here today for what were described as exploratory talks about ending the war in Angola.


Truce Turns Into Free-for-All In Police-Fire Feud on Divers
LEAD: A tentative truce between the New York City Police and Fire Commissioners disintegrated into a wild free-for-all yesterday, as the two began yelling at each other in City Hall and Mayor Koch yelled back, rebuking them as if they were unruly children.


Aliens' Amnesty Ends Today
LEAD: Crowds lined up outside Federal immigration centers in cities around the country yesterday as thousands of undocumented aliens applied for legal residency status a day ahead of the deadline for the yearlong program.


Intermet Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Intermet Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
82,879,000
79,079,000
Net inc
3,978,000
6,129,000
Share earns
.19
.29


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Biederman: Returning to Pre-TV Days
LEAD: HAVING worked together for almost four years, Barry Biederman and John F. Kelly of Biederman &amp; Company, see eye to eye on the future of their agency and its place in the big picture.
And that's one reason Mr.
Kelly, 43 years old and already chief operating officer, has just been promoted to president.


K. C. Jones to Retire as Coach
LEAD: In a surprise announcement, the Boston Celtics' coach, K. C. Jones, said today he would retire after the season and would be succeeded by the assistant coach, Jimmy Rodgers.


Review/Rock; Del-Lords: 60's Mufti, 80's Sounds
LEAD: The Del-Lords started Sunday's first set at the Bottom Line with a ringing guitar chord and a wild holler, two rock-and-roll basics; the bomping drumbeat came in a few seconds later.
The band members, in T-shirts and blue jeans, looked like every generation of bar-band rockers since the 1960's - but their songs, especially Scott Kempner's lyrics, are unmistakably 1980's rock.


Tax Receipts In Albany Fall Short
LEAD: New York State collected almost $500 million less than expected in income-tax receipts last month, the state budget division announced today, prompting Wall Street to raise the interest rates on the state's borrowing and Governor Cuomo to call for plans for possible spending cuts.


Coleco Job Cuts
LEAD: Coleco Industries said yesterday that it would cut about 475 workers.
About 330 of the positions are at the toy maker's manufacturing and distribution sites, where the reduction represents about 50 percent of the staff.
The company, based in West Hartford, Conn., also said it would reduce its headquarters staff by about 145, or roughly 35 percent.


Liberty Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Liberty Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b10,707,000
c7,872,000
Share earns
1.24
.80
b-After a capital gain of $6,863,000.
c-After a loss of $1,031,000 from discontinued operations and a capital gain of $4,303,000.


Saudis and Iran: New Assertiveness
LEAD: It was well past midnight when oil ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries emerged from the group's bunkerlike headquarters Saturday, stunned by Saudi Arabia's rejection of a plan that would have cut oil production and raised prices.


Bruins Pound 5-9 Devil
LEAD: Judging by their play in the opening game, the Bruins have made it abundantly clear that stopping Mark Johnson and his linemates will be their main strategy against the Devils in their Stanley Cup semifinal series.


Kansas City Plan Of Holder Rejected
LEAD: Kansas City Southern Industries said that stockholders at its annual meeting had rejected a shareholder proposal to break up the company and spin off its non-transportation operations.


Vote Shows A Victory For Gillette
LEAD: The Gillette Company declared a narrow victory yesterday in its proxy fight with Coniston Partners, but the New York-based investment firm said it would review the preliminary count and possibly challenge the final outcome.


Hexcel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Hexcel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
100,159,000
84,895,000
Net inc
3,305,000
2,415,000
Share earns
.72
.55


Hudson Revives And Yanks Win
LEAD: Every day, it seems, there is a new role for Charles Hudson.
He has been a middle-innings relief pitcher, a ninth-inning closer, a starter.
When Billy Martin has asked, Hudson has been there.


JACKSONS' INCOME EXCEEDED $200,000
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson and his wife, Jacqueline, reported income of more than $200,000 last year and paid about 25 percent of that in Federal taxes, according to their tax returns released today.


Fretter Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Fretter Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
89,100,000
80,100,000
Net inc
1,224,000
771,000
Share earns
.08
.07
Yr rev
250,000,000
273,000,000
Net inc
b1,380,000
4,021,000
Share earns
.09
.27
b-Includes a gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change of about $630,000.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the gambling industry appeared in some copies with sections out of order.
Readers wishing copies of the corrected article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


A 30-Year Mortgage, I Presume?
LEAD: On a supermarket parking lot was an $87,000 car.
The price sticker was on the window. $87,000.
It was a small car, only two seats, and a gear shift between them.


Boxing Notebook; Dokes's Comeback Perks Up
LEAD: With his knockout of James Pritchard last Thursday, Michael Dokes re-established his credibility as a fighter much faster than has another former heavyweight champion, George Foreman, who began his comeback in March 1987.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a report in the Briefing column of the Washington Talk page yesterday misidentified Barbara Mikulski, the Maryland Democrat.
She is a Senator, no longer a Representative.


San Francisco
LEAD: IN San Francisco, the latest in eating out may be the disaster dinner.
The 82d anniversary of the San Francisco earthquake on April 18, 1906, was commemorated at a five-course dinner in the newly opened Grill Room at Stars restaurant.


Dollar Mixed on Slow Day; Gold and Silver Are Down
LEAD: The dollar rose narrowly on domestic markets but fell overseas yesterday.
There was little news to influence trading.


New Brunswick Scientific Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*New Brunswick Scientific Co Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,454,000
8,716,000
Net loss
154,000
b354,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


A Telephone for the Outwardly Mobile
LEAD: TIME is money, and New Yorkers are not ones to idle away precious moments as they dash along the city streets.
No wonder the hand-held portable telephone is becoming increasingly popular.
According to Nynex and Metro One, which service the telephones, about 10,000 are currently being paraded around the metropolitan area.


College Loan Trust Selling $450.92 Million of Bonds
LEAD: Underwriters led by Salomon Brothers are offering $450.92 million of bonds of College and University Facility Loan Trust Two in four tranches.
They are secured by loans purchased by the trust from the United States Education Department.


NVRyan LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NVRyan LP (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
194,057,000
164,984,000
Net inc
6,111,000
1,370,000
Share earns
.22
.03
Shares outst
24,988,000
22,513,000
The share earnings and shares outstanding are in units.


Ingles Markets Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Ingles Markets Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
189,479,510
158,366,164
Net inc
2,672,587
1,454,848
Share earns
.15
.10
Shares outst
17,548,200
14,583,015
6mo sales
372,822,049
317,217,549
Net inc
6,154,499
4,524,852
Share earns
.35
.31
Shares outst
17,548,200
14,583,015


White House Confirms Reagans Follow Astrology, Up to a Point
LEAD: President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, are both deeply interested in astrology, the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said today, and two former White House officials said Mrs.
Reagan's concerns had influenced the scheduling of important events.


Pittway Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Pittway Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
190,288,000
158,638,000
Net inc
11,278,000
8,408,000
Share earns
2.46
1.83
Shares outst
4,590,984
4,589,305


Ernest G. Weiss, Accountant, 71
LEAD: Ernest G. Weiss, a retired partner in Price Waterhouse, died of a heart attack Sunday at Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 71 years old and lived in Armonk, N.Y.


Bangladesh Insurgents Kill 13 Bengali Settlers
LEAD: Tribal insurgents shot and killed 13 Bengali settlers in attacks Sunday in southeastern Bangladesh, bringing the number of dead to 36 in the last week, the authorities said today.


Kodak Income Climbs 46.1%
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company's earnings rose 46.1 percent in the first quarter of 1988, to $260 million, from $178 million a year ago, the company said today.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Chiat/Day, Los Angeles, has resigned La Victoria Foods, City of Industy, Calif., a maker of sauces, over creative differences.


Cone's First Start A First-Class Job
LEAD: David Cone and Lee Mazzilli achieved ''firsts'' last night, and both were significant for the Mets young and old.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.83
6.86
6.86
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.13
6.07
5.78
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.41
6.45
6.11
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.66
8.68
8.30
30-YR.


Crowe, in Gulf, Terms Iran a Dangerous Foe
LEAD: Iran remains a dangerous foe in the Persian Gulf despite losses in battles with the United States Navy two weeks ago, Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said today.


Ramada Inns Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Ramada Inns Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
188,841,000
185,241,000
Net inc
b123,000
bc4,431,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-Includes a pretax gain of $6,912,000 on property dispositions, compared with $16,207,000 a year ago.


MICROWAVE COOKING
LEAD: SWEET custards are the quintessential dessert of childhood, and in the form of flan are inextricably linked to Spanish cooking.
A decade ago, savory versions appeared under the name of quiche.
Many other dishes, like the Greek pastichio, depend on custard to hold them together.


Eastman Kodak Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Eastman Kodak Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 20
1988
1987
Sales
3,328,300,000
2,655,200,000
Net inc
260,100,000
178,000,000
Share earns
.80
.53
Shares outst
324,100,000
338,900,000
On Sept. 11, 1987, the company's board of directors declared a partial common stock split which was effected in the form of a 50 percent stock dividend to shareowners of record on Sept.


Chicago Is Untroubled By Political Sex Scandal
LEAD: When a local television station accused the 75-year-old president of the Cook County Board of trading jobs for sexual favors, the outrage was less than unanimous.


Santa Anita Cos reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Santa Anita Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
63,846,000
59,824,000
Net inc
7,594,000
6,513,000
Share earns
.90
.78
These figures represent the combined totals of Santa Anita Operating Co. and Santa Anita Realty Enterprises Inc.


Record Price for Johns Work
LEAD: Jasper Johns's fiercely compelling ''Diver,'' from 1962, was sold last night at Christie's for $4.2 million, a record at auction for the artist.
The buyer was not identified.


Police and Fire Divers: 2 Different Techniques
LEAD: The New York City Police and Fire Department scuba teams use different equipment and methods that reflect contrasting approaches to underwater rescues, according to experts in both departments.


CSS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CSS Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,667,000
14,312,000
Net inc
1,719,000
1,432,000
Share earns
.34
.27


Koch Sues in Traffic-Agent Assaults
LEAD: Seeking to discourage assaults on New York City traffic-enforcement agents, the Koch administration has joined three agents in a lawsuit against three people who pleaded guilty to separate attacks.


Late Rally Pushes Dow Up 15.09, to 2,058.36
LEAD: Stock prices spurted in late trading yesterday, lifting the Dow Jones industrial average by 15.09 points, to 2,058.36.


The Paper Is Gone, But The Sun's Clock Lives On
LEAD: Marvin Schneider, left, and Nicholas Ribaudo repairing the bronze clock above Broadway and Chambers Street.
The clock was restarted after being stopped for six months.
Page B3. (NYT/William E. Sauro)


Lee Data Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Lee Data Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
27,218,000
31,007,000
Net inc
83,000
1,780,000
Share earns
.01
.12
Yr rev
101,495,000
114,525,000
Net loss
5,133,000
b5,581,000
Share earns
-
.39


On Second Thought . . .
LEAD: Recent reports of the imminent demise of the nomination of Bernard H. Siegan to be a Federal appeals court judge appear to have been premature.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-17  Solidarity warned the Government that Poland faced major unrest if it refused to commit itself to major political change.
The warning came as riot policemen surrounded the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk.
Page A1


Wedtech Testimony Cites Ex-C.I.A. Deputy
LEAD: A former deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency and an Israeli general were among the officials a South Bronx military contractor dealt with, according to testimony yesterday in the racketeering trial of Representative Mario Biaggi.


Interstate General LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Interstate General LP (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,837,000
11,197,000
Net inc
4,531,000
2,292,000
Share earns
.45
.26
Shares outst
9,900,000
8,811,000
The share earnings and shares outstanding are in units.


Parker Accused In Court Papers
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Pirates said in a pretrial statement filed last Friday in Federal court that years of cocaine addiction reduced Dave Parker from a star outfielder to an overweight, injury-prone second-rater who didn't deserve the money he got.


Staley Rebuffs Tate &amp; Lyle
LEAD: Staley Continental Inc. today rejected Tate &amp; Lyle P.L.C.'s revised $35-a-share offer for the company and disclosed that it was talking with lenders for a possible recapitalization.


Review/Theater; Growing Up Insufferable in Two One-Act Plays
LEAD: In the second of two related one-act plays grouped together as ''Terry by Terry,'' the title character announces that he is the author of the first play on the bill.
Shifting between levels of reality, ''Terry by Terry'' has a novel Pirandello twist: a play within a playwright.
The real playwright (at the Manhattan Punch Line Theater) is Mark Leib and his own possible proximity to his protagonist is one of the evening's several curiosities.


Drug Counts Dropped for Woman at Slaying Scene
LEAD: Drug charges were dismissed yesterday against Maritza Battista, one of the two women in an apartment where a police sergeant was accidentally shot to death in a narcotics raid last week.
The charges were dropped after a police laboratory report said not enough cocaine had been found in the apartment to warrant a felony indictment.


Utah Lawyer a Choice as Meese Aide
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, after a lengthy and embarrassing search, has chosen Harold G. Christensen, a Utah lawyer, to become his chief deputy at the Justice Department, according to an Administration official.


M-I Schottenstein Homes reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*M-I Schottenstein Homes (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
36,251,000
26,341,000
Net inc
805,000
647,000
Share earns
.13
.11


Wolverine World Wide Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Wolverine World Wide Inc
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Sales
72,784,000
71,604,000
Net inc
910,000
887,000
Share earns
.13
.12


Fortaleza Journal; Political Maverick Tilts at the Lords of Patronage
LEAD: When Tasso Jereissati became Governor of Ceara last year, the freshman politician began in what seemed to be the most impolitic of ways by banning all personal favors and warning relatives and friends to expect no jobs in his administration.


Modine Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Modine Manufacturing Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
103,000,000
91,600,000
Net inc
5,100,000
b3,400,000
Share earns
.34
.24
Yr sales
395,200,000
349,000,000
Net inc
25,000,000
19,600,000
Share earns
1.67
1.31


Galway Kinnell Lecture
LEAD: The poet Galway Kinnell will give a lecture on ''The Form of Free Verse'' at 8 P.M.
May 12 at Poets House, 351 West 18th Street.
The lecture is the first Paul Zweig Memorial Lecture, an annual series in honor of the late poet; Mr.
Zweig, who died in 1984, was chairman of the comparative literature department at Queens College.


Pact on Nuclear Plant Bonds
LEAD: Three groups of utilities agreed today to pay $65.2 million to bondholders in the latest round of out-of-court settlements connected with two abandoned nuclear plants.
The lawsuit springs from the $2.25 billion securities default on plants owned by the Washington Public Power Supply System.


Ousted Gorbachev Critic Backs Leader's Plan
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin, the ousted Moscow party leader, was quoted in a Soviet publication today as offering an endorsement of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's drive to restructure the Soviet economy.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


L &amp; N Housing Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*L &amp; N Housing Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
925,000
762,000
Share earns
.42
.35


Chicago Merc Halted by Leak
LEAD: Trading was halted for more than two and a half hours today on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange after water from a burst pipe flooded the exchange's telecommunications room, disabling its automated price quotation system.
The exchange is the leading


New Cray Product
LEAD: Cray Research Inc., based in Minneapolis, introduced a new series of supercomputers offering up to four times the memory at the same or lower prices than the Cray X-MP series that it will replace.
The new machines dubbed X-MP EA, for ''extended architecture,'' are based on the design of the Cray Y-MP introduced in February and can run programs developed for either the X-MP or Y-MP systems.


Sigma-Aldrich Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Sigma-Aldrich Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
93,148,000
73,165,000
Net inc
13,854,000
9,807,000
Share earns
.56
.40


Robert P. Hyde, 58, Ex-Brewery Executive
LEAD: Robert P. Hyde, a retired executive who was president of Rheingold Breweries and later executive vice president of the Western Union Telegraph Company, died of cancer Friday at Community General Hospital in Syracuse.
He was 58 years old and lived in Cazenovia, N.Y.


Mr. Giamatti Makes the Right Call
LEAD: In levying the harshest penalty against a team manager in 41 years, the National League president, A. Bartlett Giamatti, has sent the right signal at the right time: Baseball will not be allowed to degenerate into chaos and disorder.


15 Indicted in Rutgers Hazing Death
LEAD: Fifteen members of a Rutgers University fraternity have been indicted in the alcohol-related death of an 18-year-old freshman pledge at a party last February, the Middlesex County Prosecutor announced today.


With a Hand or 2, an Old-Timer Revives
LEAD: The Sun no longer shines for all, but the lights within its elegant bronze vestige glow again, telling time to anyone who looks up at Broadway and Chambers Street.


Control Data Stock Advances by $1.75
LEAD: Shares of the Control Data Corporation, the Minneapolis-based computer concern long rumored to be a takeover target, jumped yesterday on rumors that Canada's Belzberg family owns a small stake and is considering further moves.
Control Data rose $1.75 a share, to $26.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Review/Television; New York's Real Estate Debate
LEAD: ''Metroline'' falls short tonight.
The topic is beyond it.
How can New York meet social needs and still keep a strong tax base?
Try answering that in 30 minutes, when builders, think tanks and advocacy groups have flailed at both the question and one another for years.
Nonetheless, give ''Metroline'' a medal for trying.


Thermo Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Thermo Environmental (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,936,000
3,867,000
Net inc
b701,000
170,000
Share earns
.12
.04
Shares outst
6,044,000
4,703,000
b-Includes a gain of $50,000 from the repurchase of debentures.


Metro Datelines; Jersey Court Extends Homeless Benefits
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court, on a 4-to-3 vote, yesterday granted a 30-day extension of state emergency assistence benefits for the homeless while a lower court rules on an appeal of the state's decision to limit benefits under the program to five months.


The Poor Don't Think America's Decline Is a Myth
LEAD: To the Editor:


Arkansas Best Suitor Gets Takeover Lesson
LEAD: Emanuel R. Pearlman, the would-be acquirer of the Arkansas Best Corporation, had been in the takeover business all of 48 hours when he got a strong dose of what lies ahead.
The target company ignored his phone calls.
The newspapers gave his $230 million deal short shrift.
And he balks at the suggestion that he is a corporate raider.


United Industrial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*United Industrial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
75,027,000
66,430,000
Net inc
3,440,000
2,549,000
Share earns
.26
.19


Koppers Cites Shearson Trading
LEAD: The Koppers Company charged Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. with illegally trading shares in Koppers based on insider information.


Britons Defuse a Bomb On West German Base
LEAD: British forces in West Germany said today that they had discovered and detonated a car bomb in a British army base in Bielefeld.


Chili's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Chili's Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
54,643,000
45,211,000
Net inc
1,717,000
1,422,000
Share earns
.29
.24
9mo rev
159,266,000
129,289,000
Net inc
b5,928,000
5,546,000
Share earns
.98
.79


More Data From N.A.S.D.
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday that it would expand its public disclosure of the disciplinary histories of its member firms and brokers.


Out for the Season
LEAD: J.J.
Birden, the wide received from Oregon who was the first offensive player taken by the Cleveland Browns in the draft, tore a ligament in his right knee during a minicamp and will miss the 1988 season. (AP)


No-Mess Chocolate . . .
LEAD: Long years of monkeying with mousses at a Geneva laboratory has produced for the Battelle Memorial Institute a chocolate that will not melt in hot weather.


El Paso Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*El Paso Electric Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
90,333,000
78,400,000
Net inc
16,997,000
b24,610,000
Share earns
.40
.60
b-Includes a gain of $4,240,000 from an accounting change.


LAROUCHE JURORS ASKING FOR RELIEF
LEAD: A Federal district judge is considering whether to declare a mistrial in at least part of the fraud and conspiracy case against the political extremist Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., six of his aides and five of his political groups.
The judge, Robert E. Keeton, said he would issue a decision Wednesday.


SCI Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCI Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
217,460,000
124,247,000
Net inc
4,378,000
4,007,000
Share earns
.21
.19
9mo sales
542,300,000
387,259,000
Net inc
12,216,000
10,776,000
Share earns
.59
.52


Review/Theater; Mamet's Dark View of Hollywood As a Heaven for the Virtueless
LEAD: Hell hath no fury like a screenwriter scorned, and American culture is all the livelier for it.
Out of the rage of embittered novelists and playwrights in studio backlots has come an enduring literature, nearly all of it practicing the same scorched-earth policy toward Hollywood that Nathanael West first apotheosized in ''The Day of the Locust.


A Los Angeles Sale Of Revenue Bonds
LEAD: The Los Angeles County Transportation Commission is tentatively offering about $112 million of sales tax revenue refunding bonds with a maximum yield of 8.088 percent for a maturity in 2018.
The underwriters are led by the First Boston Corporation.


Democrats Act to Drop Key Item in Trade Bill
LEAD: The Democratic Congressional leadership, faced with President Reagan's threatened veto of the trade bill, moved today to drop the bill's proposed curbs on Alaskan oil exports.


Reeds Jewelers reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Reeds Jewelers (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
19,500,000
12,600,000
Net inc
1,700,000
1,000,000
Share earns
.49
.31
Yr sales
46,700,000
31,500,000
Net inc
2,000,000
b1,800,000
Share earns
.58
.57


Belgian Joblessness Falls
LEAD: Belgium's unemployment rate improved last month from a year ago, falling to 10.5 percent from 11.5 percent in 1987, the National Labor Office reported today.
The April rate, down from 10.9 percent in March, was the lowest level in the last year.


Perkins Family Restaurants LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Perkins Family Restaurants LP (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
34,778,000
31,075,000
Net inc
1,777,000
1,424,000
Share earns
.17
.14


Bridge
LEAD: Tournaments with cash prizes seem to be coming to the United States.
After much soul-searching, the American Contract Bridge League has made plans for such an event in Atlantic City next year, and before then, in early November, there will be one in Incline Village, Nev., on Lake Tahoe.
It is planned by an English entrepreneur, Paul


Walesa Calls for Major Reforms To Prevent Broader Labor Unrest
LEAD: As riot policemen surrounded the Lenin shipyard here, the outlawed Solidarity union warned the Government today that it faced widespread unrest if it refused to commit itself to major political change.


U.S.-Soviet Grain Talks
LEAD: United States and Soviet officials, who began talks today on renewing the world's biggest bilateral grain agreement with statements of optimism, said wide differences remained after nine hours of difficult negotiating.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Homer &amp; Durham Wins Burpee Seed Account
LEAD: The W. Atlee Burpee Company, the venerable seed marketer, has hired a general advertising agency for the first time in memory.
It is Homer &amp; Durham.


American Biltrite Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Biltrite Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
40,133,000
33,950,000
Net inc
1,516,000
b914,000
Share earns
.76
.43
b-Includes a tax credit of $319,000.


Washington Energy Co reports earnings for 12mo March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Washington Energy Co (OTC)
12mo March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
333,185,000
319,798,000
Net inc
16,283,000
b20,438,000
Share earns
1.11
-
Shares outst
13,044,000
11,665,000
b-After a gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change of $3,215,000.


Metro Datelines; U.S. Judge Rejects Claim of Plagiarism
LEAD: A Federal judge ruled yesterday that a prominent physician had not plagiarized a medical article written by a junior colleague.


Oakwood Homes Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Oakwood Homes Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,285,000
19,392,000
Net loss
290,000
b903,000
Share earns
-
.16
6mo sales
28,683,000
35,188,000
Net inc
551,000
2,034,000
Share earns
.10
.36


Insituform Gulf South Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Insituform Gulf South Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Revenue
4,016,000
2,005,554
Net inc
298,000
b3,000
Share earns
.10
-
9mo rev
12,103,000
7,107,000
Net inc
715,000
285,000
Share earns
.24
.11


2 Workers Slain in Robbery At a Dry Cleaners in Queens
LEAD: Two store employees were shot to death and a third was seriously wounded last night in a robbery of a dry cleaners in Queens, the police said.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We do not exonerate the men responsible for this disaster.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:  LADIES OF THE MORNING  I pluck a tuft  of years ago  nesting between  Eggs Florentine  and my perfumed Mimosa  - a reminiscence of crumbs  in bed  frail coffee, jam  and a gurgle up  of Happy Mother's Day.
JUDITH FILKER CARLUCCIO


Korea's North Politik
LEAD: At the moment, everybody here is focusing on domestic politics, with the Government's loss of its legislative majority for the first time, and on the coming Olympics.
Electric signs all over town announce the number of days until the start of the Games, now 137.


Network Systems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Network Systems Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
30,146,000
20,290,000
Net inc
2,849,000
1,145,000
Share earns
.10
.04


LAB SEEKS TO TEST GENE-SPLICED DRUG
LEAD: A laboratory engaged in biomedical research is seeking Federal permission for tests in the wild involving a vaccine against rabies made by techniques of genetic manipulation.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASKETBALL


Exposaic Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Exposaic Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
44,099,000
38,145,000
Net inc
b2,935,000
c973,000
Share earns
1.15
.38
6mo rev
91,404,000
72,077,000
Net inc
b4,577,000
c1,849,000
Share earns
1.79
.72


Barry Wright Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Barry Wright Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
55,164,000
52,022,000
Net inc
1,123,000
3,273,000
Share earns
.14
.40
Latest quarter includes a charge of about $900,000 related to costs associated with the possible restructuring of the company.


Why Democrats Can't Make an Issue of Noriega
LEAD: On the surface, the Democrats should be eagerly awaiting each day's developments in Panama, the Reagan Administration's newest Central American policy flop.


Market Place; Socially Screened Funds' Favorites
LEAD: THOSE who style themselves part of the ''socially responsible investment'' movement have argued that investors can prosper financially, as well as spiritually, if they avoid companies whose products or policies violate their moral beliefs.
But that does not mean that ethically guided investors have been spared the shock of last


NBC Sells Affliate in Buffalo
LEAD: Tak Communications agreed yesterday to buy WGRZ-TV the NBC affiliate in Buffalo, for $100 million.
Sharad Tak, the company's sole shareholder, already owns four television stations in Wisconsin and one in Honolulu.


Grants Sought for Peace Corps Volunteers
LEAD: For years the Pentagon has offered financial incentives to college students who agree to serve in the armed forces after graduation.
Now a new bill would grant Federal aid to students who agree to serve as Peace Corps volunteers.


Panel Approves Bans on Pretoria
LEAD: The House Foreign Affairs Committee approved legislation today barring all American investment in South Africa and imposing a near-total trade embargo against that country.


Home Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Home Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
674,000,000
596,300,000
Net inc
b22,100,000
c74,100,000
Share earns
.65
2.03
b-After realized capital losses of $2.8 million.
c-After realized capital gains of $42.7 million.


Emerson Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Emerson Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,627,700,000
1,533,200,000
Net inc
132,600,000
115,400,000
Share earns
.58
.49
6mo sales
3,205,900,000
2,964,200,000
Net inc
257,500,000
224,700,000
Share earns
1.12
.96


Amdahl's New Mainframes
LEAD: The Amdahl Corporation today introduced a series of mainframe computers that it said are more powerful than any machines currently compatible with I.B.M.'s 3090 series.
Amdahl, which is based in


65 M.P.H. Not Costing Lives, Transportation Head Asserts
LEAD: Raising the speed limit to 65 miles per hour on some rural stretches of Interstate highway has had no effect on the traffic death rate, Transportation Secretary Jim Burnley said today.


Yale Coddles and Shares Rare Books
LEAD: It has been called a literary treasure chest, with jewels that include the original manuscripts of Gertrude Stein, the maps of Lewis and Clark and the musical scores of Cole Porter.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Paul A. Bilzerian, of Florida, and a group of investors has purchased a 6.25 percent stake in Fortune Financial Group Inc. and said it might seek control of the bank holding company based in Clearwater, Fla.


Walker Not Buying
LEAD: Herschel Walker, a running back for the Dallas Cowboys, said yesterday that he had considered and then abondoned an idea to try to buy the team for which he plays.


Las Vegas Journal; Envisioning High-Speed Artery to Gaming Tables
LEAD: Twenty years ago when Howard Hughes proposed to make this desert city the hub of a futuristic high-speed rail line, the few people who listened thought the idea was as eccentric as the billionaire himself.


Catalyst Thermal Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Catalyst Thermal Energy Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
54,188,000
29,916,000
Net inc
8,809,000
4,153,000
Share earns
.61
.35
The company attributed the earnings and revenue increases to the inclusion in the 1988 first quarter of three full months of operations results for the Boston and Philadelphia District Steam Systems compared to about two months in 1987, as well as results of the Cleveland System acquired on Dec.


John Paul, in Sermon, Takes Note of Unrest
LEAD: Commenting on the labor unrest in his homeland, Pope John Paul II said today that Poland would not be independent until its people were free to determine their future.


Proler International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Proler International (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
30,326,507
23,278,631
Net inc
5,865,654
b1,941,072
Share earns
3.74
-
Yr sales
104,927,154
85,756,607
Net inc
11,484,302
517,736
Share earns
7.32
.33


'Cocoanuts' Extends Run
LEAD: The Arena Stage's production of ''The Cocoanuts,'' which had been scheduled to run until June 5, has been extended at least through July 3.
The production, directed by Doug Wager, received uniformly favorable reviews.
It is the first staging in 60 years of the George S. Kaufman and Irving Berlin show that introduced the Marx Brothers to Broadway.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Omnicom Group's Net Increases 21% in Period
LEAD: The Omnicom Group, whose components include BBDO Worldwide and DDB Needham, said yesterday that its first-quarter net income rose 21 percent, to $7.6 million, or 31 cents a share, from $6.3 million, or 26 cents a share, in the 1987 quarter.


Connecticut Senate Votes Property Tax Relief Plan
LEAD: Under pressure from Gov.
William A. O'Neill, the Connecticut Senate gave final legislative approval tonight to an $18 million property tax relief plan that does not include a $25,000 homestead exemption provision opposed by the Governor and defeated Monday in the House of Representatives.


Entertainment Marketing Inc reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Entertainment Marketing Inc (AMEX)
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
158,918,857
84,302,518
Net loss
b10,226,304
c3,236,281
Share earns
-
.30
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $6,858,788 and an extraordinary gain of $1,221,944.


Utah Utility Co-op Markets Securities
LEAD: The Rural Electric Utilities-Deseret Generation and Transmission Cooperative is offering about $172.1 million of grantor trust certificates via Shearson Lehman Hutton.


Tightrope Act Begins On Filling No. 2 Slots
LEAD: Politicians are forever searching for complicated problems that they can sound thoughtful about.


Providence Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Providence Energy Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
52,259,000
49,550,000
Net inc
5,962,000
6,006,000
Share earns
2.57
2.64
6mo rev
94,564,000
85,936,000
Net inc
9,146,000
b9,297,000
Share earns
3.95
4.10


For the Chambers Jury, 'Intent' Proved to Be an Albatross
LEAD: To the Editor:


Remy Ends Bid For Benedictine
LEAD: biRemy Martin, the French cognac house, today ended its takeover bid for Benedictine, the liqueur maker, clearing the path for a higher offer by Martini e Rossi, the Italian aperitif group.


Grand Jury Clears Everyone In Fatal Philadelphia Siege
LEAD: A Philadelphia grand jury today cleared everyone involved of criminal liability for death and destruction resulting from the city's fiery 1985 confrontation with the radical group Move.
Those cleared included Mayor W. Wilson Goode and other top city officials.


Anthony Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Anthony Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
59,298,000
58,785,000
Net inc
1,318,000
1,164,000
Share earns
.30
.25


Metro Datelines; 2 On IRT Are Shot In Theft of Chains
LEAD: A gunman shot and wounded two people on an IRT train in Brooklyn while stealing gold chains, the transit police said yesterday.
The robber escaped with the jewelry.
The incident occurred as the transit police, citing preliminary statistics, reported that felony crimes in the subways rose 5.4 percent in the first three months of the year, compared with the same period a year ago.


USF&amp;G Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USF&amp;G Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b29,759,000
b3,625,000
Share earns
.32
-
b-Included tax credits of $1,800,000 and $3,431,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.
Share earnings are not given because preferred dividend requirements exceeded net income for that period.


Network Equipment Technoloies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Network Equipment Technoloies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
27,911,000
15,706,000
Net inc
3,847,000
c2,207,000
Share earns
.28
.17
Yr rev
90,568,000
47,410,000
Net inc
b15,032,000
c5,077,000
Share earns
1.09
.41


Guard Is Charged in Slaying
LEAD: A Brooklyn grand jury indicted a security guard on murder charges yesterday in the beating and strangulation death of a teen-ager in the mall he patrolled.
The security guard, Fred Bradley, 23 years old, of Brooklyn, was charged with three counts of second-degree murder and one count of aggravated sexual abuse in the killing of Julissa Rivera, 18, of Manhattan, according to the indictment.


Eliminating The Meter Reader
LEAD: Microelectronics has begun to change the electric meter, the device that measures electricity consumption.
New meters equipped with microprocessors and other sophisticated electronics can measure electrical use in five-minute increments around the clock, and report back to the utility headquarters monthly, daily, or even on demand, all by using the customer's phone line.


Chemical in Wine Tied to Migraines
LEAD: A TEAM of English researchers may have discovered why some red wine gives some people severe headaches.
The group, headed by Dr.
Merton Sandler at Queen Charlotte's Hospital in London, thinks that flavanoids, the powerful chemical compounds that give red wine its color, are partly to blame.


Old Spaghetti Warehouse reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Old Spaghetti Warehouse
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Revenue
5,645,085
4,487,812
Net inc
273,519
225,342
Share earns
.18
.15
9mo rev
17,252,060
13,210,272
Net inc
837,740
508,252
Share earns
.56
.34


Amplicon Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Amplicon Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,152,000
19,301,000
Net inc
2,263,000
1,221,000
Share earns
.35
.24
Shares outst
6,539,248
5,100,000
9mo rev
67,427,000
52,230,000
Net inc
b7,209,000
3,420,000
Share earns
1.11
.67
Shares outst
6,524,678
5,100,000


Wisconsin Public Service Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Wisconsin Public Service Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
183,795,000
164,351,000
Net inc
20,462,000
16,423,000
Share earns
.84
.67


Par Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Par Pharmaceuticals (NYSE)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
24,800,000
21,639,000
Net inc
3,243,000
2,727,000
Share earns
.29
.24
6mo sales
46,155,000
38,355,000
Net inc
6,490,000
4,943,000
Share earns
.58
.44


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Steeped in the South ''Scenes From the Southside,'' (RCA), the second album by Bruce Hornsby and the Range, is so suffused with Southern atmosphere that one can practically smell the honeysuckle and feel the humidity of the Virginia Tidewater area where many of the songs are set.


Election's Price in France: Values Above All
LEAD: The word is on every politician's lips: ''valeurs,'' or values.
Sensing a popular backlash against their traditional discourse, French politicians of the right and the left are appealing to values rather than dwelling on economic or social issues The emphasis on values suggests the fluidity of a campaign in which President Francois Mitterrand, a Socialist, has managed to cast himself as an almost nonpartisan, essentially conservative figure.


Gulf States Utilities Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Gulf States Utilities Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
353,857,000
302,835,000
Net inc
b8,450,000
c41,110,000
Share earns
-
.23
b-Includes writedowns of $14 million.
c-Includes $16.7 million of non-cash earnings.


Judge Rules Davis's Lawyers Excluded White Jurors
LEAD: A Bronx judge, supporting prosecution charges of discrimination, ruled yesterday that defense lawyers for Larry Davis had sought to exclude white people as jurors in his latest trial.


S.A.T. Trial Questions Focus of Rising Debate
LEAD: As 360,000 high school juniors around the country prepare to take the Scholastic Aptitude Test on Saturday, a debate is heating up about whether students should have to take an unmarked section of the test that does not count in the score.


Gulf Resources &amp; Chemical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Gulf Resources &amp; Chemical Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
27,954,000
71,846,000
Net loss
1,238,000
b41,097,000
Share earns
-
4.14
b-Net income and includes a tax credit of $16,173,000.
The company said the year-ago first quarter net from operations includes a gain of $38,200,000 from the sale of investment in Imperial Continental Gas Association.


New York Schools Consider The Use of Metal Detectors
LEAD: An increase in deadly weapons found on public school students in New York City this year has prompted the Board of Education to consider searching students with metal detectors as they enter school, a board official said yesterday.


Reds' Broadcasters Apologize
LEAD: Marty Brennaman and Joe Nuxhall, the Cincinnati Reds' radio broadcasting team, apologized yesterday for their comments on the air last Saturday night after a shoving incident involving Manager Pete Rose of the Reds and Umpire Dave Pallone.
The incident led to a 30-day suspension for Rose.


Josephson International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Josephson International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
72,212,000
58,011,000
Net inc
b2,640,000
c1,116,000
Share earns
.67
-
Shares outst
3,966,000
4,605,000
9mo rev
192,584,000
180,243,000
Net inc
b9,283,000
d23,194,000
Share earns
2.20
4.84
Shares outst
4,226,000
4,789,000


Penn Square Case Ends in a Mistrial
LEAD: The trial of a former officer of the Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company and a former Penn Square Bank vice president ended in a mistrial today when a jury could not reach a verdict.


About New York; Seeking Stardom In 'Joe Clark, The Movie'
LEAD: In the works was a Warner Brothers movie about Joe Clark, the principal at Eastside High in Paterson, N.J., the guy whose combative control methods got him on the cover of Time magazine, holding his Adirondack Big Stick, the Willie Mays model, flame treated.


Heavier Gastineau Is Happier
LEAD: In the laid-back, suburban atmosphere of the Jets' camp, ferocious talk was going on today.


Metro Datelines; Officer and 3 Others Held in Cocaine Case
LEAD: A 25-year-old New York City police officer and three other people have been charged with cocaine trafficking in Queens after a seven-month investigation, the Police Department and the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration anounced yesterday.


National Patent Development Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*National Patent Development Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
68,172,000
52,110,000
Net inc
b512,000
c3,938,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $1,421,000 relating to the early extinguishment of debt.


Books of The Times; Making the Big Bang Almost Understandable
LEAD:  A Brief History of Time  From the Big Bang to Black Holes  By Stephen W. Hawking  Illustrated. 198 pages.
Bantam Books. $18.95.


A Corridor Exchange in Feud Over Police and Fire Divers
LEAD: Following is the exchange yesterday among Fire Commissioner Joseph F. Bruno, Mayor Koch and Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward in a corridor at City Hall, as recorded by The New York Times, moments after the Mayor announced a new accord in which the Police Department will train Fire Department divers and use them interchangeably:


Keystone Camera Products reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Keystone Camera Products (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
50,516,000
40,420,000
Net loss
28,202,000
735,000
Keystone said the latest year loss was substantially because of the discontinuance of its video cassette business.


Long-Dead Whale Washes Up on Jersey Beach
LEAD: Workers examining a fin whale in Deal that was hit by a ship and killed at least five weeks ago.
The whale will be cut up and carried from the beach. (NYT/Frank C. Dougherty)


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD:  In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
April 29
April 22
May 1
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
6.9
6.9
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.0
2.4
Gasoline stocks
230.0
225.9
243.5
Distillate stocks
94.6
93.3
100.2
Crude imports, daily
4.1
5.8
4.4
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.0
1.8
Crude stocks
355.8
356.5
327.4
Crude production, daily
8.2
8.2
8.4
Refinery utilization (%)
83.9
83.9
79.0


Mortgage &amp; Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Mortgage &amp; Realty Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,944,000
3,591,000
Share earns
.47
.37
6mo net inc
10,147,000
7,031,000
Share earns
.96
.79
Shares outst
10,559,000
8,948,000


The Poor Don't Think America's Decline Is a Myth; The Chip Gap
LEAD: To the Editor:


Donald Byrd Offering Two Dance Premieres
LEAD: Donald Byrd/The Group is to present two world premieres, ''Enactments in Time of Plague'' and ''Speakeasy,'' in a season today through Saturday at Symphony Space Theater, Broadway at 95th Street.
Mr.
Byrd's work combines ballet and modern dance, Afro-American social dance and theater dance and often deals with social issues.


Dukakis's Strong Suit Turns a Bit Weak
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis is campaigning for President as a strong financial manager, but management of the Massachusetts budget is giving him political headaches at home.


Guerrillas in Colombia Kidnap Five Foreigners
LEAD: Leftist guerrillas kidnapped four foreigners today and took responsibility for the kidnapping of a French diplomat, officials said.


General Dynamics Pact
LEAD: The General Dynamics Corporation has been chosen to design a new space launching rocket for military satellites and to build 11 such rockets for more than $500 million, the Air Force said today.
The St.
Louis-based company had been competing with the McDonnell Douglas Corporation to provide the new Medium Launch Vehicle-2 rockets, the Air Force said.


Bears Release 2
LEAD: The Chicago Bears have released a former All-Pro safety, Todd Bell, and a tight end, Tim Wrightman, a member of the 1986 Super Bowl champions.
Bell, a six-year veteran, was waived.
He earned All-Pro honors in 1984, sat out the Super Bowl season because of a contract dispute and has seen only part-time duty two years.


Anchor Glass
LEAD: The Anchor Glass Container Corporation said it would close a Tennessee container plant and a Pennsylvania mold manufacturing plant by early August as part of its restructuring.
The closing could mean that about 350 employees at the Chattanooga, Tenn., plant and 100 at the Reno, Pa., factory will lose their jobs.


Texas Electric Offering Bonds
LEAD: The Texas Utilities Electric Company is offering $300 million of first and collateral trust bonds in two equal parts through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Standard Motor Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Standard Motor Products Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
97,419,000
81,618,000
Net inc
2,858,000
4,167,000
Share earns
.22
.31


Knicks Adopt Chaos Theory
LEAD: They've tried it without the press and they've tried it with the press; they've played it straight and they've played combinations.
The Knicks have attempted nearly everything imaginable to beat Boston in the first two games of their three-of-five-game playoff series, and all they have to show for it are bruised egos and a pair of lopsided defeats.


Santucci Is Faulted in a Slaying Inquiry
LEAD: Asserting that the Queens District Attorney, John J. Santucci, had mishandled an investigation into the fatal shooting of a black man by white police officers, the N.A.A.C.P. yesterday urged Governor Cuomo to appoint a special prosecutor to reopen the case.


Gain Seen for Bill Aiding Discounters
LEAD: Sponsors of legislation that would make it easier for discounters to bring price-fixing cases against manufacturers and full-price retailers said today that the Supreme Court's decision on discount retailing would probably improve the prospects for their bill.


USG Is Suing Merrill Over Role With Desert
LEAD: The USG Corporation filed a lawsuit yesterday against Merrill Lynch &amp; Company for its role in the hostile tender offer for the company made by Desert Partners L.P.


N.H.L. Playoffs; Gretzky Sets Up Oiler Victory
LEAD: Wayne Gretzky set up three goals and the Edmonton Oilers threw a defensive shell round the listless Detroit Red Wings for a 4-1 victory tonight in the opener of their Stanley Cup semifinal series.


Detroit's Benign Chain Gangs
LEAD: For years the freeway from Metropolitan Airport into Detroit was one large litter basket, strewn with rusty auto parts and other urban flotsam.
Not anymore.
Now, seven days a week, work crews in orange vests remove the debris.


Corrections
LEAD: The Social Events column on Sunday gave an incorrect date for a benefit at the Joyce Theater for Dan Wagoner and Dancers.
It will be held Thursday, not today.
The location of the party afterward has been changed to the Tower Gallery, 45 West 18th Street.


Anger at Airline Masks Deregulation Worries
LEAD: It seems that just about everybody in Washington is after the hide of the Texas Air Corporation and its chairman, Frank Lorenzo - the Transportation Department, the Federal courts, organized labor and Congress.


2 Charged In Rigging Of Lottery
LEAD: A computer expert who worked for a company that helps operate the Pennsylvania state lottery printed a fake ticket so that he and a friend could share a $15.2 million jackpot, state officials said today.


Worries Rise Over Crumbling Books
LEAD: The growth of a library's collection of books, maps, manuscripts and other materials is usually a source of pride.


Texaco Files Suit to Block Icahn Move
LEAD: Texaco Inc. filed a lawsuit yesterday against its largest shareholder, Carl C. Icahn, seeking to block the New York investor from pursuing a proxy battle to elect himself and four associates to the company's board at its annual meeting on June 7.


Malibu Grand Prix Corp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Malibu Grand Prix Corp
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
30,200,000
28,834,000
Net inc
b2,553,000
c14,984,000
Share earns
.15
.92
Shares outst
17,261,000
16,220,000
b-After a loss of $324,000 from disposition of property and equipment and an extraordinary gain of $1,649,000 on the restructure of debt.


American Carriers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*American Carriers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
155,167,000
91,616,000
Net loss
24,343,000
1,735,000


Master of Rare Strings
LEAD: Jacques Francais holding a 1677 Stradivarius, left, and a 1742 Guarnerius, valued at more than $1 million each, at his shop, Rare Violins Inc. on West 54th Street, where Christopher Landon, right, worked on a violin's sound post.
Some early violins, left, were adorned with a lion's head or a woman's face.


From the Land Of the Proletariat, A Hedonist's Drink
LEAD: ONE of the more curious enclaves in this Black Sea port is a turn-of-the-century French chateau, its garden now festooned with Communist Party posters and heaped with industrial racks of empty green bottles.
A voluptuous stone siren presides over the arched entrance, and high above her is the oddly proletarian sign, Factory of Champagne


Patten Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Patten Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
30,400,000
21,400,000
Net inc
b3,700,000
1,700,000
Share earns
.20
.13
Yr rev
116,400,000
81,600,000
Net inc
b15,100,000
9,400,000
Share earns
.88
.66


Chicago Election Board Votes To Set Special Mayoral Race
LEAD: The Chicago election board voted unanimously today to hold a special mayoral election early in 1989 to choose a successor to Mayor Harold Washington, who died in office last November.


VTX Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VTX Electronics (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,232,000
7,894,000
Net inc
22,000
245,000
Share earns
.01
.10
Share earnings have been restated to give retroactive effect to the 5-for-4 stock split declared effective March 17.


Fannie Mae Makes A 2-Part Offering
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association is offering $1.2 billion of debentures in two maturities through various dealers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Douglas Turner Moves Its Accounts to Venet
LEAD: Because of the serious illness of its founder and president, the Douglas Turner Inc. agency of Newark has switched its accounts and key employees over to Venet Advertising of Union, N.J.
The billings are about $10 million.


Review/Recital; Romantic Songs With Emphasis On 'Little Notes'
LEAD: Barbara Hendricks's virtues as a song recitalist begin with a delectable, shimmering voice of pure quality: a sensuous pleasure to the ear.
They continue with a beautiful, deft control of quick ''little notes'' such as decorate Schumann's ''Lied der Philine'' and Rachmaninoff's ''O Cease Thy Singing''; with an understanding respect for the piano part that moves her to collaborate with soloists like Dmitri Alexeev, who played for her Sunday afternoon in Alice Tully


U.S. Issues Up a Bit on Quiet Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes staged a small technical rally in sleepy trading yesterday.


Justice's Update on School Desegregation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carroll Righter Dies; Hollywood Astrologer
LEAD: Carroll Righter, an astrologer to movie stars and a writer of a syndicated daily column for 166 newspapers around the world, died Saturday.
He was 88 years old and lived in Hollywood.


A Maverick Horseman Upsets Tradition at Churchill Downs
LEAD: Louie Roussel 3d is sometimes called King Louis III in his native Louisiana.
In Kentucky, where the owner and trainer is preparing to send out Risen Star in the Kentucky Derby on Saturday, he is being called ''a loose horse'': headstrong, flighty and hard to run down.


Dr. Philip Powers, 75, Educator and Physicist
LEAD: Dr.
Philip Nathan Powers, an educator and nuclear physicist, died of pneumonia and renal failure Thursday at New York Hospital.
He was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Brock Hotel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Brock Hotel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1988
1987
Revenue
60,034,000
46,441,000
Net inc
b1,160,000
b2,519,000
Share earns
.09
.33
b-Includes tax credits of $358,000 for the latest quarter and $1,213,000 for the year-earlier period.


In Taiwan, Change Sweeps Out Taboos
LEAD: This is the image of Taiwan in flux: on a sultry Saturday night in the busy West Gate market, a taxi driver stands on a flag-bedecked truck and shouts his anti-Government protest to the crowd.
Nearby, shoppers continue haggling over the price of shoes and snake blood, while worshipers crowd into an open-air temple holding burning incense sticks aloft and bowing before the gods.


Jackie Mason Returns With a Doo-Wop Party
LEAD: It was the night that Jackie Mason returned to Broadway - an evening that grew, like one of his gargantuan and convoluted monologues, to erupt in an irrepressible series of punch lines early yesterday at Sardi's.


Review/Art; The Felicitous Output of a Tragic French Sculptor
LEAD: The National Museum of Women in the Arts in Washington has done us all a service by presenting the retrospective exhibition of sculpture, paintings and drawings by Camille Claudel (1864-1943).
The show - assembled and catalogued by Reine-Marie Paris, the artist's great-niece, and Meredith Martindale - can be seen through


ISRAELIS SEARCH HOMES IN LEBANON
LEAD: At least 1,000 Israeli soldiers in tanks and armored personnel carriers stormed through parts of southern Lebanon today, searching homes, questioning Lebanese villagers and distributing warning leaflets.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


How a Pathologist Reshaped Seoul's Politics
LEAD: Unwittingly, Dr.
Hwang Juck Joon helped set into motion the cycle of protest and democratic progress that has dramatically reshaped South Korean politics over the last year.


ROH SET TO SHARE LEADERSHIP POSTS
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo is ready to share leadership posts with the opposition in the National Assembly after his party's losses in legislative elections, party officials said today.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: LAMB is the meat most closely associated with spring, but the term spring lamb is often misused by restaurants and retail shops.
A real spring lamb should be less than a year old and weigh between 40 and 60 pounds.
Such lamb is prized for its tenderness.


A Second Festival of Serious Iconoclasm
LEAD: ''Serious Fun!,'' the experimental arts festival that brought downtown performance art to Lincoln Center for the first time last year, is to return to Alice Tully Hall next July with an expanded series of iconoclastic performance, dance and musical events.


BOLIVIAN PEASANTS PIN HOPES ON COCA
LEAD: Despite the increased momentum of anti-drug operations in Bolivia, new plantings of coca bush dot the main growing area for the raw material of cocaine.


Economic Scene; Soviet Reforms Meet Reality
LEAD: EVEN the most enthusiastic admirers in the West of perestroika predicted that the Soviet economy would slow to a crawl while enterprises retooled and learned to fend for themselves in free markets.
But through miscalculation or political expediency, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, chose to sell the effort to restructure the economy and to reduce rigidity in the Soviet system as painless change.


Gullah Cooking: Improvising on Cultures Past
LEAD: WHEREVER Vertamae Smart-Grosvenor is, she cooks. ''I think that's why my friends keep me around,'' she said, as she tried to find her way around a ''borrowed'' kitchen in South Carolina's low country near Charleston, not far from where she was born. ''They always say, 'Come see me and stay over,' and they want me to cook.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Kohde-Kilsch Advances: Claudia Kohde-Kilsch of West Germany, seeded third, overpowered Kathy Caversazio of Italy, 6-0, 6-1, yesterday in the second round of the Italian Open in Rome.
Play was suspended because of rain before Chris Evert, seeded first, could play against Ni-cole Provis of Australia.


Zenith National Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Zenith National Insurance (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b12,599,000
b11,994,000
Per share
.65
.57
Shares outst
19,411,000
20,954,000
b-Includes a realized gain on investments of $609,000 and $2,368,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


With Few Dissenters, Methodists Adopt Hymnal and Worship Book
LEAD: The United Methodist Church has seldom been as united as it was today when its chief policy-making body adopted a revised hymnal and book of worship.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Retailing as Usual


Lecture and Chair
LEAD: Yasuhiro Nakasone, who was Prime Minister of Japan for five years ending last October, will give a lecture on Japanese-American relations at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies on May 10.
Not coincidentally, on that day the graduate school will establish the Yasuhiro Nakasone Chair in Japanese Studies, a professorship endowed by the Japan Shipbuilding Industry Foundation.


Computer Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Computer Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
27,166,000
25,017,000
Net loss
2,037,000
b597,000
b-Includes a loss of $299,000 from discontinued operations.


Review/Music; St. Martin Chamber Orchestra
LEAD: For the second of their two Manhattan concerts this season, Neville Marriner and his Academy of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields London chamber orchestra offered a really lovely program Monday night at Carnegie Hall.


U.S. Agencies Submit Plans for Drug Testing
LEAD: Final rules for random drug testing of Government employees ranging from the White House chief of staff to secretaries were presented to Congress today by Federal agencies.


Entertainment Publications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Entertainment Publications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,693,000
16,849,000
Net inc
3,429,000
c301,000
Share earns
.72
.06
9mo rev
56,320,000
46,320,000
Net inc
b7,231,000
c3,094,000
Share earns
1.51
.65


Pueblo International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Pueblo International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
207,262,000
189,835,000
Net loss
b3,029,000
c2,005,000
Share earns
-
.56
Net loss
b480,000
c6,774,000
Share earns
-
1.88
b-Included a pretax charge of about $2.8 million for both periods from an inventory writedown, settlement of a tax withholding claim and the establishment of several reserves; the quarter also included a loss of $16,000 from a reversal of a tax credit; the year also included an after-tax charge of $1.5 million on


Landlord Is Held for Violations
LEAD: A former Brooklyn landlord was arrested yesterday on criminal charges of ''willfully and recklessly'' failing to maintain an apartment building that had 230 housing violations, the authorities said.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Lakers Edge Spurs To Sweep Series
LEAD: Magic Johnson had 25 points and 11 assists, and Mychal Thompson scored 23 points tonight as the Los Angeles Lakers beat the San Antonio Spurs, 109-107, and advanced to the semifinal round of the Western Conference playoffs.


Corning Officer Says Revere Deal Isn't Last
LEAD: The acquisition by Corning Glass Works of Revere Ware Inc., its closest competitor in household cookware, marked the first outside venture for Corning in the housewares industry.
But last week's deal is unlikely to be the last, said Edward T. Fogarty, who has turned around Corning's ailing consumer products division since arriving in 1983.


South Africans Separate Twins Joined at Head
LEAD: A 40-member medical team today successfully separated 16-month-old twin girls joined at the back of the head.
The 7 1/2-hour operation took place at a hospital on the outskirts of this sprawling black satellite city of Johannesburg.


Micro Mask Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Micro Mask Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,671,000
6,303,000
Net inc
b563,000
c439,000
Share earns
.25
-
6mo sales
18,826,000
12,095,000
Net inc
b1,390,000
c934,000
Share earns
.62
-
b-After tax credits of $226,000 for the quarter and $558,000 for the 6 months.


70 Held in Brazil Drug Raid
LEAD: The police seized more than 330 pounds of pure cocaine and arrested at least 70 people in the southwestern state of Mato Grosso do Sul, a police spokesman said today.
The spokesman, Carlos Geraldi, said the police discovered the cocaine, bound for Spain, in raids on private homes Monday and today.


National Gypsum Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*National Gypsum Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
320,126,000
322,825,000
Net loss
b12,290,000
4,621,000
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $2.9 million resulting from the repurchase of $69.9 million face value of the company's outstanding discount debentures.


Copier Line Introduced By Xerox
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation yesterday introduced a major series of copiers, including one model that will end its years of resistance to selling low-priced personal copiers.


A Deep-Fried Comfort Food And Sizzling Taste of Mexico
LEAD: EACH of the electric-orange picnic tables in one of Tijuana's best-known restaurants holds a basket of deep-fried pork skins, a few small wedges of lime and a dish of salsa.


Lessons
LEAD: ''Education,'' wrote Epictetus, ''means this: To be learning what is your own, and what is not your own.'' From the discourses recorded by his student, Arrian, we know that the great Stoic teacher was talking about self-knowledge, the long and difficult journey through the psyche and the soul.


The Reign Of McEnroe
LEAD: ''BUT who needs it more, do you need tennis more, or does tennis need you more?'' Diane Sawyer asked John McEnroe on ''60 Minutes'' Sunday night.


Jane Byrne Joins Edelman
LEAD: Edelman Public Relations, the nation's largest privately held public-relations agency, said today that Chicago's former Mayor, Jane M. Byrne, had joined the firm as a senior public affairs consultant.


Welbilt Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Welbilt Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
57,665,000
48,210,000
Net inc
3,604,000
2,791,000
Share earns
.44
.34


Pacificare Health Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Pacificare Health Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
107,472,000
74,979,000
Net inc
2,073,000
674,000
Share earns
.37
.11
Shares outst
5,468,000
5,968,000
6mo rev
199,587,000
137,249,000
Net inc
2,523,000
1,273,000
Share earns
.45
.21
Shares outst
5,571,000
6,011,000


National Presto Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*National Presto Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,499,000
17,405,000
Net inc
3,178,000
3,085,000
Share earns
.43
.42


Lynam Is Re-signed
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers, who failed this season to make the playoffs for the first time in 13 years, yesterday signed Jim Lynam, an assistant who took over as head coach in midseason when Matt Guokas was dismissed.
Lynam, whose 16-23 record as coach was not as good as the team's 20-23 mark under Guokas, received a three-year contract.


Another Moor of Venice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Precision Castparts Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Precision Castparts Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
108,475,000
96,662,000
Net inc
9,259,000
8,578,000
Share earns
.57
.51
Yr sales
414,441,000
326,252,000
Net inc
36,777,000
21,208,000
Share earns
2.27
1.35


No-Mess Chocolate . . . And No-Risk Bubbly
LEAD: Popping open a bottle of warm champagne that has just been agitated can send the cork rocketing away at 200 miles an hour.
So Theta Resources Inc., a San Francisco industrial design company, has come up with a champagne stopper that it says could prevent such errant corks from nicking a chandelier or injuring a guest.


Biden Resting After Surgery For Second Brain Aneurysm
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. underwent surgery today to correct an aneurysm in an artery that supplies blood to the right side of the brain, a spokesman for the Walter Reed Army Medical Center said.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  For Mom on Her Day Instead of sending last-minute flowers for Mother's Day, how about breakfast in bed?


Tractor Sales Are Rolling Again
LEAD: This is planting season in the upper Midwest, and for the first time in years Neil Horning is having trouble supplying all the tractors and other equipment that farmers need to get their crops in.


Vietnam Refugee Worries Over Fate of Sister
LEAD: For 19-year-old Nyugen Anh Tuan, there is no fonder dream than having his family join him here.


Kansas Power &amp; Light Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Kansas Power &amp; Light Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
453,248,000
396,714,000
Net inc
32,719,000
29,766,000
Share earns
.93
.81


U.S.-Japan Trade Talks Fail
LEAD: The United States and Japan tonight broke off negotiations over American beef and citrus exports and the United States said it would challenge Japan's import quotas under international trading rules.


U.S. Reportedly Knew of Noriega Role in Killing
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega participated in the killing of a priest in Panama in 1971, a fact that was almost immediately known to the United States because of intelligence monitoring of Panamanian military communications, according to a former United States Government official.


Corrections
LEAD: The headline yesterday on an obituary of William H. Van Rensselaer misstated his occupation.
He was executive director of the National Association of State Boards of Accountancy.


Pitfalls and Opportunities in Arms Sales
LEAD: The Reagan Administration expects U.S. arms sales to reach $15 billion this year.
Not long ago, that news would have touched off earnest but misleading debate on the evils of all arms exports.


DUKAKIS STRETCHES HIS LEAD, SWEEPING OHIO AND INDIANA
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis lengthened his already formidable lead today for the Democratic Presidential nomination, winning strong victories over the Rev.
Jesse Jackson in the Indiana and Ohio primaries.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on the Washington Talk page on Monday about the Office of Legal Counsel described the Supreme Court appointment of Associate Justice William Rehnquist incorrectly.
It was made by President Nixon, not President Reagan.


Henley Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Henley Manufacturing (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
155,300,000
149,100,000
Net inc
13,900,000
4,100,000
Share earns
1.25
-
The latest quarter included a gain of $8.4 million from sale of investment in ACI International Ltd.


S.E.C. to Vote on Proposal To Broaden Trading Halts
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission will vote on Thursday on a proposed rule that could lead to a universal ban on trading of a stock in all domestic markets when an important news announcement is pending.


Discount Ruling: Slight Impact Seen
LEAD: A Supreme Court ruling on Monday will encourage some big, traditional merchants to put pressure on manufacturers of popular consumer products to stop supplying discounters, discount store executives and consumer advocates said yesterday.


Meese Backing of Event in Japan Investigated
LEAD: The Office of Government Ethics started an investigation today into a letter signed by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d and sent to 30,000 people encouraging them to attend a conference in Japan, the head of the office said tonight.


Mobutu Banishes 2 Zairian Foes to Internal Exile
LEAD: The Government of President Mobutu Sese Seko has arrested and sent into internal exile two leaders of the main opposition grouping, which has called for changing Zaire's one-party state into a two-party system.


Talking Up an Idea
LEAD: For years, President Reagan has been unsuccessfully urging Congress to give him authority to veto part of a bill while approving the rest, rather than being forced to reject a lengthy piece of legislation because of one objectionable feature.
Now some of the President's conservative allies are arguing that he already has that power - or at least something approaching it.


400 Anti-Abortionists Held in Queens Protest
LEAD: More than 400 anti-abortion protesters were charged with disorderly conduct yesterday after they shut the office of Dr.
Farzan Shirazi at 83-06 Queens Boulevard in Elmhurst, Queens.


The Joke's on Meese
LEAD: When a high-ranking White House official asked Leonard Garment, the Republican lawyer and punster, at what point he thought the heat to quit would finally reach his friend, Mr.
Meese, Mr.
Garment replied, ''It all depends when Bush comes to shove.''


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly  DISARMAMENT COMMISSION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council  SOCIAL COMMITTEE - 4 P.M.


Reward for Unseld
LEAD: Another coach who took over a team during this past season also had a rewarding day.
Wes Unseld, who guided the Washington Bullets into the playoffs, was among four men inducted yesterday into the Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass.


Reagan to Press Religious Freedom at Summit
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he would call for greater religious freedom when he travels to the Soviet Union this month.


A SOVIET WARNING ON POLISH STRIKES
LEAD: In a sign of growing official concern here about the spreading labor unrest in Poland, the Soviet press and television warned tonight that strikes there endangered the Polish economy.


McEnroe Is Upset By Perez, No. 136
LEAD: John McEnroe understood there would be days like this, when he would stumble in his bid to become a dominant player again.
On the second point of yesterday's match at Forest Hills against Diego Perez of Uruguay, McEnroe slipped and fell following his serve to the net, suffering abrasions on his leg and hand.


Accord in Fragrance Suit
LEAD: The Elizabeth Taylor Cosmetics Company, which is a subsidiary of Chesebrough-Pond's Inc., and Annick Goutal Inc. have settled a lawsuit over the right to use the trademark Elizabeth Taylor's Passion for fragrance products.


The Journalism School At Columbia Is 75
LEAD: The Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University is celebrating its 75th anniversary this week with a series of seminars on journalistic issues and reunions of old grads.


WINE TALK
LEAD: THE public relations director of a large California winery was asked recently what she considered to be the role of wine writers.
She replied, in effect, ''To describe what a wine tastes like to someone who has never tasted it.''


Global Marine Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Global Marine Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
29,400,000
15,800,000
Net loss
34,000,000
32,800,000


Gold, Ignoring Oil's Rally, Declines to 6-Week Lows
LEAD: Prices of gold futures fell yesterday to their lowest levels in more than six weeks, prompting conjecture that the metal could sink as low as $400 an ounce in coming months.


Bavaro Arrested
LEAD: Mark Bavaro, the Giants' All-Pro tight end, was among the 503 people arrested Monday during a demonstration in front of an abortion clinic on Manhattan's East Side.


Employers Casualty Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Employers Casualty Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b15,076,549
b10,951,263
Share earns
1.50
1.09
b-Includes capital gains of $407,914 and $550 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


Moore-Handley Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Moore-Handley Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
25,813,000
23,600,000
Net loss
53,000
b344,000
Share earns
-
.14
b-Net income  The latest first quarter results included a tax benefit of $83,000 because of the adoption of FAS No.


'Inspect Unto Others' Is a Good Way to Save
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kelly Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Kelly Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
296,145,000
260,290,000
Net inc
12,254,000
9,345,000
Share earns
.51
.39


Edberg Surviving, but It's a Struggle
LEAD: During the breaks between games these past two days, Stefan Edberg of Sweden sat with a white towel draped on his head, as if he really did not want to see.
Given a choice, Edberg said he would rather be in Europe right now, resting in his London flat or perhaps practicing on the red clay in preparation for the French Open later this month.


Diagnostek Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagnostek Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,864,500
3,169,580
Net inc
b417,560
487,300
Share earns
.03
.05
Yr rev
10,340,000
1,160,000
Net inc
515,000
166,000
Share earns
.05
.01
b-After a loss of $663,816 from marketable securities.


AA Importing Co reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AA Importing Co
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
37,355,904
36,307,739
Net inc
b185,745
793,115
Share earns
.07
.30
b-After a gain of $711,064 from an accounting change.


Beta Blockers and Mood: Are Tales True?
LEAD: A popular class of drugs for heart problems and high blood pressure cause side effects of depression, drowsiness and mental dullness far less often then conventional wisdom holds, according to a new study.


Quaker Chemical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quaker Chemical Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
41,997,000
35,188,000
Net inc
2,959,000
2,612,000
Share earns
.46
.39


Harleysville Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harleysville Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b3,652,000
b2,455,000
Share earns
.51
.34
b-After capital gains of $4,000 for the latest first quarter and $329,000 for the year-ago period.


Air Cargo Equipment Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Air Cargo Equipment Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,411,625
3,958,561
Net inc
342,698
219,490
Share earns
.14
.08


Community Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bankshares Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
266,000
540,000
Per share
.16
.32
9mo net inc
965,000
1,686,000
Per share
.57
1.02


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Evert Wins: Chris Evert, the No. 1-seeded player, got off to a slow start yesterday in the Italian Open in Rome before beating Nicole Provis of Australia, 7-6, 6-2, in a second-round match.
Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina, the second-seeded player, also played her first match in the $200,000 event, advancing to the round of 16 with a 6-4, 6-2 victory over Amy Schwartz, a qualifier from the United States.


Allegheny Petition
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc., the maker of Sunbeam and Oster appliances and Northern electric blankets, said a number of its non-consumer products businesses had joined in the company's filing in February for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy code.


House Votes to Cut Spending on Anti-Missile Plan
LEAD: The House of Representatives, disregarding the threat of a veto, voted today to reduce the spending ceiling on President Reagan's plan for a space-based defense against missiles next year.
It set the limit at $3.5 billion, $1.4 billion less than the Administration requested.


South Carolina Federal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Carolina Federal Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b292,000
c1,022,000
Per share
.14
.49
6mo net inc
b1,694,000
c1,249,000
Per share
.81
.60
b-Includes a tax benefit of $18,000 and $102,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


American Ecology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Ecology Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,000,000
12,400,000
Net inc
b67,000
209,000
Share earns
.02
.07
b-Includes a gain of $700,000 from an accounting change.


Ogilvy Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ogilvy Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
190,060,000
161,636,000
Net inc
3,509,000
1,440,000
Share earns
.24
.10


Scuba Feud: Underworked Bravest vs. Prideful Finest
LEAD: Behind the feud between New York City's Police and Fire Departments are firefighters who spend less than 10 percent of their time fighting fires and fear staffing cuts, city bureaucrats eager to use the firefighters more fully and proud police officers jealous of their role.


Corrections Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corrections Corp of America (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,837,145
4,017,994
Net loss
366,436
385,731


Financial Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Financial Corp of America (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
63,151,000
b9,207,000
Per share
-
.17
b-Net income  The company said it added $107 million to its reserve for losses on loans and real estate in the latest quarter, bringing the reserve to $1.2 billion at March 31.


Terrorism Through the U.N. Looking Glass
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yachting's Crocodile Dundee
LEAD: IT wasn't over, but Ben Lexcen knew it was over.
Out on the blue water of the Indian Ocean off Fremantle, Australia, early last year, the 12-Meter yacht Kookaburra III was about to lose to Stars &amp; Stripes in the third race of what would be a 4-0 sweep in the America's Cup final.
Not even bothering to watch the finish through the wide windows of the press boat, the designer of the winged keel that enabled Australia II to win the cup in 1983 shook his head.


Women Work for the Same Reasons Men Do
LEAD: To the Editor:


STUDY DISCOUNTS GENETIC TEST RISK
LEAD: Regulation of small field tests of organisms developed through techniques of genetic manipulation is adequate to prevent most potential problems in the environment, according to a Congressional study released today.


Julian H. Webb, Scientist, 85
LEAD: Dr.
Julian H. Webb, director of the physics division of the Eastman Kodak Company, died of pneumonia April 28 in the Kirkhaven Nursing Home in Rochester, where he lived.
He was 85 years old.


Puerto Rican Cement Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puerto Rican Cement Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,771,000
18,877,000
Net inc
3,718,000
1,998,000
Share earns
1.98
1.01


Newport News Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newport News Savings
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
367,000
b640,000
Per share
-
.46
9mo net inc
543,000
2,360,000
Per share
.39
1.71
b-Net income


Cordis Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cordis Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
35,387,000
29,127,000
Net inc
b2,219,000
c54,078,000
Share earns
.17
-
9mo sales
96,332,000
76,353,000
Net inc
b5,158,000
c55,163,000
Share earns
.38
-


Hampton Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hampton Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
35,575,000
32,242,000
Net inc
720,000
674,000
Share earns
.20
.18


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu's views of religion and politics in South Africa misidentified a biblical figure cited by the Archbishop as having defied secular authority.
He was Nathan.


Promoting Mothers and Their Day
LEAD: Ted Kaufman was eager to hang up the phone because he had little time to waste: after all, the Outstanding Mother Awards ceremony was less than 365 days away.


Books of The Times; Path to Baseball's Pantheon: To Win, Only to Win
LEAD:  John McGraw  By Charles C. Alexander  Illustrated. 358 pages. Viking. $19.95.


Chariot Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chariot Group (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,371,000
11,102,000
Net inc
14,000
454,000
Share earns
.01
.18
Year-ago figures are restated to reflect results of a company acquired in 1987.


Optimism at New York's Tabloids
LEAD: For the first time in memory, New York City has no afternoon daily.


Independent Insurance Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Insurance Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b4,182,000
c5,882,000
Share earns
.62
.81
b-After capital losses of $87,000.
c-After capital gains of $771,000.


Paul Vario, 73; Called a Leader Of Crime Group
LEAD: Paul Vario, a convicted gangster who was said to have been a leader in the Lucchese crime family for more than three decades, died of lung failure Tuesday in a Fort Worth Federal prison, where he was serving a 10-year sentence for extorting payoffs from air-freight companies at Kennedy International Airport.


Kansas City Life Insurance Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas City Life Insurance Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,952,000
4,836,000
Share earns
.80
.63


White Sox Hand Clemens First Loss
LEAD: Greg Walker and Ivan Calderon hit home runs tonight as the Chicago White Sox beat Roger Clemens, the ace of the Boston pitching staff, for the fifth consecutive time, 6-2.


A Celebration of Hospitality
LEAD: WHAT it describes as a ''celebration of 100 years of hospitality in high places'' is planned by the venerable Appalachian Mountain Club this year.


Fix-Up for the Capital's Elderly Poor
LEAD: For years water seeped through the roof, rotting the ceilings and peeling the paint from the walls of the tall brick house in southeast Washington where 87-year-old Mary Burgess lives with her 69-year-old blind son.


Barry, R G Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barry, R G Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,060,000
11,727,000
Net loss
929,000
419,000


British Choir Opens U.S. Tour
LEAD: The Choir of St.
Bride's Church in London began its first American tour today with a noontime concert here at King's Chapel, the first Anglican church in New England.


The Editorial Notebook; Your Stars for the 80's
LEAD: For those born under the sign of Aquarius, here's an amazing prediction - one of you is going to be President.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Pariahs in the Studio?


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: THEY are small acts of terrorism, at least when measured against hijacked airliners and explosions at U.S.O. clubs.
The extortion payment may be milk money, the injuries limited to a black eye and bruised pride.
Yet the young victims of bullies describe their ordeals in terms much like those used by adult victims of terrorism.


NICARAGUA DETAINS OPPOSITION CHIEFS
LEAD: About two dozen opposition leaders were detained today as they sought to visit a union hall where construction workers are conducting a hunger strike.


Chesapeake Utilities Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chesapeake Utilities Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,057,264
17,723,478
Net inc
1,930,474
1,681,641
Share earns
1.20
1.07


Accounts
LEAD: *
The Drackett Company to the UniWorld Group for advertising its Nutrament drink to the black and Hispanic markets.


A Tiny Heart Pump Saves Its First Life, Researchers Report
LEAD: An experimental pump about the size of a pencil eraser that is inserted into the heart through an artery in the leg has helped save the life of the first patient to receive it, doctors at a hospital in Houston said yesterday.


Arx Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arx Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,318,000
15,111,000
Net inc
852,000
1,562,000
Share earns
.10
.23
9mo sales
52,678,000
38,361,000
Net inc
b2,982,000
3,638,000
Share earns
.37
.55


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bradford National Life Insurance Co., Lexington, Ky., an operating unit of Whitehall Financial Group, named William F. Healy president and chief executive, succeeding Ronald S. Scowby, who will become president and chief executive of the parent company, while remaining a Bradford director.


Security Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Federal Savings (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
176,976
b309,225
Per share
-
.21
Yr net inc
141,339
929,263
Per share
.10
-
b-Net income  The company converted to stock ownership in November 1986.


Amnesty Program Comes to a Close
LEAD: Last-minute applicants waiting in line at the Immigration and Naturalization Service center in Houston yesterday as thousands filed for amnesty on the last day of the nation's historic program.
Page B11. (NYT/F. Carter Smith)


Mets Blank Astros; Yanks Rally to Win; Mets 8, Astros 0
LEAD: The way the pitchers have been pitching the Mets don't need much hitting.
The way the hitters have been hitting the Mets don't need much pitching.


American Learning Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Learning Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,658,000
2,919,000
Net loss
370,000
591,000
6mo rev
6,979,000
5,676,000
Net loss
997,000
927,000


Poles Square Off; Solidarity Is Skillful at Using Tension To Revive Pressures on Government
LEAD: After a respite of several years, the strikes in Poland have the outlawed Solidarity union and the men around Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski squared off again like two tired boxers.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We applaud the changes that have taken place and encourage the Soviets to go farther.


Federated Officer Quits
LEAD: Norman S. Matthews has resigned as president and chief operating officer of Federated Department Stores, whose acquisition by the Campeau Corporation of Toronto was completed this week.
Mr.
Matthews said he planned to pursue other business opportunities.
Before being named Federated's president in March 1987, he was a Federated vice chairman for three years.


Arctic Alaska Fisheries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arctic Alaska Fisheries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
48,700,000
20,800,000
Net inc
9,100,000
4,000,000
Share earns
.71
.31
Year-ago quarter results are pro forma.
The company went public this year.


Bill on Smokers' Suits Praised
LEAD: Major health organizations today endorsed a bill that would enable smokers and their families to sue tobacco companies for damages on the ground that deceptive advertising for cigarettes resulted in serious injury or death.


Designers Are Honored
LEAD: The Arthur Ross Awards, given annually by Classical America, a group that supports the classical tradition in American fine arts, were presented Monday at the National Academy of Design in New York City.
The awards were presented by Anne L. Armstrong, a former Ambassador to Britain.


Yields Post An Increase
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were higher for the week ended yesterday, following the general trend in interest rates.


Analytical Surveys Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analytical Surveys Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,024,656
539,356
Net inc
b44,040
20,768
Share earns
.02
.01
6mo sales
1,906,678
1,079,534
Net inc
b75,524
40,196
Share earns
.03
.02
b-Includes tax credits of $9,027 and $13,750 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Tentative Amnesty Extension
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ordered immigration officials yesterday to continue accepting amnesty applications from one group of illegal aliens in New York State for at least two more weeks while the court considers a lawsuit seeking an extension of the amnesty deadline.


Mortgage-Backed Securities Are Offered by Freddie Mac
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, known as Freddie Mac, is offering $500 million of real estate mortgage investment conduit securities through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Vehicle Sales Down 2.6% In Late April
LEAD: Late April sales of American-made cars and light trucks were down 2.6 percent from the comparable period last year, the eight domestic manufacturers reported today.
But analysts and auto executives said the year-to-year decline was somewhat misleading because last year's period was unusually strong.


People Magazine Offers New One-Topic Issue
LEAD: Along with the regular issue of People magazine that shows up on newsstands May 16 will be another special one-advertiser, one-topic People selling for more than twice the price.


Cuomo Sees 'Hard Decisions' on Budget
LEAD: Governor Cuomo said today that an expected budget shortfall of $300 million would require lawmakers to make ''hard decisions,'' but he offered assurances that no cuts in basic services would be made.


Napco Security Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Napco Security Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,842,730
7,639,003
Net inc
1,192,867
968,574
Share earns
.27
.22
9mo sales
25,421,122
20,746,109
Net inc
3,010,919
2,584,027
Share earns
.69
.59


10-Year Offering By Seagram Unit
LEAD: Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons Inc., a unit of the Seagram Company, is offering $250 million of 9.65 percent notes due in 1998, at a price of 99.75, to yield 9.689 percent, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Commerce Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancorp Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
433,425
361,165
Per share
.33
.28


Police Broaden Queens Drug Crackdown
LEAD: Defendants in Queens drug cases are pleading guilty to felony charges at a far swifter pace since a court unit devoted exclusively to narcotics cases began operating in the borough five weeks ago, prosecutors say.


First New Hampshire Banks reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First New Hampshire Banks (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,699,000
b8,288,000
Per share
.31
.70
b-After a gain of $1.9 million from an accounting change.


Andover Controls reports earnings for Qtr to April 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andover Controls (OTC)
Qtr to April 3
1988
1987
Sales
5,171,514
4,925,684
Net inc
634,700
574,225
Share earns
.18
.16
9mo sales
17,285,443
17,003,368
Net inc
2,170,442
1,922,984
Share earns
.60
.53


CMS Enhancements Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CMS Enhancements Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
35,647,000
28,209,000
Net inc
661,000
598,000
Share earns
.08
.08
Shares outst
8,680,000
7,238,000
9mo sales
109,234,000
68,534,000
Net inc
1,475,000
1,446,000
Share earns
.19
.20
Shares outst
7,840,000
7,123,019


Review/Ballet; Grandeur and Spectacle
LEAD: A Shakespearean tragedy was transformed into dance on Tuesday House when American Ballet Theater offered the first of a series of performances of Sir Kenneth MacMillan's choreographic version of ''Romeo and Juliet.'' The ballet, to Prokofiev's score, will continue for the rest of this week at the Met, and Saturday night's performance will be telecast nationally by PBS as part of the ''Live From Lincoln


Candidates Viewing California Primary as a Dress Rehearsal for November
LEAD: It might have seemed pointless on the surface, but Vice President Bush arrived in California today to open his campaign for the state's Republican Presidential primary.
On the Democratic side, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson is to follow Thursday and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts will arrive a week later.


Health at the Top
LEAD: With the current crop of candidates more or less youthful and apparently healthy, the health of the next President has not been an issue in the campaign.
Nor does the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, appear to be in anything but the pink of condition.
But The Harvard Medical Alumni Bulletin, in its current issue, has published a statistical reminder that the health of those who lead the two superpowers ought never to be taken for granted.


The New York Times/CBS News Poll; A Portrait of Ohio Voters
LEAD:
Dukakis
Jackson
TOTAL
63%
28%
Whites
79
14
Blacks
4
95
18-29 years old
50
43
30-44
60
33
45-59
67
29
60 and older
74
22
Less than high school
72
27
High school graduate
71
21
Some college
54


U.S. Will Mail AIDS Advisory to All Households
LEAD: The Federal Government today began a three-week campaign to inform Americans about AIDS, focused around a pamphlet to be mailed to every household in the nation.


Matrix Science reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matrix Science (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,061,000
21,834,000
Net inc
989,000
2,660,000
Share earns
.13
.34
9mo sales
51,921,000
55,085,000
Net inc
1,419,000
4,790,000
Share earns
.18
.61


Joel J. Shorin, Company President, 65
LEAD: Joel J. Shorin, retired president of a chewing gum company that includes baseball cards with its product, died last Sunday at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 65 years old and lived in Kings Point, L.I.


RJR Nabisco Test Of Cigarette Set
LEAD: The nation's largest cigarette manufacturer, RJR Nabisco Inc., plans to begin test-marketing an almost smokeless cigarette in the final three months of the year.
The plan was announced at the company's annual stockholders meeting in Atlanta.
The company is not saying where the cigarette will be sold or under what brand name, said David Fishel, a spokesman for the R.


It's Never Say Die for Knicks and Devils in Playoffs; Brown's Goal in Overtime Beats Bruins
LEAD: The Devils accomplished the split they vigorously sought against the Bruins in Boston Garden, but it wasn't routine.


Essef Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Essef Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
35,135,000
23,255,000
Net inc
1,742,000
1,548,000
Share earns
.36
.42
Shares outst
4,884,200
3,734,200
6mo sales
67,724,000
38,760,000
Net inc
2,851,000
1,776,000
Share earns
.58
.48


Fight for Rowntree
LEAD: The food company Jacobs Suchard A.G., which is competing against Nestle S.A. for the British confectioner Rowntree P.L.C., said it had raised its holding in Rowntree to 23.48 percent from 21.14 percent.
In the British press, the assaults by the two Swiss companies on the producer of Kit Kat bars, Smarties children's candy and Polo mints have been called the ''chocolate wars.


Pope Picks High-Level Group To Go to Moscow Church Fete
LEAD: The Vatican announced today that Pope John Paul II, hoping to open ''new paths'' for peace in the world, had named a delegation to attend a major religious celebration in Moscow that will be the largest group of Roman Catholic Church leaders ever to visit the Soviet Union.


It's Never Say Die for Knicks and Devils in Playoffs; Celtics Are Sunk By Free Throws
LEAD: The Knicks found two friends at Madison Square Garden last night: Johnny Newman and the free-throw line.
As a result, they stayed alive in their playoff series against the Boston Celtics.


Electronic Associates Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electronic Associates Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,922,000
7,855,000
Net inc
65,000
163,000
Share earns
.02
.06


Seibels Bruce Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seibels Bruce Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b3,583,917
b2,959,515
Share earns
.49
.41
b-Includes a capital gain of $342,822 for the latest quarter and a loss on investments of $10,130 for the year-ago quarter.


Eastern Loss Seen From Safety Inquiry
LEAD: Frank Lorenzo, the chairman of the Texas Air Corporation, said today that the Federal safety investigation of Eastern Airlines would cause the carrier to post a loss for the current quarter.


Review/Concert; Aeolian Chamber Group
LEAD: At Town Hall Monday night, the Aeolian Chamber Players introduced a brief new work by Peter Lieberson, entitled (without benefit of program-note elucidation) ''Raising the Gaze.'' It is a six-minute burst of drum-driven, occasionally jazzy energy, with sharply pointed instrumentation (flute, clarinet, string trio, piano, percussion), spiky but not dreary dissonance and an authentic rhythmic life that made it a pleasure to follow.


F.A.A. Widens Inspections for Boeing Cracks
LEAD: Reacting to further data produced in the inquiry into the rupture of an Aloha Airlines jet over Hawaii a week ago, the Government yesterday widened the scope of emergency Boeing 737 inspections that have been looking for skin cracking and corrosion.


Concern Rises on Effect Of Meese's Many Trips
LEAD: If you were looking for Edwin Meese 3d last year, chances were 1 in 3 you wouldn't have found him in the capital.


CHRYSLER REACHES PACT WITH UNION
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation and the United Automobile Workers reached agreement today on a new 28-month contract covering about 60,000 union members.


Snake Smuggling Is Charged
LEAD: The owner of a wholesale tropical fish business was charged yesterday with smuggling about 700 baby boa constrictors into the United States, Federal officials said yesterday.
The snakes are protected under international trade agreements.
The suspect, Agremiro Espana, 43 years old, owner of the Miro Espana Company in Jamaica, Queens, was also charged with violating the Lacey Act, which outlaws interstate or foreign transportation of illegally captured wildlife.


Back in Court
LEAD: The National Football League Players Association has returned to Federal court in Minneapolis in an attempt to overturn the N.F.L.'s restrictions on free agency.
The union thought it scored a victory last week when the National Labor Relations Board did not agree with team owners' contention that the players had refused to bargain in good faith.


Two Authors, 2 Routes to Big Money
LEAD: The publishing industry's insatiable appetite for big books was underscored anew by two major acquisitions this week.
Yesterday the Putnam Publishing Group acquired the next novel by Lawrence Sanders for $2.85 million in an auction involving eight houses, while two days ago Simon &amp; Schuster and Pocket


Dynascan Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dynascan Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
44,280,000
40,736,000
Net inc
902,000
b862,000
Share earns
.13
.12
b-Includes income of $33,000 from discontinued operations.


Zenith's Harvard Cheer
LEAD: The Zenith Electronics Corporation said today that the Harvard Business School was recommending that all candidates for a master's degree in business administration who start class in September acquire the new Zenith Data Systems portable Supersport 286 portable personal computer.
It said the new model features a 20-megabyte hard-disk drive and a backlit screen.


Fairfield Communities Land Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fairfield Communities Land Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
59,337,000
71,270,000
Net loss
3,478,000
821,000


Review/Television; An Unsparing British View of Britain
LEAD: The contrast can be startling.
American television dramas are almost dottily optimistic, constantly looking for an ending of uplift and inspiration.
The British, however, seem to take delight in gloom, regularly turning out social indictments that are scathing in their bleakness.
Little wonder that Margaret


Central Fidelity Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Fidelity Banks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
11,754,000
11,574,000
Per share
.76
.74


Hospital Roommate Can Affect Recovery Time, Study Finds
LEAD: Hospital roommates can affect the course of recovery from surgery, new research indicates.
Recovery time was shorter by about a day and a half for patients awaiting surgery who shared a room with someone who had already undergone surgery, rather than someone who was also waiting for an operation.


Data Switch Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Switch Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
26,053,000
23,456,000
Net inc
160,000
b452,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


French Hostages Freed in Beirut; Boon for Chirac
LEAD: Four days before France's presidential election, Prime Minister Jacques Chirac triumphantly announced tonight that three French hostages had been freed in Lebanon after three years of captivity.


Ad for Pepsi On Soviet TV
LEAD: Pepsico Inc., which says that Pepsi-Cola was the first Western consumer product offered in the Soviet Union (in 1974), now claims to be the first American company to have bought commercial time on Soviet television.


American Medical Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Medical Electronics Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,903,912
1,500,068
Net loss
b4,044,273
c126,222
Share earns
-
.04
b-After a tax credit of $63,134 and a charge of $4,238,600 from a litigation settlement.


Review/Theater; Ketron's 'No time Flat'
LEAD: As the author of ''Asian Shade,'' ''Fresh Horses'' and many other plays, Larry Ketron has sensitively delineated lives in America's heartland.
The landscape may appear to be small, but Mr.
Ketron's stories are brushed with humanity.
In his new play, ''No Time Flat'' (at the WPA Theater), the leading role is, uncharacteristically, that of a writer.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.We have a ranch house that is built on a hillside.
During a heavy rain water seeps into the basement where the concrete floor joins the wall that is against the side of the hill.
I know you have recommended perimeter drains for problems like ours, but for us this would mean ripping out lots of paneling and breaking up the concrete floor.


Beirut Christian Clash Feared
LEAD: Lebanon's top Christian political leaders held intensive consultations today in an attempt to avert a violent confrontation between Christian militiamen and Government troops loyal to President Amin Gemayel.


Home Unity Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Unity Savings (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b1,976,000
c1,506,000
Per share
-
.79
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $325,000.
c-Net income and after a gain from discontinued operations of $426,000 and an extraordinary gain of $399,000.


People
LEAD: *
James M. Palumbo has been named senior vice president at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis.


William R. Laidlaw 4th, Writer, 80
LEAD: William R. Laidlaw 4th, a writer, died of throat cancer last Friday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Kearney-National Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kearney-National Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
45,432,000
39,521,000
set inc
2,557,000
2,255,000
Share earns
.45
.40


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  LTV outlined a proposal for ending its bankruptcy, the second-largest in the nation's history, but its insistence that more than $2 billion in pension liabilities be terminated was immediately challenged by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
In September, the Federal agency forced the steel company to administer the pension plans, citing LTV's improving profits.


First Security Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Security Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
8,043,000
7,211,000
Per share
.66
.59


Central Banking System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Banking System Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
424,000
2,029,000
Per share
.10
.45


CityFed Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CityFed Financial (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
471,000
b14,035,000
Per share
-
.62
b-After a gain of $2,470,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.
There were no per share earnings after preferred dividend requirements in the latest period.


Metzenbaum Captures Senate Primary in Ohio
LEAD: Democratic voters in Ohio selected Howard M. Metzenbaum to run for a third term in the United States Senate in a primary Tuesday.


Police Versus Firefighters
LEAD: The scene of a tragic accident is hardly the place for the New York Police and Fire Departments to engage in a shouting match over bureaucratic prerogatives.
Ultimate responsibility for the embarrassing spectacle rests with Mayor Koch, who has let the dispute behind this week's confrontation fester far too long.


NORWAY IS MISSING ATOM ARMS WATER
LEAD: Norway said today that a significant amount of Norwegian heavy water was missing and appeared to have been diverted four years ago into the international black market for materials that can be used to make nuclear weapons.


Tenneco's Earnings Surge
LEAD: The net income of Tenneco Inc. more than doubled in this year's first quarter, helped mainly by a one-time $25 million foreign tax credit, the company said today.
The credit was related to Colombian oil operations.


All-Lunceford Show Is Tribute to a Star of Swing
LEAD: The American Jazz Orchestra was steaming through ''T'ain't What You Do,'' a Jimmie Lunceford Orchestra standard, at a Tuesday afternoon rehearsal in Cooper Union's Great Hall.
As John Lewis, its conductor, beamed from the podium, the horns rose to their feet to finish the last chorus, swinging their saxophones to the irresistible two-beat - and finishing up with grins all around.


POLAND'S BISHOPS NAME 5 MEDIATORS IN LABOR CONFLICT
LEAD: Poland's Roman Catholic bishops, apparently acting with the approval of the Polish authorities, authorized five Catholic laymen today to act as mediators to break the deadlock in labor conflicts now in their second week.


Irving Bank's 'Poison Pill'
LEAD: The Bank of New York Company announced yesterday that it had reached agreement with a majority of the Irving Bank Corporation's 15 preferred shareholders in an attempt to dismantle a ''poison pill'' provision that would make any takeover of the Irving more difficult.


Imasco Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imasco Ltd
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,147,381,000
1,051,931,000
Net inc
44,625,000
b8,561,000
Share earns
.34
.03
b-After a $29,079,000 special charge.
The results are in Canadian dollars.
The company is listed on the Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver stock exchanges.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-17


Citadel Holding Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citadel Holding Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
6,134,000
4,509,000
Per share
1.86
1.30
The year-ago net included non- recurring charges relating to lawsuits and other settlements which reduced earnings by $3.9 million after tax.


Barbara Bush Tends His Image Her Way
LEAD: Scenes from the life of George and Barbara Bush: George at the Wailing Wall, at the Berlin Wall, at the Great Wall; George with a succession of world leaders.


Dollar Closes Mixed on Day With Little Economic News
LEAD: The dollar was mixed against most major currencies yesterday in light domestic trading.
Dealers attributed the situation to a lack of economic news.


Price/Stern/Sloan Publishers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Price/Stern/Sloan Publishers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,175,000
5,933,000
Net inc
130,000
28,000
Share earns
.04
.01


Computer Components reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Components
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,176,045
1,008,003
Net inc
b294,475
c358,216
Share earns
.10
-
9mo sales
8,615,451
4,618,082
Net inc
b381,802
d72,401
Share earns
.13
.04
Shares outst
3,010,839
1,755,000


Plymouth Five Cents Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plymouth Five Cents Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
37,000
121,000
Per share
.02
.05


Hana Biologics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hana Biologics (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,256,000
1,938,000
Net loss
1,731,000
216,000
9mo rev
5,340,000
5,439,000
Net loss
2,884,000
762,000


Life in the 30's
LEAD: IT seems that most of the men in my life have wanted to possess things, but not actually to purchase them.
You see the problem.
If I am hanging around the house and it crosses my mind that, hey, we could use a toaster oven, the next logical step in my mental progression is to go to a store where I will buy a toaster oven, tote it home and toast up a storm.


BT Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BT Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,394,000
1,398,000
Per share
.45
.45


New York City Drops 3 Banks as Underwriters
LEAD: New York City officials stunned Chase Manhattan Bank, Citibank and Chemical Bank yesterday by announcing that the three banks would no longer belong to the elite group of managing underwriters for the more than $1 billion of bonds the city sells each year.


IRT Mugging Victim Seized For Using a Pistol in Defense
LEAD: A 17-year-old high-school student, set upon by six muggers on an IRT subway train in Brooklyn early yesterday, was arrested after he drew a small handgun and wounded one assailant, the transit police said.


Farm Fresh Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Farm Fresh Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
179,943,855
180,949,194
Net loss
1,200,122
b2,374,145
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


Raise the Minimum Wage and Get a Good Return on Investment
LEAD: To the Editor:


3 Airlines in West Again Lead Nation In On-Time Flights
LEAD: Three relatively small airlines that operate primarily in the West and the Southwest posted the best on-time records in March for the second consecutive month, the Department of Transportation reported today.


Allied Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
48,531,354
40,151,764
Net inc
b3,423,164
b3,382,099
Share earns
.51
.52
b-Includes investment gains of $434,743 for the latest quarter and $8,107 for the year-earlier period.


Lawyer May Seek Moynihan Seat
LEAD: A Long Island lawyer and Republican fund-raiser has emerged as a leading contender for his party's nomination for the United States Senate, according to state Republican leaders.


Rover Bid Cleared
LEAD: British Aerospace P.L.C. received clearance from the British Government to proceed with its $:150 million, or $279 million, acquisition of the Government's 99.8 percent stake in the car maker Rover Group P.L.C., the latest in a long line of privatization deals under the Conservative Government of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.


Pulawski Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pulawski Savings
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,407,000
1,528,000
Per share
.72
.81
Yr net inc
2,569,000
2,997,000
Per share
1.34
1.59


Kentucky Derby Notebook; Fashioning a Perfect System
LEAD: The zealous followers of Dosage, an extremely popular system of pedigree analysis, say they have picked the last 58 Kentucky Derby winners.
They are almost certain to claim a 59th straight triumph after Saturday's race.


Del Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Del Laboratories Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
30,462,000
28,433,000
Net inc
1,270,000
1,083,000
Share earns
.92
.73
The company said the latest quarter net share earnings are adjusted to reflect the application of a modification of the treasury stock method.


Expert Panel Affirms Success of Ear Implants For the Profoundly Deaf
LEAD: Evidence clearly shows that electronic devices implanted in the inner ear can help bring sound to many profoundly deaf people, a Federal panel of experts concluded here today.


University Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* University Bank &amp; Trust (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
612,000
550,000
Per share
.15
.15
Shares outst
4,197,000
3,713,000


Tenneco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tenneco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,992,000,000
3,634,000,000
Net inc
63,000,000
b29,000,000
Share earns
.38
.08
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $3 million.
The latest quarter results include a one-time $25 million credit for foreign taxes related to Colombian oil operations.


David B. Eisendrath; Photographer Was 73
LEAD: David B. Eisendrath, a photographer, writer and lecturer known for his understanding of photographic principles and techniques, died of a heart attack Monday.
He was 73 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Pyro Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pyro Energy Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
32,725,000
27,828,000
Net inc
733,000
2,050,000
Share earns
.06
.15


Xtra Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xtra Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
48,223,000
31,710,000
Net inc
b4,718,000
c1,776,000
Share earns
.49
.24
6mo rev
100,911,000
64,673,000
Net inc
b12,369,000
c4,789,000
Share earns
1.35
.64


Commando Ecology
LEAD: Ecological concerns rated high in the Persian Gulf when the United States retaliated against Iran for mining a frigate.


Cobb Resources Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cobb Resources Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
657,000
489,000
Net inc
b58,000
c84,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
1,287,000
974,000
Net inc
b133,000
c247,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Includes gains of $22,000 and $50,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, from tax benefits.


Weatherford International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weatherford International Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
28,182,000
24,825,000
Net loss
387,000
1,845,000
Year-ago first quarter revenue has been restated to include $1.7 million from the Marine Crane division, which was previously reported as a discontinued operation; the restatement had no effect on the loss for the period.


Reagan Official Sees Hopes for Peace in Angola and Namibia
LEAD: Pursuing a diplomatic mission that he acknowledged has become a race against time, a Reagan Administration official said today that hopeful signs had emerged from two days of negotiations on ending the war in Angola and bringing independence to South-West Africa, or Namibia.


Game 3: A Joy to Knick Fans
LEAD: There have been circuses and dog shows, hockey playoffs and indoor tennis championships, but for four years there had not been a post-season New York Knicks basketball game at Madison Square Garden - until last night.


Alcohol May Hasten Spread of AIDS in Infected People
LEAD: Research on blood cells in the laboratory suggests that even moderate drinking may make people more susceptible to infection by the AIDS virus and may speed the onset of disease in infected people, a scientist said today.


Review/Television; 'Top Dog,' the Search for Stardom
LEAD: It's not entirely serious, but what did you expect? ''48 Hours,'' on CBS at 8 o'clock tonight, visits the Westminster Kennel Club Show at Madison Square Garden.
A dachshund sniffs Charles Kuralt and a pointer kisses Charles Osgood.
All the dogs are amiable, and, champions or not, a lot of them have that wonderfully goofy dog look.


Diagonal Data Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagonal Data Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,865,400
744,069
Net inc
110,777
95,712
Share earns
.06
.07
Shares outst
1,752,987
1,379,095


Lexington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lexington Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
362,000
542,000
Per share
.16
.23


Slain Indian Outpolls Rival In North Carolina Court Race
LEAD: Julian T. Pierce, a Lumbee Indian who was slain March 26, outpolled District Attorney Joe Freeman Britt Tuesday in the race for a superior court judge's seat in Robeson County.
Mr.
Britt will become judge in December.


Elgin National Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elgin National Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,982,301
22,935,691
Net inc
b3,267,770
c1,042,668
Share earns
1.08
.34
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $2,084,673.
c-After a loss from discontinued operations of $421,833.


Reliance Group Holdings Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reliance Group Holdings Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
13,955,000
30,222,000
Share earns
.19
.40
The company said year-ago quarter net includes substantial income of its real estate development group resulting from a gain on the sale of an office building in Los Angeles.


Boatmen's Offer Tops Bid Centerre Accepted
LEAD: The Centerre Bancorporation, the fourth-largest bank holding company in Missouri, is now a takeover target of the state's two biggest banking companies.


U.S. Agencies Submit Plans for Drug Testing
LEAD: Final rules for random drug testing of Government employees, ranging from the White House chief of staff to secretaries, were presented to Congress Tuesday by Federal agencies.


Rowing for Lions: Urban Adventure
LEAD: The Harlem River, which separates Manhattan from the Bronx, has been home to Columbia's crews for years.
Increasingly, the river has also been the final resting spot for discarded trash, abandoned automobiles and corpses.


Spring, Lapping Gently at the Hulls Of Their Homes
LEAD: THIS month's mild breezes have given all New Yorkers a reason for cheer, but nowhere has the change in seasons met with greater relief than at the 79th Street Boat Basin.


CITES U.S. FAILINGS
LEAD: In an unusually conciliatory speech, President Reagan today praised the Soviet Union's recent human rights record, and acknowledged American failings in such areas as homelessness and racial injustice.


Pacific Inland Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Inland Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b18,916
c65,025
Per share
.01
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $6,800.
c-Net loss


Ero Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ero Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,942,000
10,974,000
Net inc
696,000
609,000
Share earns
.22
.19


'Junk Bond' Policy Shift At Drexel
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. today halted a trading practice in which Drexel employees and partnerships controlled by them bought significant portions of new ''junk bond'' issues underwritten by the firm before they reached the investing public.


Bio-Logic Systems Corp reports earnings for Year to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bio-Logic Systems Corp (OTC)
Year to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
8,672,206
7,085,228
Net inc
861,045
860,098
Share earns
.30
.30


Business Spending Rises Sharply, But Imports Get Much of the Gain
LEAD: A surge in business spending is under way in the United States.
But just as the American economy has failed to reap the full benefit of the consumer buying boom of the 1980's, it is missing out on many of the rewards of this new growth for the same reason: Much of the spending is on imports.


MARCOS IS BARRED AT MOTHER'S RITES
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino refused today to allow her predecessor, Ferdinand E. Marcos, to return to the Philippines to attend the funeral of his 95-year-old mother, who died this morning.


The Economy as Greenspan Sees It
LEAD: In the broadest statement in months of his views on the economy, Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve Board chairman, said that major countries do not know the optimum exchange rate of the dollar and that unemployment could fall further without causing higher inflation and inducing the Fed to raise interest rates.


Democrats' Delegate Tally
LEAD: Current breakdown of Presidential preference of delegates to national political conventions, compiled by The New York Times.
Preferences are based on state laws, party rules, delegates' public statements and projections from early results in caucus states.
Dukakis ... 1,467  Jackson ... 926  Gore ...


U.S.-Korea Talks Gain
LEAD: South Korea has bowed to United States pressure and agreed to remove most restrictions on the sale of imported cigarettes.
The step could cut the price of imported cigarettes by 76 percent, trade negotiators for both countries said today.


Democrats Regroup on Trade Bill
LEAD: Congressional Democrats have appeared to be in no hurry to send the recently passed trade bill to President Reagan, who has said he will veto it.


Mentor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mentor Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,416,000
9,021,000
Net inc
1,526,000
1,051,000
Share earns
.14
.09
Yr sales
39,651,000
32,898,000
Net inc
6,398,000
4,248,000
Share earns
.57
.37


Court in South Africa Rules Against Segregated Beaches
LEAD: A court in the South African city of Port Elizabeth ruled today that the city's segregated beaches must be open to people of all races.


Merchants Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants Group (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b1,239,000
b986,000
Share earns
.57
.44
b-Includes capital gains of $141,000 and $24,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively; the year-ago period also includes a tax credit of $9,000.


Security Pacific's Renewable Notes
LEAD: The Security Pacific Corporation is offering $400 million of floating-rate renewable notes with a final maturity in 1998, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Bindley Western Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bindley Western Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
309,600,000
240,668,000
Net inc
1,178,000
1,111,000
Share earns
.19
.17
Shares outst
6,187,608
6,520,244


Talking Deals; Wall St. Rivals Try Cooperation
LEAD: THE increasing tendency of Wall Street firms to throw more and more of their own financial muscle into takeover deals to help their clients outdo rival bidders has suddenly taken a new turn.
Now, with the risks from these deals soaring, the firms are turning to a Wall Street tradition some had thought passe: cooperation.


Meese Is Said to Pick Two for Top Posts
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d has chosen Edward S. G. Dennis Jr., the United States Attorney in Philadelphia, to head the criminal division of the Justice Department, a Reagan Administration official said today.


Capitol Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capitol Bancorporation
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
870,000
b3,776,000
Per share
.28
1.32
b-Included income from the sale of Cap Mortgage Co.


U.S. Gains and Setbacks Reported on Quality of the Air
LEAD: Federal clean air standards for ozone, a principal part of smog, were violated last year in more areas than the year before, but the standard for carbon monoxide was violated in fewer areas, the Environmental Protection Agency said Tuesday.


Burritt Interfinancial Banorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burritt Interfinancial Banorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
956,000
859,000
Per share
.30
.26
The per share earnings reflect an 8 percent stock dividend to be paid May 6.


Plant Sale Devotees Go to the Source
LEAD: Patrons of the Brooklyn Botanic Garden annual plant sale picking their favorites yesterday from a selection ranging between 75 cents and $75.
The two-day spring sale continues today from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.25
6.60
6.61
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.14
6.13
5.41
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.39
6.41
5.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.67
8.66
8.37
30-YR.


At Immigration Offices, Lines Around Block
LEAD: The security guard took a deep breath and sighed before opening the door yesterday at the Immigration and Naturalization Service office in Queens on the last, hectic day of the Federal amnesty program for most aliens.


Financial Corp. Loss
LEAD: The Financial Corporation of America today reported a $63.2 million first-quarter loss, which continued to erode the net worth of the troubled savings and loan holding company.


Salerno and 8 Found Guilty As Racketeers
LEAD: Anthony (Fat Tony) Salerno, portrayed as the boss of the Genovese crime family, was convicted with eight other men yesterday of racketeering.


Corrections
LEAD: An April 24 obituary of Lord Ramsey, a former Archbishop of Canterbury, misstated the origin of the line of English Primates.
According to the Church of England Yearbook, Lord Ramsey was the 100th Archbishop of Canterbury since Augustine in 597.


Trims Are Made in 'Chess,' Saving Time and Money
LEAD: The Broadway play ''Chess'' has lost a few moves.
The 3-hour-plus, $6.2 million musical has become a 3-hour-minus, $6.2 million musical, in a move that saves thousands of dollars a week in overtime costs on a show that received less than favorable notices and is very expensive to run.


The Vote Count in the Primaries
LEAD:
Indiana
Ohio
District of Columbia
98% of prec. reporting
All prec. reporting
All prec. reporting
DEMOCRATS
Dukakis
436,955 (70%)
860,896 (63%)
14,969 (18%)
Jackson
138,496 (22%)
378,315 (28%)
67,812 (80%)
Others
50,884 ( 8%)
136,220 ( 9%)
1,733 ( 2%)
98% of prec.


Baseball Notebook; Looking to Lefties: The Right Move?
LEAD: Perhaps it's a Communist conspiracy designed to subvert the possibility of a Subway Series, but the Mets and the Yankees are seeing an awful lot of left-leaning opponents this season, more, in fact, than any other team in their respective leagues.


Events: Spring Hike and Flower Shows
LEAD: Architecture Seminar, Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; 212-860-6163.


Bellow Auctioning Off 'Sammler' Manuscript
LEAD: Saul Bellow is selling the notebooks, typescript and all papers relating to ''Mr.
Sammler's Planet'' at Sotheby's on June 7.
The manuscript material of the novel, published in 1970, is the first archive of a major living author's published work to be auctioned, and the first manuscript material to be sold by Mr.


New Ferment On the Pariah Of Perestroika
LEAD: At the Leningrad college where Nina Andreyeva teaches chemistry, her colleagues give out her home phone number with nasty glee, throwing in a bit of gossip about the woman whose conservative ''manifesto'' prompted a national showdown over ideology.


Reading as a Family Affair
LEAD: THERE was a time not long ago when Maria Gonzalez could not read as well as her three adolescent children.
And when she tried to read to them, it was disastrous.


Former Ambassador Faults Adminstration's Panama Policy
LEAD: Ambler Moss, former United States Ambassador to Panama, greeting Representative George W. Crockett Jr. at hearing yesterday in Washington on the Panamanian situation.
Mr.
Moss said the U.S. had acted in ''an old-fashioned interventionist way'' and was hurting the Panamanian people and economy. (NYT/Michael


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the credit markets misstated the source of a request for the repricing of New York State's offering of $2.6 billion in one-year notes.
The underwriters, led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, requested it.


Currents; Art Deco, to Adorn the Home Stage
LEAD: AS the interest in preserving and renovating Art Deco buildings has grown in recent years, home furnishings companies are producing products that recall the patterns and colors of the 1930's.
The latest of these is F. Schumacher's Radio City Music Hall Collection.
Twenty designs of printed and woven fabrics, wall coverings and borders, as well as carpet, were all adapted from the original archives.


Nui Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nui Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
94,613,000
88,134,000
Net inc
b10,887,000
c7,689,000
Share earns
2.95
2.13
6mo rev
156,065,000
140,027,000
Net inc
b13,352,000
c10,550,000
Share earns
3.62
2.93


American Water Works Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Water Works Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
115,288,000
109,863,000
Net inc
10,210,000
10,771,000
Share earns
.33
.35


CHINESE DISSIDENT DERIDES A DOGMA
LEAD: In his first public political remarks to students since his expulsion from the Communist Party, China's most prominent dissident spoke to a gathering of 300 students today about democracy and modernization.


People's Bank
LEAD: TBWA Advertising has picked up the account of the People's Bank of Bridgeport, Conn., which has 67 branches in the state.
The agency will start to work immediately and will be producing a mostly television campaign.
The budget is $4 million.
David Deutsch Associates, which won the account in 1985, was in the competition to retain it.


Bolar Pharmaceutical Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bolar Pharmaceutical Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
31,325,218
16,300,711
Net inc
6,950,857
3,147,442
Share earns
.35
.16


Review/Guitar; Barbosa-Lima in a Duo
LEAD: Carlos Barbosa-Lima, the Brazilian guitarist, is marking the 30th anniversary of his debut with a pair of concerts this week at Weill Recital Hall.
The first, on Tuesday evening, was a program of guitar duets with Sharon Isbin, an accomplished American player who, like Mr.
Barbosa-Lima, has lately been addressing herself to classical-pop crossovers.


Space Shuttle May Not Fly Till September
LEAD: The space agency has set Aug. 25 as its internal target date for the first launching of a space shuttle since the Challenger disaster, but the flight may have to be put off until early September, according to the agency's Administrator.


Augat Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Augat Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
80,034,562
75,214,430
Net inc
2,095,199
3,538,493
Share earns
.12
.20


New AIDS Law Sends Right Signal to Employers; 'Clean Needles'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prenatal Test For Defects Termed Safe In U.S. Study
LEAD: An experimental prenatal test that can identify common birth defects after 9 1/2 to 12 weeks of pregnancy is nearly as safe as amniocentesis, according to a Federal study.


Adaptec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adaptec Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,553,000
16,622,000
Net inc
668,000
1,546,000
Share earns
.09
.21
Yr rev
58,784,000
57,325,000
Net inc
3,774,000
b6,453,000
Share earns
.50
.93


Afghan Chief Arrives in India And Is Accorded Full Honors
LEAD: Najibullah, the Afghan leader, arrived here today for three days of talks with Indian leaders that American and other diplomats will watch carefully for clues on his actions as Soviet troops prepare to withdraw from his country.


Salomon's Plan For Phibro Unit
LEAD: Officials from Salomon Inc. said yesterday that the firm's planned purchase of an oil refinery in Texas would make its oil subsidiary a stronger player in that industry.


Energen Corp reports earnings for 12mo March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energen Corp (NYSE)
12mo March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
355,914,000
347,770,000
Net inc
12,653,000
8,703,000
Share earns
2.74
2.02
Shares outst
4,610,000
4,309,000


Echo Bay Mines Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Echo Bay Mines Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
60,000,000
43,400,000
Net inc
10,900,000
8,100,000
Share earns
.11
.09
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Citizens Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
271,000
b1,040,000
Per share
.14
.52
b-After a tax benefit of $421,000.
The latest period included a non- recurring pre-tax charge of $700,000 to establish contingency loss reserve and a non-recurring pre-tax gain on loan recovery of $281,000.


Buccaneers Make Trade
LEAD: The Tampa Bay Buccaneers traded a veteran offensive tackle, Ron Heller, to the Seattle Seahawks yesterday in exchange for the defensive lineman, Randy Edwards, and a 1989 draft choice.


Royce N. Flippin, 85, Ex-Investment Banker
LEAD: Royce Norwood Flippin, a retired investment banker, died last Thursday at the Van Dyk Manor Nursing Home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 85 years old and lived in Upper Montclair, N.J.


Chalone Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chalone Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,683,000
1,852,000
Net inc
65,000
b83,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Pantera's Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pantera's Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Revenue
39,207,000
6,427,000
Net loss
744,000
b741,000
Share earns
-
.12
9mo rev
108,695,000
18,489,000
Net loss
3,246,000
b1,529,000
Share earns
-
.25


Grumman Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grumman Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
908,021,000
852,201,000
Net inc
21,027,000
b57,852,000
Share earns
.61
1.73
b-After a gain of $35 million, or $1.07 a share, from the adoption of FASB No. 96.


A Surprise Start and Finish
LEAD: When Rick Pitino said before last night's game that the Knicks were looking to create some chaos in the playoff game with the Boston Celtics, he raised the spector of traps and presses, jump switching and 48 minutes of mad-dash basketball.


Analysts See Power Authority Losing Proxy Fight With Lilco
LEAD: The Long Island Power Authority's proxy battle against the Long Island Lighting Company is so limited in scope, financial analysts said today, that a victory would do little to help the authority take over the utility.


Lakeland Industries Inc reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lakeland Industries Inc
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,504,428
16,957,836
Net inc
227,400
457,613
Share earns
.09
.24


Israeli Troops Battle Shiite Forces And Destroy Village in Lebanon
LEAD: Israeli soldiers fought a pitched battle with Shiite Moslem militiamen at a village in southern Lebanon today, and at least 40 Lebanese and 3 Israelis were killed, the army said tonight.


New AIDS Law Sends Right Signal to Employers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Healthdyne Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthdyne Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
22,061,000
17,427,000
Net loss
b887,000
c502,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-After a tax loss carryforward of $10,000.
c-Net income and after a tax loss carryforward of $210,000.


Columbia Gas System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia Gas System Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,321,117,000
1,087,002,000
Net inc
84,559,000
75,925,000
Share earns
1.83
1.71


Jefferson Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Bank
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
685,000
538,000
Per share
.24
.22


Staley Continental Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Staley Continental Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
856,434,000
785,715,000
Net inc
b325,000
c6,821,000
6mo sales
1,702,041,000
1,596,157,000
Net inc
13,356,000
c346,000
Share earns
.24
.17
b-Includes a charge of $8.5 million due to the accelerated vesting of certain previously issued stock under executive compensation and long-term incentive plans.


More Queens Drug Defendants Are Pleading Guilty
LEAD: Defendants in Queens drug cases are pleading guilty to felony charges at a far swifter pace since a court unit devoted exclusively to narcotics cases began operating in the borough five weeks ago, prosecutors say.


Careercom Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Careercom Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
36,374,285
13,496,225
Net inc
b1,406,674
1,102,705
Share earns
.16
.16
6mo rev
71,025,197
26,915,232
Net inc
b3,855,388
2,154,666
Share earns
.44
.30


Jefferson Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
702,578
700,367
Per share
.23
.25
Shares outst
3,071,447
2,763,807


N.Y.U. Student Found Dead
LEAD: A 22-year-old photography student from Boston was found dead in his dormitory at New York University late yesterday morning, the police reported.
They said the man, whose identity was not released until his family could be notified, had been found in his undershorts in his dormitory apartment at 33 Third Avenue, near Ninth Street in Greenwich Village.


Modern Art By Russians In Capital
LEAD: The first major United States exhibition of the work of three contemporary Soviet artists will open at the Corcoran Gallery of Art on Thursday.


Family Infighting at Levolor May Bring Sale of Company
LEAD: Infighting among the members of the founding family of Levolor Lorentzen Inc., a maker of window blinds based in Parsippany, N.J., is likely to result in a sale of the company.


Anti-Abortion Demonstrators Face Fines of $25,000 a Day
LEAD: A Federal judge last night ordered organizers of the Operation Rescue anti-abortion campaign being conducted in the metropolitan region this week to pay fines of $25,000 a day for each day that they continue to block access to offices where abortions are performed.


New York Marine &amp; General Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York Marine &amp; General Insurance (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b3,643,870
b3,316,606
Share earns
.42
.38
b-Includes net realized investment losses of $237,710 and $118,581 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


GATT to Act on Beef In U.S.-Japan Impasse
LEAD: Efforts to increase American access to Japan's beef and citrus markets have broken down, American officials said today, and the United States will take its complaint to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the world body that oversees commerce.


German Joblessness Dips
LEAD: West Germany's unemployment rate fell to 8.9 percent in April from 9.6 percent in March, but officials attributed the decline to seasonal factors.


Blasts Level Shuttle Fuel Plant, Killing a Worker
LEAD: A series of explosions destroyed a rocket-fuel plant and an adjoining marshmallow factory here today, killing one person and injuring more than 200.


Sun Microsystems Stake for A.T.&amp;T.
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc., based in Mountain View, Calif., said it would issue 879,947 shares of its common stock to A.T.&amp;T. for about $40.6 million.
The sale, which is expected to be completed in 30 days, is based on the average price for the last 20 trading days through Monday of $36.8875 a share plus a 25 percent premium, bringing the total price to $46.1094 a share.


Benjamin Lawrence, Adman, Is Dead at 83
LEAD: Benjamin Lawrence, whose advertising art agency, Lawrence Studios, was among the largest in the industry in the 1930's and 1940's, died of lymph cancer at Beth Israel Hospital on April 25.
He was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He had lived for many years in New Paltz, N.Y.


Florida Rock Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Rock Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
89,951,000
59,615,000
Net inc
3,960,000
2,812,000
Share earns
.43
.30
6mo sales
170,632,000
124,390,000
Net inc
b11,505,000
7,029,000
Share earns
1.25
.76


Brawley Is Reported To Have Been Seen At Newburgh Party
LEAD: A report that Tawana Brawley was seen at a party in Newburgh, N.Y., during the four days last November when she said she was being held by abductors was broadcast last night by WCBS-TV.


Market Place; Coleco's Struggle To End a Tailspin
LEAD: IS Coleco Industries like one of those characters in an old Western movie who is dead on his feet but hasn't yet toppled into the dust?
That's the question that hangs over the battered toy maker following the announcement last night that Arnold C. Greenberg would be replaced by Morton E. Handel as chairman and chief executive and that the Hallwood Group Inc.


Hometown Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hometown Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b8,000
79,000
b-After a charge from an accounting change that lowered net by $49,000.


Currents; Solace for Fumblers
LEAD: HOPELESSLY unmechanical souls, take heart.
It's not all your fault.
According to a new book, ''The Psychology of Everyday Things'' (Basic Books, $19.95), the reason we fumble at light switches and door handles and are overwhelmed by directions for household electronic gadgets may be that these objects are poorly designed.


Review/Theater; On West German Stages, 3 Opera-Related Dramas
LEAD: Even more than in opera, the West German theatrical scene provides a striking contrast to that in the United States.
Every German city, large and small, has a Government-sponsored spoken theater or two that presents both the classics and new works to an avid public.


Wings West Planes
LEAD: Wings West Airlines Inc. said that the AMR Corporation had established a deadline of next Tuesday to resolve differences over the airline's proposed acquisition of 10 British Aerospace advanced turbo-prop jets and that if an agreement was not reached, AMR would void their proposed merger.
AMR offered in mid-April to buy Wings West, a regional carrier that feeds passengers to American Airlines, for $10.50 a share.


Ehrlich Bober Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ehrlich Bober Financial (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,346,000
4,618,000
Net inc
b214,000
d400,000
Share earns
.07
.11
9mo rev
10,555,000
17,615,000
Net loss
b357,000
cd2,559,000
Share earns
-
.86


Rep. Dyson Says Smear Drove an Aide to Suicide
LEAD: Representative Roy P. Dyson of Maryland said today that his top aide, Thomas M. Pappas, jumped to his death Sunday from a New York hotel because he felt reports that he had mismanaged Mr.
Dyson's office and staff were a ''smear'' that could not be overcome.


Lectec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lectec Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,347,000
1,120,000
Net inc
218,000
116,000
Share earns
.07
.04
9mo rev
4,200,000
3,494,000
Net inc
622,000
388,000
Share earns
.20
.16


BankVermont Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankVermont Corporation
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
326,000
1,422,000
Per share
.13
.58
The company said the pending sale of its Oxford Bank and Trust subsidiary reduced after-tax earnings by slightly over $500,000 in the latest quarter.


IE Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IE Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
119,542,000
105,271,000
Net inc
8,408,000
b9,772,000
Share earns
.60
.72
b-After a gain of $4,547,000 from an accounting change.


Ply-Gem Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ply-Gem Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
89,399,000
70,563,000
Net inc
b3,363,000
c5,125,000
Share earns
.30
.45
b-Includes about $600,000, or 5 cents a share, from utilization of 1987 income tax capital loss carryforwards resulting from the adoption of FAS 96.


Gateway Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,192,000
3,152,000
Per share
.40
.40
The year-ago period adjusted to reflect a 50 percent stock dividend in May 1987.


Advanta Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanta Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
72,820,000
65,758,000
Net inc
632,000
1,481,000
Share earns
.07
.16
The company said the latest quarter included gains of about $4.5 million from the sale of $150 million of credit card asset-backed certificates and $800,000 from the sale of $33.6 million of second mortgage asset-backed certificates.


Mistrial Declared in U.S. Case Against LaRouche
LEAD: A Federal district judge today declared a mistrial in the fraud and obstruction of justice case against the political extremist Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., six of his followers and five of his political groups.


Broadway Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Broadway Financial Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
607,000
804,000
Per share
.38
.50


Lease Finance's Chief To Place Big Jet Order
LEAD: When Leslie L. Gonda wants to avoid eavesdroppers and hold a private talk with his colleagues, he slips into his native Hungarian, which two of his executives also speak.
The chairman and chief executive of the International Lease Finance Corporation speaks five languages, a skill that has proved useful in negotiating aircraft-leasing deals with foreign customers.


Andal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andal Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
25,989,000
16,856,000
Net loss
339,000
1,366,000
6mo rev
50,244,000
30,852,000
Net loss
727,000
b3,617,000
b-Includes an $825,000 charge from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Free Training for Aspiring Musicians in Chicago
LEAD: Earnest young voices from the inner city sing liltingly while aspiring musicians experiment with a spectrum of styles each Saturday in a renovated train station just south of downtown.


Carter-Wallace Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carter-Wallace Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
127,399,000
120,958,000
Net inc
7,849,000
7,084,000
Share earns
.52
.47
Shares outst
15,157,000
15,138,000
Yr rev
483,121,000
451,183,000
Net inc
37,840,000
32,326,000
Share earns
2.50
2.13
Shares outst
15,150,000
15,142,000


Enseco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enseco Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,449,000
6,810,000
Net inc
134,000
b602,000
Share earns
.02
.07
b-After a gain of $868,000 from an accounting change.
The company said the latest quarter net was reduced by one cent a share, which is the insurance deductable on damages resulting from an accident at its Berkeley Heights, N.J., facility in March.


Norman Saves Best For Last 18 Holes
LEAD: The way Greg Norman is playing final rounds these days he only needs to be within hailing distance before the last 18 holes of a tournament to be a serious threat to win.
Norman loves the challenge and has been the best at making stretch runs on the PGA Tour this year.


S.E.C. Cites Endotronics
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has accused Endotronics Inc. of reporting millions of dollars of phony sales between 1985 and 1987 in violation of security laws.
In charges filed Tuesday in


The Doctrine or the Treaty?
LEAD: The Reagan Administration negotiated an important treaty with the Soviet Union that would eliminate Euromissiles.
Now it jeopardizes that accomplishment by insisting on a novel and absurd Presidential doctrine that few senators will or should swallow.


New AIDS Law Sends Right Signal to Employers; Equal Opportunity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Unicorp American Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unicorp American Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
66,100,000
8,700,000
Net inc
b3,800,000
500,000
Share earns
.24
.02
b-Included a pretax gain of $1.8 million from the sale of an industrial building in Bedford, Mass.


Hostages Are Rescued In New Caledonia Raid
LEAD: French authorities rescued 22 gendarmes and an assistant prosecutor today who had been held hostage by Melanesian separatists in a cave on Uvea island, the French Government said.


Citizens Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
6,855,000
7,404,000
Per share
.47
.51


Oil Prices Show a Decline; Cattle Off on U.S.-Japan Rift
LEAD: Oil futures prices slipped yesterday, under pressure from a continuing negative mood in the market and a report that showed larger-than-expected domestic inventories in gasoline and crude.


Lawmaker Vows to Act On Tougher Ethics Bill
LEAD: A House subcommittee chairman said today that he would act promptly on legislation that would clamp down on lobbying by former members of Congress and senior officials of the executive branch.


Currents; Historic Homes and Their Gardens
LEAD: THE Artis Group gallery is holding an exhibition, called House and Garden, of paintings, watercolors and drawings from the 18th to the 20th century.
About half the show is architectural drawings, including those for French and Italian villas as well as for more celebrated buildings, like a town hall at Versailles designed by Hector Lefeul, the official architect of Napoleon I


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council


Dukakis Assails U.S. Drug Policy at Dinner for Bronx Democrats
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis last night made his his first major appearance in New York following his victory in the state's tumultuous primary two weeks ago and charged that the Reagan Administration ''can't say no to drugs and doing business with drug dealers.''


East Weymouth Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* East Weymouth Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
220,596
609,336
Per share
.23
.64


Ogilvy Income Soars
LEAD: The Ogilvy Group, whose main component is the Ogilvy &amp; Mather worldwide ad agency, had a marvelously improved first quarter.
Although revenues only improved 17.6 percent from the corresponding quarter in 1987, net income more than doubled thanks to a large improvement in operating profit.
Revenues were $190 million, up from $161.6 million, while net income was $3.5 million, up from $1.4 million, or 24 cents a share compared with 10 cents.


Prices of Bonds and Notes Drop
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes sagged in quiet trading yesterday although the Government's borrowing needs at next week's quarterly refunding will be somewhat less than had been anticipated.


Sun Electric Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Electric Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
55,342,000
47,180,000
Net inc
b1,832,000
669,000
Share earns
.26
.26
b-Includes tax credits of $421,000.
The company said effective Jan. 1, it changed its domestic fiscal year- end from Oct.


USG Given A New Plan By Its Suitor
LEAD: Putting even more pressure on the USG Corporation, Desert Partners L.P. today proposed raising its tender offer to $50 a share for the company or merging under an alternative recapitalization plan.


North Canadian Oils Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Canadian Oils Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
21,554,000
17,350,000
Net inc
8,166,000
6,450,000
Share earns
.20
.17
Shares outst
27,214,000
18,470,000
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Jackson Searching to Amend His Strategy; He Says Delegate Rules Have Been Unfair
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's overwhelming victories in the Ohio and Indiana primaries Tuesday left the Rev.
Jesse Jackson searching for a new strategy for the final month of primaries, and the Chicago civil rights leader said today that party rules on delegate selection had unfairly worked against him.


East Berlin Journal; In a Tiny Outpost of Judaism, a Rabbi Walks Out
LEAD: His arrival here was hailed as a breakthrough, the coming of a retired American rabbi to serve a minute East German congregation that had been without a rabbi of its own for more than two decades.


Affiliated Bank Corporation of Wyoing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Bank Corporation of Wyoing (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
606,000
534,000
Per share
.51
.45


New Furor On Security Of Phone Bids
LEAD: Officials of the General Services Administration and Congressional staff members said yesterday that secret bids for the Government's new $25 billion telephone system might have been examined last weekend, just hours after they were submitted, by someone without proper authorization.


For Officers and Firefighters, Ties Still Bind
LEAD: For the firefighters and police officers at what they call Fort Pitt, a joint fire house and police station beside the Williamsburg Bridge on Pitt Street, the public squabble over who should be in charge of underwater rescue operations is very much a family affair.


Anchorage Journal; Flying Opens Door to a Wild Alaska
LEAD: The sight of small, low-flying planes lifting off from this city's downtown Merrill Field and droning out toward the other Alaska, the real Alaska, is a constant reminder that there are two classes of people in this rugged state: those who fly and those who do not.


Oglebay Norton Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oglebay Norton Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
27,823,000
23,030,000
Net inc
232,000
b828,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


Fuddruckers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fuddruckers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,000,000
13,500,000
Net inc
83,000
b390,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


First Georgia Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Georgia Savings
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
24,000
75,000
Per share
.03
.13
Shares outst
879,434
594,101


First Fincorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fincorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
604,531
791,947
Share earns
.24
.32
The company said the primary reason for the decrease in earnings is a reduction in loan fee income for the first quarter of 1988 as compared to the first quarter of 1987, due to revised accounting standards.


Looking to Gorbachev
LEAD: ''Gorbachev's policy in a sense depends on the Polish situation,'' Bronislaw Geremek said. ''If the reforms fail here, it would be a sign to  [ Yegor ]  Ligachev and other opponents that, you see, the result is anarchy, no production, it can't work.


New Jersey Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Jersey Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
853,000
b838,000
Per share
.32
-
b-Included $364,000 in gains from the sale of a prospective branch site and sale of mortgage-backed securities and common stock.


Review/Dance; The Human Condition In Word and Movement
LEAD: Stephan Koplowitz choreographically acknowledged the joys and sorrows of being human in a poignant program Monday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
His works, created in collaboration with their performers, blended dance with spoken texts so adroitly that one could not imagine the movements without the words or the words without the movements.


Dyncorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dyncorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
138,912,000
123,257,000
Net loss
b5,901,000
c595,000
b-Includes a loss of $6.9 million related to the company's leveraged buyout, and is after net from discontinued operations of $428,000.


Koch Proposes Larger Plan To Renovate City Dwellings
LEAD: Mayor Koch proposed yesterday that every abandoned apartment building in New York City be rebuilt and that every occupied, city-owned apartment be renovated.


Memorial for McCracken
LEAD: Marilyn Horne and the Collegiate Chorale, conducted by Robert Bass, are among those who are to take part in a memorial service for the tenor James McCracken on Saturday at 10:30 A.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
Mr.
McCracken died last Friday at the age of 61.
Speakers include Lotfi Mansouri, who has been named the next general manager of the San Francisco Opera, and Edward Purrington, assistant director of the Washington Opera.


G.M.'s Saturn Plant Is 25% Completed
LEAD: Construction is about one-fourth complete at the Saturn plant in Spring Hill, Tenn., at which the General Motors Corporation plans to turn out automobiles that can compete with imports, officials of G.M.'s Saturn Corporation subsidiary said Tuesday.
Production is expected to begin in June 1989, and 6,000 people have applied for work at the plant,


Sabonis to Stay
LEAD: The visa allowing the Soviet basketball star Arvidas Sabonis to remain in the United States has been extended for two months, the Portland Trail Blazers announced yesterday.


Gregorian Is Given Public Service Award
LEAD: Dr.
Vartan Gregorian, the president and chief executive officer of the New York Public Library, is this year's recipient of the $24 Award from the Museum of the City of New York.


Union Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
33,244,000
31,854,000
Net inc
b1,420,000
c3,880,000
Share earns
.20
-
9mo sales
96,871,000
85,968,000
Net inc
b4,890,000
c936,000
Share earns
.67
-


Agency Sets Its Sights Beyond Italy
LEAD: DID you know that Armando Testa Advertising is the biggest native Italian agency?


Equitable Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equitable Resources Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
153,385,000
156,025,000
Net inc
26,858,000
b27,562,000
Share earns
1.29
1.36
b-Includes a gain of $6,450,000 from an accounting change.


Restaurants' Auditor Quits
LEAD: The Big Eight accounting firm of Peat Marwick Main &amp; Company has resigned as the accounting firm for Bombay Palace Restaurants Inc. because of fraud reportedly linked to the company's senior management.


Many Aliens Seek Amnesty on Last Day as Legal Questions Persist
LEAD: The nation's historic program offering illegal immigrants a chance to stay in the United States came to a frantic finale yesterday as more than 100,000 applicants jammed legalization centers around the country.
Meanwhile, last-minute Federal court rulings extended the application period for some aliens and added a final element of confusion.


Cal Rep Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cal Rep Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,321,593
1,171,172
Per share
.58
.51


Unum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unum Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b29,200,000
b19,300,000
Share earns
.63
.39
b-Includes investment gains of $1 million and $3 million for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Personal Health
LEAD: With asthma in children on the increase, experts lament that a host of effective new drugs are being underused or improperly used.
As a result, asthma is now a more serious threat to the health of American children than ever before and, by all indications, the problem is getting worse.


Cambrex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cambrex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
30,904,200
27,262,000
Net inc
2,112,000
b768,500
Share earns
.38
.21
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $401,800.


Senate Inquiry Finds Meese Violated White House Policy
LEAD: Edwin Meese 3d and his former White House deputy violated a policy that prohibited officials from getting involved in procurement matters like the Wedtech Corporation's efforts to obtain Government contracts, according to a Senate subcommittee report released today.


Legislature in Hartford Ends Session on Time
LEAD: An exhausted Connecticut General Assembly adjourned at midnight Wednesday after adopting a pay raise for its members in the session's final hours.
But it failed to approve several key pieces of legislation, including a controversial measure that would have restored smoking on the New Haven line of the Metro-North Commuter


Atlantis Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantis Group Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,260,000
18,199,000
Net inc
b1,384,000
c424,000
Share earns
.20
.07
Shares outst
6,686,000
5,436,000
b-Includes a gain of $821,000 from discontinued operations.


New AIDS Law Sends Right Signal to Employers; Insurers and Testing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Currents; Charting History In Its Design
LEAD: DESIGN excellence, according to R. Craig Miller of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is based on many factors.
Whether or not an object is esthetically pleasing is only one of them.
How a piece fits into the history of design and how functional it is are also important.


Wise Inaction on Press
LEAD: Freedom A Federal judge in Rhode Island accused The Providence Journal of acting ''above the law'' and held it in criminal contempt for publishing an article in defiance of his order.
An appellate court in Boston reversed the judge, saying his order was so ''transparently void'' that the newspaper had a right to disobey it.


Free Blood Testing Attracts Thousands
LEAD: A line of people formed yesterday in Central Park at 60th Street and Fifth Avenue to receive free cholesterol and blood-pressure tests.
About 2,400 people were screened there and more than 9,000 in the metropolitan region in the Countdown U.S.A. program.
At right, a paramedic at the Lutheran Medical Center, Arlene Egan, tests Lisa Drobnis.


CNA Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CNA Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,929,000,000
1,688,600,000
Net inc
b175,969,000
b95,017,000
Share earns
2.78
1.45
b-Includes realized investment gains of $72,100,000 for the latest quarter and $15,400,000 for the year-earlier period.


USA Today's Asia Plant
LEAD: USA Today opened a printing plant here today, its third outside the United States.
The newspaper will be transmitted by satellite from USA Today's Washington headquarters for printing here by Consolidated Newspapers Ltd., which is associated with Sing Tao Ltd., a publisher of English and Chinese newspapers in the British territory.


Consolidated Products reports earnings for Qtr to April 13
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Products (OTC)
Qtr to April 13
1988
1987
Revenue
26,783,102
25,692,211
Net inc
588,731
b404,076
Share earns
.18
.12
6mo rev
48,567,069
45,747,657
Net inc
1,518,547
b906,268
Share earns
.46
.28


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ABI American Businessphones Inc., Irvine, Calif., said it would not merge into TIE/Communications Inc., Shelton, Conn., a maker of small and medium-size multifeatured key telephone systems.


Mets Blank Astros; Yanks Rally to Win; Yankees 4, Royals 3
LEAD: When he stopped to consider the consequences tonight, John Candelaria said he might have been wrong.
He had allowed himself to become disturbed by a few questionable calls in the third inning, and by the seventh they were still festering.


Agnico-Eagle Mines Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Agnico-Eagle Mines Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,400,000
10,100,000
Net inc
2,700,000
3,100,000
Share earns
.19
.22
Yr net inc
b13,800,000
b6,600,000
Share earns
.99
.47
b-Includes gains on sales of investments of $4.1 million for the latest year and $1.4 million for the year- earlier period.


New Position for Solomon
LEAD: Peter J. Solomon was named yesterday to head the new merchant banking division of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., which plans to invest primarily in leveraged buyouts.


Metro Matters; Battery Park City, And Measuring A Cuomo Friend
LEAD: When Florence Frucher told Governor Cuomo that her daughter was debating whether to attend Harvard or Williams next fall, the Governor offered this fatherly advice: ''Nobody turns down Harvard.''


Biden's Status Satisfactory
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, was in satisfactory condition today, one day after surgeons corrected an aneurysm, or weakening on the wall of an artery that supplies blood to the right side of his brain, a spokesman for Walter Reed Army Medical Center said.
The operation was similar to the one performed Feb.


American Ship Building Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Ship Building Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,307,000
6,975,000
Net loss
2,890,000
1,787,000
6mo rev
22,695,000
11,852,000
Net loss
4,270,000
4,698,000


Intact Cousins Of Broken Teacups
LEAD: WHEN Bob Page left his job as an auditor for the state of North Carolina, neither his family nor his friends could believe he was going to sell used dishes for a living.
But that is what he did after starting Replacements Ltd. in 1981; now he sells more than $9 million in replacement china a year.


Lee Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lee Pharmaceuticals (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,420,000
9,689,000
Net inc
10,000
163,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
17,404,000
19,018,000
Net inc
51,000
998,000
Share earns
.01
.24


Rose Looks Back
LEAD: Pete Rose, the Cincinnati Reds manager, who will appeal the National League's decision to suspend him 30 days for shoving Umpire Dave Pallone, said yesterday the suspension could have been worse.


Warwick Insurance Managers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warwick Insurance Managers (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,540,835
11,424,714
Net inc
b1,392,899
b1,040,877
Share earns
.37
.27
b-Includes tax benefits of $100,000 and $42,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Austron Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Austron Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,182,631
2,704,993
Net inc
312,248
361,645
Share earns
.09
.10
9mo sales
6,120,775
5,740,162
Net inc
465,716
111,003
Share earns
.13
.03


Emcon Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emcon Associates (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,836,000
4,438,000
Net inc
515,000
276,000
Share earns
.20
.17
Shares outst
2,583,000
1,613,000


Kinder-Care Names Head of Savings Unit
LEAD: The American Savings and Loan Association of Florida, which was just been taken over by Kinder-Care Inc., the child-care company, announced yesterday that it had named Harris C. Friedman chairman and chief executive.


Murray A. Blaivas, Computer Expert, 71
LEAD: Murray A. Blaivas, a leader in the use of computers in clinical laboratory testing, died of heart failure Tuesday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 71 years old and lived in Hollywood, Fla.


China's Phantom Brain Drain
LEAD: Although China has achieved some economic success by loosening market controls, its recent move to drastically cut the number of students allowed to study in the United States is a shortsighted measure that could stunt future growth.


Critic's Notebook; Updike's Long Struggle To Portray Women
LEAD: Over the years, John Updike noted in a recent interview in The New York Times, readers have occasionally objected to his portrayals of women, criticizing them as being merely ''wives, sex objects and purely domestic creatures.'' In response, he said he'd been ''constantly trying to improve'' his depiction of women.


Father Serra, Founder of California Missions, to Be Beatified
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church has taken another step toward declaring Junipero Serra a saint by announcing that the 18th-century Franciscan missionary will be beatified by Pope John Paul II at a ceremony in the Vatican.


Williamsburg Bridge To Open, Koch Says
LEAD: Mayor Koch said yesterday that the Williamsburg Bridge, which has been closed because of structural corrosion since April 12, could be opened ''very shortly,'' although he declined to say exactly when.


Hill &amp; Knowlton Fills A Top Job From Outside
LEAD: For the first time in the memory of its top executives, the 61-year-old Hill &amp; Knowlton, a worldwide public relations concern, went outside the company to fill a top executive post.


Kenan Transport Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kenan Transport Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,752,000
12,742,000
Net inc
b2,299,000
730,000
Share earns
.98
.31
b-After a gain from an accounting change of $1.5 million.


Review/Dance; A Hermetic Poem by Dan Wagoner
LEAD: There is no such thing as inspiration, the objectivists tell us.
But if it wasn't inspiration that led Dan Wagoner to choreograph the compelling work he calls ''To Comfort Ghosts,'' then he must be eating something special with his Wheaties.


Cerprobe Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cerprobe Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,168,500
1,009,313
Net loss
227,172
5,468
Year-ago first quarter included a one-time gain of $169,500 from an accounting change.


LTV Offers Plan to End Bankruptcy
LEAD: The LTV Corporation today outlined a broad proposal for ending its bankruptcy, the second largest in the nation's history, but its insistence that more than $2 billion in pension liabilities be terminated was immediately challenged by the Government agency that insures corporate pensions.


Bridge
LEAD: Whether bridge is art, science or something else is not an easy question.
There is a large verbal and language element in bidding, and to a lesser extent in defense.
Card play is largely a science, in which the mathematical mind has some advantage.


Colombia Uses Army in Cocaine Raids
LEAD: The authorities have discovered two large cocaine-processing complexes during a new anti-drug offensive that for the first time involves Colombia's armed forces.


Brazil Plans Talks on Debt
LEAD: Brazil, struggling with the developing world's largest foreign debt, is preparing to resume negotiations for financial help from the International Monetary Fund.
Geraldo Moura, the Finance


Giga-tronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Giga-tronics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,149,000
3,832,000
Net inc
1,009,000
640,000
Share earns
.31
.17
Yr sales
18,186,000
17,249,000
Net inc
3,573,000
3,027,000
Share earns
1.02
.78


Brown Sees a Clear Winner
LEAD: He hadn't planned it, and he didn't do much more than yell for the puck and aim at a slice of netting straight in front of him.
He stared into the goal just long enough to see the red lamp flash, and then he did an impromptu dance, a move as unrehearsed as the one that made him a hero.


North-West Telecommunicaions reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North-West Telecommunicaions
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,102,516
11,600,315
Net inc
958,346
b1,349,224
Share earns
.46
.66
b-Includes a pretax gain of $590,000 from the sale of the company's interest in a limited partnership.


Gazebos Decorate The Summer Landscape; Pavilions From Kits
LEAD: FROM the gold cloth pavilion of Cleopatra to the painted teahouses of China, garden shelters of one form or another have been extraordinarily appealing throughout history.
Recentnarily appealing throughout history.
Recently, the use of gazebos - airy edifices where morning toast may be consumed with grace - seems to be increasing.


Lincoln National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln National Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,577,800,000
1,747,800,000
Net inc
b53,600,000
c105,700,000
Share earns
1.20
2.31
Shares outst
42,300,000
44,800,000
b-After net realized capital losses of $4.5 million.


Drug Case Raises Doubts in Bolivia
LEAD: The recent dismissal of charges against 16 Bolivians in a cocaine-related murder has raised questions about the ability of the justice system to resist the pressures of drug traffickers.


Texas Instruments Offers 8 7/8% Notes
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc. is offering $150 million of 8 7/8 percent notes due 1993, at a price of 99.725, to yield 8.94 percent, through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Show Business Network Is Set
LEAD: Home Shopping Network Inc. said this week that it would start a new cable network that will cover the entertainment industry with reports on personalities and events involving movies, television, home video, music and Broadway.


Adams Resources &amp; Energy Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adams Resources &amp; Energy Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,587,000
15,474,000
Net inc
761,000
223,000
Share earns
.10
.02


Omnicom Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Omnicom Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
204,965,000
117,197,000
Net inc
7,577,000
6,263,000
Share earns
.31
.26
Revenue represents commissions and fees.


Competitions: Paths of Glory


Rapist Is Sentenced to 15 Years
LEAD: The suffering of a blind woman who was raped and robbed two years ago and who felt compelled to leave Manhattan was recounted yesterday at the sentencing of the man who pleaded guilty to the crime.


Lucky Discussing Sale of Some Stores
LEAD: Lucky Stores Inc. said it had been talking with third parties interested in buying the Arizona and Florida stores that make up nearly a third of the chain.
Lucky, the nation's sixth-largest supermarket chain, began the negotiations Monday, a spokeswoman, Judy Decker, said.
She declined to elaborate.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Bullets Tie Pistons
LEAD: Moses Malone sank a 12-foot jumper with 22 seconds left and Jeff Malone added a free throw with two seconds remaining tonight to lift the Washington Bullets to a 106-103 victory over the Detroit Pistons in the fourth game of their Eastern Conference series.


5 Schools to Use Detectors for Guns
LEAD: Students at five New York City high schools will be searched with metal detectors next fall as part of an experimental effort to reduce violence and weapon possession in the schools, the Board of Education said yesterday.


Error Reported in Describing Jackson Income
LEAD: An aide to Jesse Jackson said today that he was mistaken when he described about $46,000 of the Presidential candidate's earnings last year as coming principally from the entertainer Bill Cosby.
But he said Mr.
Cosby did pay some money to the Jackson family's company.


Iran's Carpet Exports
LEAD: Iran exported 12,000 tons of hand-woven carpets last year on the legal market, but many others were also smuggled out, officials said Tuesday.


One Valley Bancorp of West Virginia reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Valley Bancorp of West Virginia
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,591,000
b3,419,000
Per share
.58
.57
b-Includes one-time tax gains of $469,000.


Raleigh Federal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raleigh Federal
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,033,000
798,000
Per share
.30
-
Year-ago share earnings are not available; the company converted to stock form of ownership on July 6, 1987.


Home Improvement
LEAD: EVEN though owning telephones, instead of renting them from the telephone company, is now commonplace, many homeowners and apartment dwellers choose to rent because they think that the installation might be too hard.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article in the Word and Image pages on Tuesday discussed NBC News's interruption of network programming to report Israeli troop movements in Lebanon.
The article quoted journalists on rival networks who believed NBC had overreacted, and it quoted an NBC vice president in defense of the decision.


BankWorcester Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankWorcester Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,031,000
2,762,000
Per share
.25
.34


High Radiation Found in Plant On East 44th St.
LEAD: Potentially hazardous radioactive contamination dating back almost 50 years has been found in a commercial building in midtown Manhattan, the head of a State Assembly committee charged yesterday.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Mafia Leader Convicted


Margins of Safety
LEAD: John Q. Investor remains fearful of the stock market for good reason: six months after the crash, computerized ''program trading'' still remains a bonanza for the heavy hitters and a constant danger to the small investor on whose confidence all markets depend.


New Plans For Parks At Battery
LEAD: Governor Cuomo and Mayor Koch are expected to announce today designs for 50 acres of waterfront parks winding nearly two miles along the edge of Battery Park City and Battery Park.


COMPANY NEWS;
LEAD: The pilots of United Airlines offered $110 a share yesterday for all outstanding stock of the Allegis Corporation, the airline's owner.


BankNorth Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankNorth Group Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,383,000
1,994,000
Per share
1.09
.92


Review/Recital; Albright at the Organ
LEAD: William Albright, the organist and composer, inaugurated the nine-week International Organ Recitals series at the Church of St.
John the Evangelist, 348 East 55th Street, on Monday evening.
His program was mostly contemporary and American, and offered an impressive overview of how composers have lately tapped the organ's considerable resources.


Currents; High-Style Windows
LEAD: AS architects become more involved in the total design process -creating everything from skyscrapers to tea cups - it seems only natural that they design store window displays.
Bergdorf Goodman has asked 10 top New York architects to transform its windows, using clothes from the fall collections.


Joe Niekro Cut
LEAD: The Minnesota Twins asked waivers yesterday on Joe Niekro, one of the most successful knuckleballers in baseball history, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.


Continental Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b87,000,000
c124,700,000
Share earns
1.42
2.01
Shares outst
60,370,145
61,260,186
b-Includes realized capital gains of $1,000,000 and a loss of $300,000 from discontinued operations.


Clinical Sciences Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clinical Sciences Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,020,018
767,073
Net inc
89,949
b214,172
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-12  Polish forces crushed a 10-day strike at the big Lenin steel mill at Nowa Huta.
Meanwhile, riot policemen kept the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk sealed as several hundred workers continued a four-day walkout.
Page A1


Offer to Protect Koppers Jobs
LEAD: In the latest round of its takeover battle with the Koppers Company, Beazer P.L.C. has offered to make ''substantial and important'' guarantees to all Koppers employees in Pittsburgh except for senior management if the company agrees to an immediate merger.


A Rockwell Closing
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation said it would discontinue operations at the plant here that its North American Aircraft division operates to make structural components for the B-1B aircraft.
The company has delivered the last of the B-1B's ordered by the Air Force.
Rockwell said final closing would require about 15 months.


Review/Film; Self-Absorbed Oblivion Before the Nazi Storm
LEAD: In a peaceful Viennese garden, a man and woman who have recently embarked on a love affair discuss the matters they care about most.
He has found a good apartment, in a building he says Mozart often used to pass; will she move in?
She has an offer to travel abroad for professional reasons; will he object too strenuously?


Occupational Medical Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Occupational Medical Corp of America (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,347,775
1,462,747
Net inc
96,336
72,115
Share earns
.04
.03
9mo rev
4,145,521
4,614,158
Net inc
4,331
351,682
Share earns
-
.14


Troopers' Role in Drug War Expands
LEAD: Declaring that the Federal Government has ''failed miserably'' at stopping drugs coming into the United States, Governor Cuomo yesterday announced that 110 state troopers are being deputized by the United States Customs Service to help seize drugs smuggled into New York State.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  COMMERCIALS AS ART


Review/Art; The Elusive Bronze Sculptures of Joel Fisher
LEAD: Joel Fisher's slender sculptures resemble trees or figures but they resist exact definition.
His current exhibition at the Diane Brown Gallery, entitled ''Subtle Delusions,'' expands on an idea the artist has fruitfully pursued for several years - copying in three dimensions various shapes derived from chance arrangements of lines on paper.


Northwestern Public Service Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northwestern Public Service Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
41,013,068
35,216,698
Net inc
5,074,721
4,189,479
Share earns
1.32
1.09


Jean Philippe Fragrances reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jean Philippe Fragrances
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,348,339
1,033,981
Net inc
137,987
25,268
Share earns
.03
-
Yr sales
3,434,961
2,664,701
Net inc
450,308
47,763
Share earns
.09
.01
The company said sales for 1987 included income of $125,000 from sale of a trademark.


Heartland Express reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heartland Express
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,063,769
5,710,635
Net inc
1,252,041
855,948
Share earns
.25
.17


Bonds Gain, but Note Prices Slip
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were mixed in light trading yesterday.


Law School Dean Wanted: A Man for All Reasons
LEAD: Time was when being dean of a law school was the summit of the profession, offering a chance to shape the direction of legal education and hone the next generation of legal talent.
A prime example was Erwin N. Griswold who served 21 years as dean of the Harvard Law School, dominating one of America's prominent institutions, before resigning in 1967 to become Solicitor


ISI Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ISI Systems Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,684,000
8,213,000
Net inc
1,547,000
1,121,000
Share earns
.23
.17
9mo rev
27,136,000
22,890,000
Net inc
4,023,000
2,351,000
Share earns
.60
.42


Bourque Lives Behind a Mask
LEAD: After a Bruin victory, Ray Bourque, the defenseman who balances the rarest of skills with the lunchpail mentality so highly prized among Boston Garden's athletic contingent, sits slumped at his locker.


Review/Opera; Dame Janet Baker as 'Orfeo' in Concert
LEAD: In 1982, Dame Janet Baker completed a retirement from the operatic stage by singing Orfeo in Gluck's ''Orfeo ed Euridice'' at Glyndebourne.
But she has continued as a recitalist, and Wednesday night at Carnegie Hall she appeared in the same role in a semistaged concert performance of the opera with the Oratorio Society of New York.


Cable Consortium Formed
LEAD: Four of the nation's largest cable television companies said today that they would form a research and development consortium to focus on developing high-definition television and other new technologies for the industry.


NL Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NL Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
373,549,000
308,479,000
Net inc
b35,132,000
c12,471,000
Share earns
.12
-
b-After a tax credit of $3,542,000.
c-Net loss


Review/Art; A Brazilian Exhibition In a Didactic Context
LEAD: ''Brazil Projects at P.S. 1'' is one of the more ambitious and flawed shows of the season.
With works by around 70 painters, sculptors, photographers, architects, video artists, costume designers and television directors, this cultural extravaganza fills all three floors of P.S. 1's exhibition space.


Casablanca Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Casablanca Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,417,000
16,484,000
Net inc
961,000
891,000
Share earns
.21
.19
9mo rev
46,898,000
42,435,000
Net inc
1,853,000
b3,567,000
Share earns
.40
.76


Kaisertech Says It Sees Buyout Offers Coming
LEAD: Kaisertech Ltd. said today that it expects one or more acquisition proposals and that it had set up a committee of outside directors to evaluate the offers.


Review/Film; 'Judgment,' on a Hijacking and Its Aftermath
LEAD: ''Judgment in Berlin'' (no relation to ''Judgment at Nuremberg'') is an account of the aftermath of a 1978 hijacking of a Polish airliner by an East German seeking asylum in the West.
Helmut Thiele's appearance at Tempelhof Air Force Base in West Berlin was an embarrassment to the West Germans, so they tossed the case to the equally embarrassed Americans, who had no enthusiasm for punishing a refugee from the East but were bound by international treaty to crack down on hijackings.


Omnicom Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Omnicom Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
204,965,000
177,197,000
Net inc
7,577,000
6,263,000
Share earns
.31
.26
Shares outst
24,739,800
24,383,500
Revenue represents commission and fee income.


King Sunny Ade
LEAD: King Sunny Ade will lead his Nigerian juju band tonight at 8 at the Beacon Theater, Broadway at 74th Street (496-7070).
Tickets are $20.


Before
LEAD: A New York City subway car being prepared for the battle against graffiti.
To see how it looked after being sanded and painted to join the 86 percent of the fleet that is now graffiti-free, turn to page B1. (NYT/Neal Boenzi)


Alba Waldensian Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alba Waldensian Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,557,921
11,157,097
Net inc
14,563
b51,540
Share earns
.01
.03
b-After a loss of $49,567 from discontinued operations.


Jorgen Jenk, 65; Rescued Jews
LEAD: Jorgen R. Jenk, a member of the Danish resistance in World War II and later an international business executive who was president of Georg Jensen Inc., died of heart and liver failure on Tuesday at Charing Cross Hospital in London.
He was 65 years old and lived in London.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Commonwealth Edison Company, a Chicago-based electric utility company, is offering $350 million of first-mortgage bonds in three parts through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


Wellman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wellman Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
78,800,000
63,100,000
Net inc
8,900,000
4,300,000
Share earns
.61
.40
Shares outst
14,469,000
10,800,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Davis Joins Sherwood
LEAD: Marvin David, who has been running a one-man advertising show called Davisworks with the help of the city's multitude of freelancers, has moved in with Sherwood &amp; Schneider and has brought his four clients with him.
Total billings are about $3 million, the president, Lew Sherwood, said.
The clients are the Portuguese National Tourist Office, the Grow Group, Fownes Brothers &amp; Company, glove makers, and James Edmund Inc., maker of Oleg Cassini label menswear.


Fortune Financial
LEAD: A group led by the investor Paul A. Bilzerian said it now controlled about 9.9 percent of the common shares outstanding of Fortune Financial Group, a bank holding company based in Clearwater, Fla.
Earlier this week the investor, who this year took over the Singer Company, said that he had accumulated a 6.25 percent stake in Fortune Financial and that he might seek control of the company.


Bridge
LEAD: For the next five days, the Cavendish Club, at 105 East 73d Street in Manhattan, can claim to be the center of the bridge world.


Linear Instruments Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linear Instruments Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,786,994
1,230,841
Net inc
90,017
b43,965
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
4,127,687
3,474,533
6mo sales
3,465,100
2,421,704
Net inc
160,842
b84,240
Share earns
.04
.02


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Charles W. Schmid has been named senior vice president of marketing at the Miller Brewing Co., Milwaukee.


Methodist Church Vote Assails Corporations
LEAD: Although the United Methodist Church reasserted its traditional doctrinal and sexual standards earlier this week, the nation's second-largest Protestant denomination has demonstrated in the last few days that it is not abandoning the church's active support for liberal social and political causes.


Metro Tel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Tel Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,325,835
1,841,954
Net loss
76,895
34,321
9mo sales
4,744,233
4,038,052
Net inc
77,159
8,557
Share earns
.03
-


Walter N. Reilly, 73, A Film Executive, Dies
LEAD: Walter N. Reilly, a motion-picture and theater executive, died of cancer on Sunday at Northern Westchester Hospital in White Plains.
He was 73 years old.


Geico Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geico Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b54,587,400
b47,207,992
Share earns
3.34
2.81
b-After gains on securities transactions of $21,658,859 for the latest first quarter and $17,284,650 for the year- ago period.


Ports of Call Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ports of Call Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,804,000
14,350,000
Net inc
b82,000
b166,000
Share earns
.03
.07
b-Includes tax credits of $33,000 and $55,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Yemen Oil Exploration
LEAD: Yemen and Southern Yemen have agreed on a joint exploration venture for oil in their border region, newspapers here reported today.
They said agreement had been reached to leave an 850-square-mile area between each other's oilfields free of military installations.


Michigan Energy Resources Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michigan Energy Resources Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
56,029,000
48,094,000
Net inc
3,798,000
2,837,000
Share earns
1.40
1.06


Western Publishing and G.&amp;W. in Merger Talks
LEAD: Western Publishing Group Inc., the nation's largest publisher of children's books, said yesterday that it was holding merger talks with Gulf and Western Inc., the entertainment, publishing and financial services company.


Wichita River Oil reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wichita River Oil (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
813,400
876,278
Net inc
173,500
230,097
Share earns
.36
.51


New Head of Coleco On a Salvage Mission
LEAD: Morton E. Handel, who has served under Arnold C. Greenberg, chairman and chief executive of Coleco Industries, now finds himself in Mr.
Greenberg's seat with a mission to salvage the company.


G&amp;K Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* G&amp;K Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Revenue
23,557,000
20,156,000
Net inc
1,721,000
1,095,000
Share earns
.19
.15
Shares outst
8,962,000
7,182,000
9mo rev
67,427,000
59,735,000
Net inc
5,474,000
3,648,000
Share earns
.63
.51
Shares outst
8,666,000
7,083,000


Xscribe Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xscribe Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,503,000
7,082,000
Net loss
805,000
b103,000
Share earns
-
.03
Yr rev
31,997,000
29,817,000
Net inc
485,000
1,426,000
Share earns
.10
.36
b


Craig Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Craig Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
261,746,000
240,959,000
Net inc
842,000
806,000
Share earns
.40
.43
Shares outst
2,135,000
1,859,000
6mo rev
521,356,000
480,030,000
Net inc
1,629,000
998,000
Share earns
.77
.54
Shares outst
2,118,000
1,859,000


DSC Communications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DSC Communications Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
82,276,000
76,732,000
Net inc
3,962,000
b2,929,000
Share earns
.10
.07
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $525,000 from the purchase of some of the company's debentures.


Superpower Proxies in Third World Deplored
LEAD: A panel of American and Soviet public figures issued a report today suggesting ways to eliminate confrontation in the third world.
But they disagreed at a news conference about their key proposal, a ban on superpower use of so-called ''proxy forces'' in regional conflicts.


AFP Imaging Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AFP Imaging Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,514,831
4,350,496
Net inc
46,192
48,853
Share earns
.01
.01
9mo sales
30,571,492
14,462,664
Net inc
348,760
292,905
Share earns
.07
.06


Our Towns; And Next Year: Even Scarier! Mother's Day II!
LEAD: There is no boy or man alive who does not know the terror known as ''Mother's Day.'' The true story of Mother's Day is boys and men out there all alone in shops and malls desperately trying to find a half-decent gift that won't humiliate them.


Two Pesos reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Two Pesos (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,247,000
3,235,000
Net loss
1,304,000
b157,000
Share earns
-
.02
Yr rev
25,229,000
11,200,000
Net loss
1,085,000
b342,000
Share earns
-
.06
b


Hong Kong Stake Raised
LEAD: Jardine Strategic Holdings announced today that it had raised its stake in the Hongkong Land Company to 33 percent from 25 percent.


Cominco Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cominco Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
363,200,000
297,000,000
Net inc
31,900,000
4,400,000
Share earns
.35
-
There are no share earnings for the year-ago quarter because preferred dividend requirements exceeded net income.


Children's Campaign '88: Where, Then, Stand the Candidates?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Comshare Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comshare Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,490,500
17,402,200
Net inc
813,000
444,000
Share earns
.30
.16
9mo rev
58,501,000
51,599,000
Net inc
1,298,500
1,602,500
Share earns
.47
.58


Rebels and U.S. Say Sandinistas Are Blocking Aid
LEAD: Adolfo Calero, right, a Nicaraguan rebel leader, at a news conference in Washington yesterday where he said the Sandinista Government was holding U.S. aid ''hostage'' during peace talks.
The White House made similar charges.
With Mr.
Calero were two rebel leaders with whom he is reported to be feuding, Col.


Louisiana Refinery Explodes, Killing One Worker
LEAD: An early morning explosion and fire that ripped off roofs and doors of nearby homes rocked a Shell Oil refinery here today, killing one worker, injuring more than 40 people and leaving six people missing.


Bow Valley Industries Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bow Valley Industries Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
59,000,000
67,300,000
Net inc
7,400,000
b12,400,000
Share earns
.07
.18
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $2.9 million.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


George Rose, 68, Broadway Star And Winner of 2 Tonys, Is Dead
LEAD: George Rose, a veteran comic actor who was as adept at Shakespeare as at Gilbert and Sullivan and who won two Tony Awards, was found dead early today in an overturned car near his vacation home in the Dominican Republic.
The police there said Mr.
Rose's death appeared to have been the result of an accident.


AFGHAN REBELS GET SUPPORT FROM U.S. FOR A GOVERNMENT
LEAD: The United States has told the Afghan guerrillas that it would support them in an effort to form a provisional government if they consolidate their control of most of the country and meet other criteria, State Department officials said today.


Two Reputed Mob Figures Face A 3d Trial in an Officer's Death
LEAD: Two reputed Mafia figures will be tried a third time on charges that they murdered a New York City police detective on a Queens street, the Queens District Attorney's office said yesterday.


Labarge Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Labarge Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
13,483,255
14,629,007
Net inc
b129,940
551,992
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
43,576,775
41,483,118
Net inc
b601,337
c3,378,049
Share earns
-
.33
b-After gains from a debenture exchange and a tax loss carryforward of $44,200 for the quarter and $204,500 for the 9 months.


Golden Valley Microwave Foods reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden Valley Microwave Foods (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
35,641,000
22,723,000
Net inc
4,050,000
2,833,000
Share earns
.34
.24


A Symphonic Summit After Politicians Talk
LEAD: Shortly after President Reagan joins Mikhail S. Gorbachev at the summit meeting, a Moscow stage will combine the New York Philharmonic and the State Symphony Orchestra of the Soviet Ministry of Culture.


Bingo King Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bingo King Co Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,866,000
4,981,000
Net inc
188,000
71,000
Share earns
.13
.05
9mo sales
17,928,000
14,345,000
Net inc
432,000
335,000
Share earns
.31
.22


Wicat Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wicat Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Revenue
8,181,000
7,584,000
Net loss
b3,497,000
4,927,000
Yr rev
39,200,000
28,040,000
Net loss
b4,897,000
11,567,000
b-Includes a $1.5 million reserve against a loss on the sale of the company's Australian subsidiary.


Airborne Freight Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airborne Freight Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
175,499,000
144,947,000
Net inc
b2,045,000
2,860,000
Share earns
.29
.47
Shares outst
6,947,000
6,053,000
b-Includes a gain of $1,013,000, or 14 cents a share, from aircraft sales.


43 Employers Are Honored By Congress Over Child Care
LEAD: Forty-three employers that sponsor child care programs for their workers were honored in the Capitol building today by a group of House members seeking to expand federally aided child care.


Milgray Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Milgray Electronics Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
22,958,831
16,451,577
Net inc
556,158
b296,132
Share earns
.71
.38
b-Includes a gain of $351,200 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Innovex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Innovex Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,847,816
4,139,993
Net inc
371,382
208,704
Share earns
.08
.05
6mo sales
11,260,566
8,169,959
Net inc
640,563
510,268
Share earns
.14
.12


Coast-to-Coast in 20 Seconds: Fax Machines Alter Business
LEAD: A boom in facsimile machines is sweeping the business world and beginning to alter the way people conduct their affairs.


Wall St. Eerily Quiet As Institutions Retreat
LEAD: When William F. Harnisch, president of Forstmann-Leff Associates, walked into his trading room last Monday afternoon, he could not believe his eyes.
Not one of the dozens of telephone lines linking his money management firm to Wall Street brokers was lighting up.


Lac Minerals Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lac Minerals Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
45,000,000
5,900,000
Net inc
8,000,000
3,600,000
Share earns
.09
.04
Shares outst
91,820,000
84,915,000
The share earnings reflect 3-for-1 stock split last September.


S.E.C. Attacks Wisconsin Law
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission filed a friend-of-the-court brief today, charging that Wisconsin's anti-takeover law is unconstitutional.


National Pizza Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Pizza Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 29
1988
1987
Sales
30,547,000
27,421,000
Net inc
2,384,000
1,920,000
Share earns
.26
.23
Yr sales
119,788,000
96,479,000
Net inc
8,766,000
b7,387,000
Share earns
.99
.88


Dow Seeks Bigger Montedison Stake
LEAD: The Dow Chemical Company sought United States antitrust permission to raise its stake in Italy's Montedison S.p.A.
Dow said it had filed under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act for antitrust clearance to increase its holding in what is essentially a rival company.
Dow said it holds between 4 and 5 percent of the stock of the big chemical company, which is based in Milan,


8 Decline Olympic Bids
LEAD: The list of players who have declined invitations to try out for the United States Olympic basketball team has grown to eight, and it could grow longer as potential Olympians choose to pursue the big money of the National Basketball Association rather than risk injury playing for a gold medal, according to Coach John Thompson of the Olympic team.


Who Wants a 'Democratic, Secular' Palestine?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Penn Virginia Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penn Virginia Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,230,000
12,728,000
Net inc
1,424,000
1,714,000
Share earns
.37
.45


Ranger Oil Ltd (Canada) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ranger Oil Ltd (Canada) (N)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
27,636,000
24,359,000
Net inc
b7,340,000
b7,175,000
Share earns
.09
.09
b-Includes a special gain of $1,601,000 and $621,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Book Notes
LEAD:  Publicity vs. Privacy


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Malombo Music


Review/Film; Imamura on Updating Divine Squalor
LEAD: The robust good looks of Shohei Imamura's 1968 Cinemascope epic ''The Profound Desire of the Gods'' only heighten the perverse quality of the action, and Mr.
Imamura's ribald, casually comic direction has much the same effect.
This three-hour film, which will begin the Film Forum 2's Imamura retrospective, makes an ideal introduction to the maverick qualities of this film maker's idiosyncratic style.


Brintec Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brintec Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
82,445,000
73,140,000
Net inc
1,701,000
1,842,000
Share earns
.14
.15


United Dominion Realty Trust Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Dominion Realty Trust Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b93,000
b216,000
Per share
.02
.03
b-Includes a charge of $14,000 and $15,000 from extinguishment of debt for the latest and year-ago period, respectively.


16 Still Missing in Lebanon: When They Disappeared
LEAD:  AMERICAN  Terry A. Anderson, reporter, March 16, 1985.
Thomas M. Sutherland, college dean, June 9, 1985.
Frank Herbert Reed, educator, Sept. 9, 1986.
Joseph James Cicippio, university executive, Sept. 12, 1986.
Edward Austin Tracy, author, Oct. 21, 1986.
Jesse Turner, college professor Jan.


Invitron Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Invitron Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,971,000
3,370,000
Net loss
3,981,000
1,397,000


Osmonics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Osmonics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,790,000
4,880,000
Net inc
490,000
410,000
Share earns
.14
.12


Family Steak Houses of Florida reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Family Steak Houses of Florida (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,512,258
4,847,895
Net inc
416,661
330,197
Share earns
.04
.03


Datamarine International reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datamarine International (OTC)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
5,338,091
4,381,070
Net inc
224,750
124,283
Share earns
.21
.11
6mo sales
9,883,060
7,979,888
Net inc
408,058
287,946
Share earns
.37
.26


Fresh Juice Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fresh Juice Co Inc
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
815,000
328,000
Net inc
21,000
b90,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


N.H.L. Playoffs; Oilers Rally to Gain 2-0 Lead in Series
LEAD: Mark Messier scored his second goal of the game and assisted on Craig Simpson's game-winner at 5 minutes 1 second of the third period, capping a three-goal surge that gave the Edmonton Oilers a 5-3 victory over the Detroit Red Wings tonight in Game 2 of the Campbell Conference finals.


Inspection of Aloha Airlines Found Maintenance Wanting
LEAD: An extensive inspection of Aloha Airlines last December by the Federal Aviation Administration found the airline did not have an adequate system to assure that its aircraft were properly maintained, according to agency documents.


Williamsburg Bridge Not Ready to Reopen
LEAD: The Williamsburg Bridge will remain closed until at least next week, New York City transportation officials said yesterday.
The bridge was closed April 12 as a danger to the public, and officials have made different predictions as to when it can be reopened.


Gomez Goes About His Business Quietly
LEAD: Some fans came to this tournament to watch John McEnroe - however briefly - while others were interested in the new generation of Americans, teen-agers like Andre Agassi and Michael Chang.
Some of the schoolgirls are smitten with Stefan Edberg, giggling as they follow the 21-year-old Swede as he walks from the interview tent to the familiar Tudor clubhouse at Forest


Park Electrochemical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Park Electrochemical Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1988
1987
Sales
35,700,000
27,596,000
Net inc
2,087,000
1,817,000
Share earns
.40
.35
Yr sales
128,136,000
102,777,000
Net inc
7,030,000
5,885,000
Share earns
1.36
1.14


Matec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matec Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,309,812
5,359,318
Net inc
116,803
78,988
Share earns
.04
.02


Eldorado Motor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldorado Motor Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Sales
18,511,079
18,503,545
Net loss
459,799
b141,616
Share earns
-
.05
9mo sales
55,668,726
53,755,260
Net loss
572,962
b371,504
Share earns
-
.14


Who Wants a 'Democratic, Secular' Palestine?; P.L.O. Dominance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dukakis, at Coal Mine, Calls for Energy Policy
LEAD: Wearing a hard hat and overalls, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts spent more than an hour in a coal mine today and then promised a national energy policy that would stimulate coal production and ''invest special resources'' in depressed mining towns like this one southeast of Charleston.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.75
6.24
6.84
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.20
6.14
5.51
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.38
6.39
5.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.70
8.67
8.33
30-YR.


Polydex Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Polydex Pharmaceuticals
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,285,775
1,238,990
Net inc
251,991
b1,376,241
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


TV Weekend; 'The Bourne Identity,' A Mini-Series Thriller
LEAD: Robert Ludlum, a best-selling author of thrillers, gets to prime-time television this Sunday - on Channel 7 at 9 P.M. - with an adaptation of his novel ''The Bourne Identity.'' In the general scheme of things, this is what executives like to call important television.
It stars Richard Chamberlain and Jaclyn Smith, known in the industry as king and queen of the mini-series form.


Crown Crafts Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Crafts Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 3
1988
1987
Sales
18,867,000
13,839,000
Net inc
1,311,000
841,000
Share earns
.43
.27
Yr sales
72,166,000
53,789,000
Net inc
5,393,000
2,790,000
Share earns
1.74
.92


Review/Film; The Ripper's Return
LEAD: The world needs another movie about a copycat Jack the Ripper as much as it needs another Ripper, unless the film has the wit of ''The Ruling Class'' (Peter O'Toole as a nobleman who believes he's Jack), or the tautness of ''Time After Time'' (the Ripper chased through time by H. G. Wells). ''Jack's


Atalanta-Sosnoff Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atalanta-Sosnoff Capital (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,233,000
8,551,000
Net inc
b1,900,000
c2,104,000
Share earns
.22
.24
b-Includes an after-tax gain of $28,000 from the repurchase of convertible debentures and is after a pretax trading loss of $331,000.


Losses Posted in Quarter By Viacom and Turner
LEAD: Viacom Inc. and Turner Broadcasting System Inc., two entertainment and communications concerns, both reported first-quarter losses.


Houston Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Houston Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
808,885,000
777,250,000
Net inc
79,533,000
57,775,000
Share earns
.68
.50


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Selective Approach to Spirit Sales
LEAD: CARILLON IMPORTERS, which handles such spirits as Absolut vodka, Bombay gin and La Grande Passion and Grand Marnier liqueurs, likes to put its advertising where its customers are but its competition is not.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ketchum Yellow Pages Appoints Top Officials
LEAD: Robert Hickson, 61 years old, and Steven Troy, 39, have been promoted to chairman and president, respectively, of Ketchum Yellow Pages.
That specialty advertising unit of Ketchum Communications grew from $13.5 million in billings in 1982 to more than $64 million this year.


American Stores May Lift Lucky Bid
LEAD: The American Stores Company disclosed that it had told Lucky Stores Inc. it was willing to pay more than $60 a share for the company if non-public information provided by the company justified a higher price.
American Stores signaled its determination not to halt its battle for control of Lucky, even though the Dublin, Calif., supermarket chain has accepted a buyout offer of $61 a share, or $2.4 billion, from Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen Ltd.


Astrocom Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astrocom Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,122,000
2,727,000
Net inc
39,000
b29,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Review/Dance; Bustamante As Romeo In Ballet
LEAD: Any debut in a ballet that takes three hours is a major one; in this respect, American Ballet Theater's production of Sir Kenneth MacMillan's ''Romeo and Juliet'' automatically becomes a test of both artistic projection and physical stamina.


Viacom Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Viacom Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
293,128,000
-
Net loss
b45,692,000
-
b-Includes interest expense of $65,101,000.
Viacom is a new company resulting from the June 9, 1987 acquisition of Viacom Int.


Air Wisconsin Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Air Wisconsin Service (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,869,000
b604,000
Share earns
.92
-
b-Net loss  Share earnings are fully diluted.


UDC-Universal Development LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UDC-Universal Development LP (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
48,549,000
41,477,000
Net inc
4,846,000
4,287,000
Share earns
.42
.40
Year-ago revenue restated to reflect consolidation of Westbrook Village venture.


Niagara Mohawk Yield Is 9.986%
LEAD: The Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation is offering $200 million of 9 7/8 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 1998 at a price of 99.30 to yield 9.986 percent through a group of underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


Hanover Insurance Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hanover Insurance Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b25,948,000
c32,017,000
Share earns
1.26
1.55
b-After capital gains of $1,844,000.
c-After capital gains of $6,106,000 and a tax credit of $315,000.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; An Audit to Determine Location of Magazines
LEAD: The new interest in Whittle Communications' plans for publishing magazines specifically for doctors' offices makes it timely for someone to introduce syndicated research on which magazines can be found where.


Cooper Says It Is Seeking Buyers
LEAD: The Cooper Companies said that the board of directors had decided to seek a buyer for the whole company or for any or all of its businesses individually.
The decision follows an announcement last week by the Federal Trade Commission that it will seek to block Cooper's proposed sale of its contact-lens business to the Schering-Plough Corporation because it would reduce competition in soft contact lenses.


Impressionist Shows at 2 Auction Houses
LEAD: THIS is the May weekend when bidding paddles are polished and art enthusiasts by the thousands make the rounds of New York's auction galleries.
From today through Sunday, Sotheby's and Christie's will welcome the multitudes who come to view the largest exhibitions of Impressionist, modern and tribal art to be presented by the auction houses this year.


Vermont Research Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vermont Research Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
1,321,000
1,247,000
Net loss
889,000
684,000


Northeastern Mortgage Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeastern Mortgage Co Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b849,000
c1,162,000
Share earns
-
.21
Net loss
3,143,000
c2,625,000
Share earns
-
.47
b-Includes a gain of $512,000 from the sale of servicing rights.


Review/Film; A Priest's Sex-Struck Parish
LEAD: ''The Mass Is Ended'' begins with a young priest, Don Giulio, returning to his home in Rome after service on a picturesque island, only to find more problems than he can handle.
They are mostly problems of the heart.
The priest whom Giulio is replacing had to give up the pulpit when his love affair produced a child.


Chittenden Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chittenden Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,826,000
1,577,000
Share earns
.36
.31


IRT Property Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IRT Property Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,601,464
6,518,180
Net inc
b8,763,910
2,165,978
Share earns
.98
.23
Shares outst
10,681,681
9,517,550
b-After a gain of $6,528,357 on the sale of properties.


Teamster Chief Taking Leave
LEAD: Jackie Presser is taking a leave of absence from his post as president of the teamsters' union just as a jury's verdict in the trial of a New York mob leader boss has reportedly set back Federal efforts to oust Mr.
Presser and other teamster leaders.


About Real Estate; Smithtown Making Condominiums Feel at Home
LEAD: Smithtown, on the North Shore of Long Island, has been one of the later communities to accept condominiums.
By waiting longer, however, it has devised a formula to bypass much of the opposition to them found elsewhere.


Ivax Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ivax Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,060,000
587,000
Net inc
59,000
b254,000
b-Net loss


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  MILWAUKEE (AL) - Recalled Paul Mirabella, pitcher, from Denver of the American Association.
Sent Steve Kiefer, infielder, to Denver.
SAN FRANCISCO (NL) - Placed Dave Dravecky, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Terry Mulholland, pitcher, from Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.


Walter H. Miller, Banker, 55
LEAD: Walter H. Miller, chairman of the Richmond Hill Savings Bank and a former chairman of King Kullen supermarkets, died of a stroke Tuesday at his home in Garden City, L.I.
He was 55 years old.


Cardinal Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cardinal Industries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,985,000
8,472,000
Net inc
166,000
102,000
Share earns
.06
.04


No Headline
LEAD: A field of 17 3-year-olds was entered today for the 114th Kentucky Derby at Churchill Downs Saturday, and the luck of the draw put two of the favorites in the outside posts.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Carlisle Cos., Cincinnati, appointed Robert J. Deffeyes president of its newly formed Memory Products Group, a marketer of complementary computer storage products.


Deltona Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deltona Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,355,000
17,660,000
Net inc
b1,084,000
b16,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Includes tax credits of $408,000 for the latest quarter and $7,000 for the year-earlier period.


Cerner Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cerner Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,604,000
5,566,000
Net inc
952,000
654,000
Share earns
.25
.18


Mercury Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercury Savings &amp; Loan Assn (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,128,000
b3,580,000
Per share
.20
.64
b-Includes a gain of $1,413,000 from an accounting change.


Western Micro Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Micro Technology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
22,386,000
13,781,000
Net inc
410,000
b907,000
Share earns
.15
-
Yr sales
73,362,000
52,185,000
Net inc
665,000
b903,000
Share earns
.24
-


Fossil Hand Could Upset Notions on Human Evolution
LEAD: In a finding that could upset established ideas of human evolution, a scientist reported yesterday that fossil hands from a South African cave strongly indicate that the direct ancestors to early man were not alone in developing the ability to make and use tools.


IRT Shooting Suspect Has an Arrest Record
LEAD: A Brooklyn high-school student charged this week with shooting one of six men who attacked him on an IRT train has two previous arrests for robbery, one of them in an incident on the IRT, police records show.


Galaxy Carpet Mills Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galaxy Carpet Mills Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Revenue
64,529,000
60,382,000
Net loss
503,000
c654,000
Share earns
-
.19
6mo rev
130,489,000
118,749,000
Net inc
b1,690,000
1,763,000
Share earns
.51
.52


Sky Express Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sky Express Inc
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
2,685,039
3,785,917
Net loss
1,629,133
64,203
9mo sales
9,027,213
10,679,832
Net loss
2,032,542
b141,881
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Steamy Nuns and Junkies
LEAD: When Yolanda's boyfriend dies of a dose of heroin laced with strychnine, with which she unknowingly supplied him, she seeks refuge from the police at the convent of the Holy Redeemers, dedicated to Our Lady of the Forsaken.
Its motto: ''Sin is our chosen path.'' There the nightclub singer-cum-junkie finds a home away from home.


Chandler Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chandler Insurance
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,210,530
105,121
Share earns
.53
.05


Cuban Riot Study Says Clues Weren't Heeded
LEAD: Officials at two Federal prisons where Cuban inmates rioted last November failed to secure the facilities partly because early signs of trouble were not relayed to them by prison personnel, a Justice Department report concludes.


Realty Broker Is Sued Over Racial Steering
LEAD: The New York State Attorney General today sued a Yonkers real-estate broker, Dan Merlino, and three employees of his company, Realty Forum, accusing them of racial steering by providing listings of apartments in particular neighborhoods based solely on a client's race or color.


Behind the 2 Democratic Contenders, 2 Hard-Driving Campaign Managers; Gerald Austin Provides Direction And Order to Jackson's Candidacy
LEAD: The evening before the Rev.
Jesse Jackson was defeated in the Ohio Democratic primary was a peak moment for Gerald Austin, the Ohio political consultant who is Mr.
Jackson's campaign manager.


U.S. Denounces Attacks on the Polish Strikers
LEAD: The White House deplored the violent attacks on Polish strikers today and urged a peaceful dialogue between the Government and the workers, including the outlawed free trade union movement, Solidarity.


Circadian Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circadian Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,043,000
5,510,000
Net loss
b98,000
c89,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
13,596,000
14,427,000
Net loss
1,319,000
c540,000
Share earns
-
.12
b-Includes a tax benefit of $250,000.


Poison Gas Leak in Soviet
LEAD: Fifty-one people were hospitalized last month with gas poisoning after hydrogen sulphide leaked from a gas refinery in the Ural Mountains, the newspaper Sovetskaya Rossiya reported today.
The daily said that on April 26 many people in the village of Muzhichya Pavlovka woke up with severe headaches, weakness and nosebleeds.


Datum Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datum Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,422,000
6,452,000
Net inc
279,000
217,000
Share earns
.10
.08


Interleaf Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interleaf Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,117,000
11,786,000
Net inc
b2,469,000
c642,000
Share earns
.21
.06
Yr rev
58,389,000
37,173,000
Net inc
b6,980,000
d410,000
Share earns
.59
-


Cigna Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cigna Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,300,000,000
3,900,000,000
Net inc
b71,000,000
c175,000,000
Share earns
.80
2.05
b-Includes realized investment gains of $8 million and income from discontinued operations of $11.7 million.


Quest Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quest Medical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,863,523
3,505,607
Net inc
b321,619
6,813
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
6,376,115
7,430,360
b-Includes a tax credit of $113,679.


Triangle Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triangle Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
993,600,000
912,200,000
Net inc
b11,308,000
6,254,000
Share earns
.40
.20
b-Includes an after-tax gain of $11,148,000 in the market value of its marketable equity securities portfolio over year-end 1987 values.


Verticom Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Verticom Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,734,000
2,953,000
Net loss
138,000
b237,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


Fire Damages Wright's Office
LEAD: Fire broke out late today in the Capitol Hill office of House Speaker Jim Wright, Democrat of Texas, and the blaze raged unimpeded for 10 minutes because of a lack of fire hoses and alarms, said a Congressman who was one of the first at the scene.


17 Die as French Free Hostages in New Caledonia
LEAD: French commandos freed 23 hostages today in the South Pacific territory of New Caledonia in an eight-hour siege in which 15 of the hostages' captors and 2 commandos were killed, the Government said.


Intelligent Systems Master LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intelligent Systems Master LP (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
41,734,000
44,405,000
Net inc
7,000
1,811,000
Share earns
-
.18
The year-ago share earnings are cents a unit.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST APARTHEID - 10 A.M. and 3:15 P.M.


Franklin Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Electric Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
40,500,000
33,700,000
Net inc
2,900,000
2,400,000
Share earns
.78
.74


National Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Insurance Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
884,000
b640,000
Share earns
.21
.20
Shares outst
4,244,981
3,150,180
b-Includes an accounting change gain of $109,000.


At The Bar
LEAD: For Arnie Becker, Esq., the loser-turned-Lothario on ''L.A.
Law,'' legal life is one sexual adventure after another.
Viewers of the popular television show are led to believe that romance, or at least lust, is as much a part of divorce practice as custody agreements, and every bit as proper.


Cade Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cade Industries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,037,930
12,323,414
Net inc
452,886
156,794
Share earns
.03
.01


U.S. Tax Receipts Lag
LEAD: Government tax receipts are running somewhat behind expectations this spring, apparently dashing any remaining hopes for a second straight decline in the budget deficit.


Live, From Mount Everest
LEAD: A television viewer in Tokyo watching members of two multinational mountain-climbing teams that simultaneously scaled Mount Everest, transmitting the first live broadcast from the summit yesterday.
A small video camera attached to the helmet of a Japanese climber relayed the signals via satellite to television stations in Japan and China.


Market Place; In the Near Term Gas Looks Bright
LEAD: MANY natural gas distribution companies are expected to do well in the near future as oil prices remain relatively high and as the manufacturing sector of the economy continues its robust activity.


Who Wants a 'Democratic, Secular' Palestine?; Bir Zeit University Poll
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cobe Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cobe Laboratories Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
56,139,000
45,050,000
Net inc
3,537,000
2,137,000
Share earns
.54
.32


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Brunch at Hotel Maxim's


Household International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Household International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,068,900,000
749,700,000
Net inc
56,000,000
50,200,000
Share earns
1.53
1.18
Shares outst
34,700,000
40,100,000


Agnico-Eagle Mines Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Agnico-Eagle Mines Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,418,000
10,144,000
Net inc
b6,856,000
c4,497,000
Share earns
.49
.32
Yr rev
51,751,000
37,396,000
Net inc
b13,852,000
c6,625,000
Share earns
.99
.47


Foodmaker Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foodmaker Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 10
1988
1987
Revenue
150,926,000
138,833,000
Net inc
4,583,000
3,553,000
Share earns
.36
.31
Shares outst
12,868,000
11,375,000
28wk rev
345,503,000
308,772,000
Net inc
7,803,000
3,960,000
Share earns
.60
.40
Shares outst
12,977,000
9,916,000


Atlantic Southeast Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Southeast Airlines (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
30,758,422
24,281,115
Net inc
1,159,776
2,000,458
Share earns
.09
.15


Information Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Information Resources Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
27,050,000
26,030,000
Net loss
1,250,000
b1,420,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


Trade Halts At N.A.S.D. Permitted
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission, divided 3 to 2, today allowed the National Association of Securities Dealers to halt trading of individual securities when an important news anannouncement is made.


F.D.A. Assailed on Approval of Drug
LEAD: Some doctors and other witnesses charged today that the Food and Drug Administration approved a sedative related to Valium without complete information about the drug's potency or some of the deaths associated with its use overseas.


Landmark Land Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Land Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
121,857,000
65,890,000
Net inc
13,186,000
b4,778,000
Share earns
1.65
-
b-Net loss


MDC Asset Investors reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MDC Asset Investors (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
166,174,000
63,430,000
Net inc
9,237,000
3,700,000
Share earns
.73
.74
Shares outst
12,622,000
5,013,000


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amax Inc., Greenwich, Conn., said it plans to expand production at its Sleeper gold mine in Nevada by 20 percent, adding 40,000 ounces a year of capacity by 1989.


ROCKET FUEL PLANT FACING QUESTIONS
LEAD: Union officials raised questions today about safety at the rocket fuel plant where a series of devastating explosions Wednesday killed one person, left one other missing and injured more than 200.


K-Tron International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* K-Tron International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,713,000
9,336,000
Net inc
b1,196,000
b670,000
Share earns
.39
.17
Shares outst
3,078,000
3,868,000
b-After tax credits of $325,000 for the latest first quarter and $30,000 for the year-ago period.


Cultures Blend as Atlanta Installs a Black as Catholics' Archbishop
LEAD: Eugene Antonio Marino, the nation's first black Roman Catholic Archbishop, was formally installed today in a ceremony that mixed Gregorian chant, brass fanfares, folk music, black gospel music and Spanish hymns.


Murder Ruled Out in Death
LEAD: Foul play has been ruled out in the death of a 22-year-old New York University student from Boston who was found dead in his dormitory room Wednesday, the police said yesterday.
The body of the student, identified as Daniel Rosenberg, was discovered by a roommate at 33 Third Avenue, near Ninth Street.


Moore Products Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moore Products Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
22,540,000
21,439,000
Net inc
1,089,000
1,209,000
Share earns
.52
.58


Art People
LEAD:  The Awful Truth


Maryland Federal Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maryland Federal Savings &amp; Loan
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,058,000
1,007,000
Per share
.38
-
The company went public in June.


California High Court Rules Against Club on Membership
LEAD: The state Supreme Court today allowed the California Coastal Commission to require that an exclusive club in the Los Angeles area pledge that it will not discriminate in exchange for permission to develop beach property.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Behind Two Candidates


Moto Photo Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moto Photo Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,066,904
3,475,499
Net loss
298,421
149,236


Palestinian-American Held
LEAD: The Israeli authorities arrested Mubarak Awad, a Palestinian-American advocate of nonviolent protest, Thursday, Palestinian sources said.
The Palestinian sources said the police arrested Mr.
Awad during the night at his East Jerusalem home and took him for questioning.
Mr.
Awad, who advocates non-violent resistance to Israeli occupation, is a United States citizen.


One Dead, 30 Hurt in Los Angeles Skyscraper Fire
LEAD: Flames and smoke spewing from the 12th through 15th floors of the 62- story First Interstate Bank Building in Los Angeles early yesterday.
A building engineer died and more than 30 people were injured.
Officials called it the worst high-rise fire in Los Angeles history.
Page A20. (AP)


ACS Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ACS Enterprises Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
680,910
709,513
Net inc
355,313
b217,413
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss  The company said year-ago figures are restated to show the results of Home Viewer Publications Inc., which was disposed of Dec.


Reburying the Dead
LEAD: The large halls of the museum were dark and cool, a relief from the bright sun of Jerusalem.


Restaurants
LEAD: It's really not fair the way chefs move from on restaurant kitchen to another in this town, often under cover of darkness with no public announcement so diners can keep track.
Perhaps restaurateurs should be like professional sports teams and hold well-publicized drafts: ''I'll swap your Bobby (Mesquite Sizzler) LaRouche and his saucier for two pastry chefs and a first-round draft choice next year.


Perception Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Perception Technology Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,216,170
2,964,471
Net loss
796,851
760,732
6mo sales
6,677,907
7,204,572
Net loss
857,893
b85,792
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


PAM Transportation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PAM Transportation
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,505,279
13,907,045
Net loss
402,721
b975,881
Share earns
-
.20
b-Net income


Datascope Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datascope Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
28,100,000
23,400,000
Net inc
2,882,000
1,606,000
Share earns
.65
.40
9mo sales
73,950,000
60,750,000
Net inc
6,113,000
3,075,000
Share earns
1.38
.78


New England Critical Care Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Critical Care Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,748,000
6,029,000
Net inc
1,109,000
634,000
Share earns
.19
.14
Shares outst
5,829,000
4,653,000


Colorado String Quartet
LEAD: The Colorado String Quartet (Julie Rosenfeld and Deborah Redding, violinists; Francesca Martin, violist, and Sharon Prater, cellist) are to play Haydn's ''Sun'' Quartet, Dvorak's Quartet in A flat (Op. 105) and Ginastera's Quartet No. 2 on Sunday at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
Tickets are $10.
Information: 874-6770.


Westmoreland Coal Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westmoreland Coal Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
137,203,000
141,396,000
Net loss
b3,156,000
c1,454,000
Share earns
-
.18
b-Includes a $2.5 million gain from a change in accounting for income taxes.


Train Is Struck From Behind; 20 Passengers Hurt in Jersey
LEAD: A locomotive struck the back of an N.J.
Transit passenger train on the North Jersey Coast Line today, injuring at least 20 people, the police said.


Yacht Dispute in Court
LEAD: Michael Fay of New Zealand asked the New York State Supreme Court yesterday to rule on the San Diego Yacht Club's plan to defend the America's Cup with a multihull.
A hearing is scheduled May 18 before Judge Carmen Beauchamp Ciparick.


Let the Retail Price Be Right
LEAD: Should a manufacturer have the power to tell retailers what to charge consumers for a product?
The Supreme Court's recent ruling on this doesn't plow new ground but warns Congress that a majority of the Court remains uneasy with forbidding manufacturers to fix retail prices.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Kirshenbaum Account
LEAD: National Consumer Information Services, a recently formed data base company, has selected the 11-month-old Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond of New York to handle its $2.5 million advertising account.
It is the agency's biggest single assignment.
The client, based in San Francisco, plans to provide consumers with product information.


Vestron Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vestron Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
79,372,000
47,752,000
Net inc
b13,023,000
c2,040,000
Share earns
.35
-
b-Includes a $15.7 million pretax gain from the settlement of litigation.
c-Net loss


Regency Cruises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regency Cruises Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
21,223,000
10,576,000
Net inc
2,665,000
b1,334,000
Share earns
.11
.08
Shares outst
23,290,000
16,819,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $401,000.


Books of the Times; Murder Spans the Decades in Tales of Suspense
LEAD:  Darkness at Dawn  Early Suspense Classics  By Cornell Woolrich  Edited by Francis M. Nevins Jr. and Martin H. Greenberg; introduction by Francis M. Nevins Jr. 297 pages.
Peter Bedrick Books.
Paperback,$8.95.
First Prize  By Edward Cline  216 pages.
The Mysterious Press. $15.95.


Los Angeles High-Rise Fire Kills 1; Officials Cite Lack of Sprinklers
LEAD: Fire ravaged the tallest building in California late Wednesday night, resulting in one death, injury to more than 30 people and questions about the construction and safety of modern skyscrapers.


State Authority Increases Offer For Lilco Stock
LEAD: A state power authority, already in a difficult proxy contest to take over the Long Island Lighting Company, today raised its purchase bid by $222 million, offering Lilco's investors $12 a share for their common stock.


LCS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LCS Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,620,733
9,193,159
Net inc
74,096
372,311
Share earns
.05
.24
6mo sales
18,923,605
18,075,855
Net inc
104,137
682,339
Share earns
.07
.44
The year-ago 6 months included after-tax gain of $132,000, or 9 cents a share, from early termination of a contract.


Review/Dance; Music Highlight's City Ballet's All-Robbins Night
LEAD: If you can believe, as legend has it, that James Audubon was the ''lost Dauphin'' and that this son of Louis XVI escaped the French Revolution and came to America, then you can believe that ''Birds of America,'' a ballet related to this theme, was actually on the way to completion by George Balanchine.


Is Moscow Really Tilting to Defense?
LEAD: How sincere is the Soviet Union about devising a new military doctrine that emphasizes defense and what its officials call a ''reasonable sufficiency'' of forces?
After my recent meeting with the Defense Minister, Gen.
Dmitri T. Yazov, I came away convinced that, while there remains a wide gap between reality and rhetoric,


An Irving 'Poison Pill' Eliminated
LEAD: The Bank of New York Company said last night that it had reached an agreement with more than two-thirds of the Irving Bank Corporation's 15 preferred shareholders to waive a ''poison pill'' provision that would prevent the takeover of Irving.


Party Roles Limited for New Yorkers
LEAD: The vote in New York may have been critical to the Democrats' primary campaign, but when the party's convention is held in Atlanta in July to nominate a Presidential candidate the state's leading Democrats will almost certainly not play major roles.


On Stage
LEAD:  Gantry Is Alive and Preaching


Wells Fargo Mortgage &amp; Eqity Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wells Fargo Mortgage &amp; Eqity Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b224,000
c2,236,000
Per share
-
.33
9mo net inc
b1,759,000
c6,724,000
Per share
.26
1.01
b-Includes for both periods expenses of $1,318,000 that were incurred in the termination of an agreement in principle to sell the company's assets and a proposed plan of liquidation; the 9 months also included a loss of $633,000.


Economic Scene; When the News Is Good and Bad
LEAD: IT is becoming harder and harder to distinguish good news from bad news.
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said this week that he was ''optimistic that the balance of trade will continue to improve in 1988 and beyond.'' That sounded great.
But Mr.
Greenspan quickly added that the faster the trade balance improves, ''the greater the burden on monetary policy to curtail private domestic spending,'' lest the rapidly improving trade balance, combined with strong domestic spending, accelerate inflation.


Anacomp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anacomp Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
100,279,000
31,379,000
Net inc
b11,139,000
c4,512,000
Share earns
.28
.14
6mo rev
200,943,000
58,377,000
Net inc
b22,791,000
c7,336,000
Share earns
.59
.22


Emma N. Papert Married To Robert Sheldon Levine
LEAD: Emma N. Papert, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Elias Papert of Jackson Heights, Queens, and Robert Sheldon Levine, a son of Sylvia Levine-Lux of Miami Beach and the late Dr.
Murray J. Levine, were married yesterday.
Rabbi David Weintraub performed the ceremony at the Jewish Center in Jackson Heights.


Warrant Out For the Arrest Of Sharpton
LEAD: A Criminal Court judge in Brooklyn issued warrants for the arrest of 18 people, including the Rev.
Al Sharpton and State Assemblyman Roger L. Green, after a group of them walked out of his courtroom yesterday during a hearing on charges that they obstructed the New York City government during a civil-rights protest last December.


Stokely USA reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stokely USA (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
55,928,000
57,455,000
Net inc
b2,715,000
350,000
Share earns
.33
.04
Yr sales
188,843,000
159,826,000
Net inc
5,425,000
1,459,000
Share earns
.65
.17


Turner Broadcasting System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Turner Broadcasting System Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
186,300,000
137,900,000
Net loss
14,100,000
39,700,000


Pannill Knitting reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pannill Knitting (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
25,575,000
36,204,000
Net loss
2,843,000
472,000


Radyne Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radyne Corp
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,921,415
1,071,111
Net inc
438,318
92,555
Share earns
.10
.01
Yr sales
5,259,553
3,101,586
Net inc
513,218
b19,358
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss


Many Mornings After?
LEAD: Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, was eager to move into the Russell Building on Capitol Hill, especially since it had an office for him with a fireplace.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


The Smithereens
LEAD: The Smithereens, a rock bank, will perform tonight and tomorrow at the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street (228-6300).
Lucky 7 opens tonight; Cindy Lee Berryhill opens tomorrow.
Shows begin at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; tickets are $12.50.


Most Retailers Report Sluggish Sales for April
LEAD: Reflecting an early Easter holiday and cool weather, April sales were disappointing for most of the nation's largest general retailers.


The Editorial Notebook; A Class of '88
LEAD: ''Oh, say, can you see . . .'' The anthem begins with the usual whisper, until the singers feel their individual voices are lost, until almost all are trying the difficult high notes at the end, until the 35,000 or so voices fill the huge stadium that sits like a crater in the side of a hill.


Review/Concert; Art of Early Keyboard
LEAD: Gwendolyn Toth, an organist (principally), brought the third season of her Art of the Early Keyboard series to a close on Wednesday evening at St.
Michael's Church with an enlightening look at German church music by four of Bach's predecessors and older contemporaries.


Jackson Choice of All
LEAD: He's only a rookie, but already Mark Jackson of the Knicks is in legendary company.
This season Jackson broke two assists records for rookies set 27 years ago by Oscar Robertson, and yesterday he became the only unanimous choice to the National Basketball Association all-rookie team.


Larizza Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Larizza Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
29,495,000
23,564,000
Net inc
2,704,000
3,401,000
Share earns
.20
.29
Shares outst
13,800,000
11,800,000


Code-Alarm reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Code-Alarm
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,068,000
2,750,000
Net inc
284,000
161,000
Share earns
.13
.11
Shares outst
2,112,200
1,500,640


Waters Instruments Inc reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waters Instruments Inc
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,210,000
11,909,000
Net inc
361,000
102,000
Share earns
.25
.07


Consolidated Natural Gas Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Natural Gas Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,017,598,000
1,005,162,000
Net inc
124,122,000
105,072,000
Share earns
1.50
1.26
Shares outst
82,880,000
83,167,000
Year-ago figures are restated to reflect changes in accounting for abandoned facilities and for unbilled revenue.


Copyright Battle Lost by Interlego
LEAD: The Danish makers of Lego toy bricks lost a four-year legal battle to stop Tyco Toys Inc. of Moorestown, N.J., from making Lego-like products.
A British court dismissed an appeal by Denmark's Interlego A/S of a Hong Kong court ruling on copyright infringement. ''This is a tremendously significant victory for the company,'' Tyco's general counsel, Michael Kennedy, said in New


Foothill Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foothill Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
21,369,000
18,117,000
Net inc
b2,996,000
b1,841,000
Share earns
.33
.20
b-After extraordinary gains of $363,000 for the latest first quarter and $45,000 for the year-ago period.


Louis Armstrong Salute
LEAD: Arthur Prysock, Milt Hinton and Jimmy Heath are among the jazz instrumentalists and singers who will perform in ''Salute to Louis'' tonight at 8 o'clock at the Louis Armstrong School, 32-02 Junction Boulevard, East Elmhurst, Queens.
Tickets to the tribute to Louis Armstrong are $5 and $10 (students and the elderly, $2).


Newhall Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newhall Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,059,000
1,477,000
Net inc
b1,043,000
742,000
Share earns
.24
.17
b-Included $198,000 from a gain on property sales.
The share earnings are cents a unit.


CBI Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CBI Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
307,389,000
261,583,000
Net inc
5,076,000
1,785,000
Share earns
.17
.02


Cetec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cetec Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,120,000
8,519,000
Net inc
125,000
188,000
Share earns
.07
.10


Liberty May Be the Price of Civil Rights Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dynatronics Laser reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dynatronics Laser
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,316,900
701,900
Net inc
151,600
47,500
Share earns
.02
.01
9mo rev
3,291,900
1,788,600
Net inc
368,200
33,300
Share earns
.05
-


Moniterm Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moniterm Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,426,127
5,120,569
Net inc
365,966
b569,299
Share earns
.08
.13
b-After a tax credit of $233,412.


Connecticut Legislature Adjourns in Frustration
LEAD: Hours after the General Assembly adjourned shortly before 1 A.M. today, both Democrats and Republicans expressed frustration that the legislature had failed to settle the largest issue it faced, property-tax relief, or to take a final vote on several other fiercely debated measures.


California Microwave Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Microwave Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
20,259,000
19,631,000
Net inc
718,000
b6,869,000
Share earns
.09
-
9mo sales
69,459,000
73,858,000
Net inc
2,168,000
b5,952,000
Share earns
.27
-


Timberland Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Timberland Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,127,000
21,216,000
Net inc
1,647,000
1,836,000
Share earns
.16
.17
Year-ago first quarter net and share earnings are pro forma.


State Dept. Criticizes Jordan For Crackdown on Reporters
LEAD: The United States criticized Jordan today for expelling an American television network reporter and for withdrawing the credentials of two local journalists working for American news organizations.


U.S. Efforts Fail to Heal Contra Rift
LEAD: Despite the Reagan Administration's efforts to shore up a monthlong rift in the Nicaraguan rebel leadership, the differences appear to persist.


FGIC Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FGIC Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
30,961,000
27,867,000
Net inc
18,720,000
16,108,000
Share earns
.62
.52
Shares outst
30,212,000
30,844,000


Correction
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article in some copies yesterday about reported Justice Department appointments misidentified a Salt Lake City lawyer said to be in line for Deputy Attorney General.
He is Harold G. Christensen.


Pop/Jazz; Seductive String Music Strikes a Global Chord
LEAD: STRINGS are a musical and cultural common denominator: they're found on disco records - a wall of violins wailing away - or in Sudanese pop music.
They're found in prim halls of European high culture and in studios seductively backing soul singers.
Now an integral part of Indian classical music, the fiddle defines bluegrass music in Tennessee.


Data-Design Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data-Design Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
28,572,000
18,976,000
Net inc
1,845,000
b132,000
Share earns
.28
.02
9mo rev
81,951,000
54,547,000
Net inc
5,325,000
b6,319,000
Share earns
.81
.96


Legg Mason Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Legg Mason Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,890,000
3,020,000
Share earns
.22
.40
Shares outst
8,549,000
7,564,000
Yr net inc
7,576,000
10,295,000
Share earns
.88
1.46
Shares outst
8,612,000
7,058,000


All American Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* All American Semiconductor
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,988,391
4,138,215
Net inc
302,682
178,923
Share earns
.10
.10
Shares outst
2,927,778
1,777,778


Dillsboro Journal; For Injured Wildlife, An Indiana Refuge
LEAD: Crouching low under a shagbark hickory tree, Paul Strasser cupped his hands like a megaphone and howled into the forest.
In the distance, the wolves heard the call, and soon the air was filled with the song of the wild animals.


On New York Walls, the Fading of Graffiti
LEAD: Two decades after graffiti first infested New York, creating a pervasive sense that the city was out of control, the plague has quietly begun to recede, say city officials, leaders of community organizations and even many graffiti writers themselves.


25 Go on Trial in Yugoslavia Over Financial Scandal Roles
LEAD: Twenty-five people went on trial today in connection with Yugoslavia's Agrokomerc financial scandal, which toppled Vice President Hamdija Pozderac and caused political turmoil in the republic of Bosnia.


Pratt &amp; Lambert Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pratt &amp; Lambert Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
55,268,000
51,691,000
Net inc
1,517,000
864,000
Share earns
.25
.14
Latest-quarter results include a net gain of $285,000 from the sale of the company's Chicago distribution center.


Police-Fire Contest May Be Scrapped
LEAD: A Koch administration plan to pit police officers against firefighters to see which can respond first to car accidents may be scrapped in favor of a test that would simply time the two agencies' responses in different parts of Brooklyn.


Dr. Phyllis Weingarten Wed to Michael Kann
LEAD: At the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I., Dr.
Phyllis Esther Weingarten, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Emil Weingarten of Fresh Meadows, Queens, was married yesterday to Michael Howard Kann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred S. Kann of North Caldwell, N.J.
Rabbi Louis Bernstein performed the ceremony.


George Rose, 68, Broadway Star And Winner of 2 Tonys, Is Dead; A Versatile Perennial
LEAD: George Rose was one of the most versatile, inventive and hard-working actors on the Broadway and London stage during the last 40 years.
The British-born actor, who won two Tony Awards and was nominated for three others, was known for his performances in such musical comedies as ''The Mystery of Edwin Drood,'' ''The Pirates of Penzance'' and ''My Fair Lady.


Greeting Ex-Captives, Chirac Sees Better Iran Ties
LEAD: Welcoming three freed hostages home from Lebanon, Prime Minister Jacques Chirac declared today that the way had been opened for ''normal relations'' between France and Iran.


Healthcare Services Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthcare Services Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,433,407
8,132,978
Net inc
450,055
410,002
Share earns
.12
.11


SALIVA MAY HINDER AIDS TRANSMISSION
LEAD: Human saliva contains substances that prevent the AIDS virus from infecting white blood cells, a new study has found.
The researchers said the finding might help explain why no cases have been documented in which the AIDS virus was transmitted from person to person through saliva.


Officer Recounts Gunplay in Inwood Raid
LEAD: A police officer in a drug raid in the Inwood area in which a sergeant was slain gave the first eyewitness account yesterday of the shooting, quietly testifying about the gunplay.


India Says Afghan Would Share Rule
LEAD: Najibullah, the Afghan leader, was described by senior Indian officials as willing to share significant political powers with Afghan guerrilla groups and prepared to accept India as a mediator in bringing about such an arrangement.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Evert Withdraws From Italian Open: Top-seeded Chris Evert withdrew because of a foot injury and Claudia Kohde-Kilsch, the No. 3 player, lost in the third round of the Italian Open in Rome yesterday.
Evert, who was scheduled to play a third-round match against Helen Kelesi of Canada, defaulted because of a heel injury in her right foot.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: Bank of New York Company reached agreement with Irving's preferred shareholders to waive a ''poison pill'' provision that would block a takeover.
It must win a proxy fight at Irving's annual meeting today to drop the remaining barriers.  [ D1. ]


COMPANY NEWS;
LEAD: Returning to its origins as a food company, Kraft Inc. said today that it had agreed to sell its Duracell battery business for $1.8 billion in cash to an investment group led by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company.


Survivor of East River Crash Sues Copter Owner and Pilot
LEAD: A survivor of the helicopter crash Sunday in the East River filed a $5.1 million lawsuit yesterday against the helicopter sightseeing company and the pilot of the aircraft.


Police-Fire Feuds: Only in New York
LEAD: Disputes similar to those between the New York City Police and Fire Departments over who should take part in rescue efforts are unlikely to occur in most cities, police and fire officials around the country say, primarily because precise responsibilities have been established.


Review/Art; Playful Images Rich in Riddles By Paul Klee At the Met
LEAD: IT would have been difficult to be a part of the Parisian art world after World War II and not be aware of Heinz Berggruen as a cherubic, hyperactive, trilingual presence.


NUCLEAR DUMPING AT LAKE SUSPECTED
LEAD: Chemical evidence strongly suggests that low-level nuclear waste has been dumped into a large California lake in the past 36 years, a team of geologists reported yesterday.
The scientists said they did not know the source of the waste, which they stressed posed no health hazard.


Justice Dept. Inquiry Seen
LEAD: Government lawyers are investigating possible perjury by officials during testimony about a company's charge that it was driven into bankruptcy by the Justice Department.


VHC Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VHC Ltd
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,502,893
5,867,438
Net inc
446,966
b680,845
Share earns
.21
.32
b-Includes a tax credit of $260,000.


Salvadorans Deserve a Welcome
LEAD: Two faces of United States immigration policy: On Wednesday, the deadline passed for undocumented aliens who have lived here since 1982 to apply for amnesty under the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act.
But as this warmhearted program was winding up, the Administration was in court pursuing narrow-minded efforts to force


Guante's Fluent Pitching Says Enough for Yanks
LEAD: He would not speak.
He waved his hand as if to shoo away the small crowd that followed him from one end of the clubhouse to the other, and he smiled.
But there were no words.


Ex-Hostages Recall Beirut Ordeal And Comrade's Wrenching Death
LEAD: ''We survived,'' Jean-Paul Kauffmann said today of his three years as a hostage in Lebanon. ''We did not live.'' Dressed in fur-lined air force jackets, Mr.
Kauffmann and two other freed hostages, Marcel Carton and Marcel Fontaine, stepped off a small jet to a somber reception at Villacoublay, an air base southwest of Paris.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Joining Forces


Texaco-Icahn Suit: June Hearing Set
LEAD: A Federal district judge in White Plains scheduled a preliminary hearing for June 3 in the suit filed by Texaco Inc. against Carl C. Icahn, its largest shareholder.
Texaco's annual meeting is on June 7, and Mr.
Icahn is seeking to be elected as a director, along with three associates.
Texaco wants the court to block him from voting his 14.8 percent share in the company or proxies for others and from buying more shares.


Nevada Power Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nevada Power Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
83,130,000
78,119,000
Net inc
4,327,000
6,259,000
Share earns
.14
.21


Jackson Renews Complaint Over His Share of the Delegates
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson today renewed his complaint that his share of delegates to the Democratic National Convention was not proportional to the percentage of his popular vote.
He also strongly suggested that he would not sit silent if party leaders do not heed his appeals for more delegates.


Mutual Federal Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mutual Federal Savings &amp; Loan
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
364,000
471,000
Per share
.32
.41
Yr net inc
754,000
914,000
Per share
.66
.79


SECURITY FORCES CRUSH A WALKOUT AT MILL IN POLAND
LEAD: Security forces stormed the big Lenin steel mill at Nowa Huta in southern Poland today, crushing a 10-day strike that had set off a wave of labor unrest.


Bell Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
105,730,000
92,036,000
Net inc
2,082,000
973,000
Share earns
.32
.15
9mo sales
318,487,000
254,813,000
Net inc
4,791,000
2,558,000
Share earns
.73
.39


La Paz Journal; A Latin Romance: His, Hers and TV's Versions
LEAD: It was a romance of the 1950's, between a young Peruvian man who would become a famous writer and the Bolivian woman who defied convention to become his wife.


Technology for Communicaions International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technology for Communicaions International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,981,000
10,872,000
Net inc
b1,055,000
1,005,000
Share earns
.35
.33
6mo rev
26,717,000
19,767,000
Net inc
b1,711,000
1,592,000
Share earns
.57
.52


Nations Left and Right Know to Trust I.C.R.C.
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Bensonhurst Man Is Shot At His Home by 3 Who Flee
LEAD: A 45-year-old Brooklyn man was critically wounded last night in a gangland style shooting in front of his Bensonhurst home late yesterday, the police said.


Four Ex-Chase Officials Form Investment Bank
LEAD: Four former senior executives of the Chase Manhattan Corporation have decided to start their own investment banking firm, to be known as R. P. Urfer &amp; Company.


American Colloid Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Colloid Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
25,172,000
18,617,000
Net inc
618,000
464,000
Share earns
.24
.18


France Pays Heavily for Hostages
LEAD: Americans need to be mindful of their own sins before lecturing anybody on the subject of ransoming hostages.
That said, France's Prime Minister, Jacques Chirac, appears to have paid a humiliatingly high price to free the last three French captives in Lebanon.


First Federal Savings &amp; Losn of Coeur d' Alene reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings &amp; Losn of Coeur d' Alene
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
411,223
384,505
Per share
.30
.28
6mo net inc
862,117
1,155,672
Per share
.63
.84


Wisconsin Offers Bonds For $420 Million Refunding
LEAD: The State of Wisconsin is offering $420 million of general obligation refunding bonds through a group of underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.


Nostalgia Network Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nostalgia Network Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
594,014
323,557
Net loss
472,891
591,418
Shares outst
5,714,612
1,735,629
The year-ago figures restated to reflect accounting changes; year-ago shares outstanding restated to reflect reverse split in November 1987.


Trio-Tech International reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trio-Tech International
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Revenue
4,207,000
3,384,000
Net loss
25,000
505,000
9mo rev
12,220,000
11,277,000
Net loss
203,000
828,000


Lovellette Loses
LEAD: On the night Clyde Lovellette was accepted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass., he was rejected by voters back home in Indiana.
The former N.B.A. center fell short by 12 votes in his bid for the third and final at-large spot on the Republican ticket for the Wabash County Council.


Pentech International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pentech International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,604,137
1,600,743
Net inc
242,158
95,089
Share earns
.02
.01
6mo sales
4,939,506
2,552,603
Net inc
450,323
104,075
Share earns
.04
.02


Laser Precision Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laser Precision Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,502,000
3,720,000
Net inc
279,000
62,000
Share earns
.07
.02


Here's Looking at You
LEAD: Employees of the Treasury Department have been puzzled by a poster that began appearing on office and corridor walls a few weeks ago.


Johnston Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnston Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
31,250,000
28,507,000
Net inc
1,450,000
b2,258,000
Share earns
.44
.70
Shares outst
3,330,376
3,224,509
9mo sales
89,935,000
80,529,000
Net inc
5,683,000
b6,514,000
Share earns
1.71
2.02
Shares outst
3,314,043
3,219,818


Pic 'N' Save Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pic 'N' Save Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
73,979,000
62,455,000
Net inc
7,050,000
7,050,000
Share earns
.18
.18


Dollar Up in U.S. After Fall Overseas, While Gold Rises
LEAD: The dollar staged a turnaround in domestic trading yesterday, as technical factors pushed the currency higher after it lost ground earlier overseas.


Intellicall Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intellicall Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,660,000
4,454,000
Net inc
488,000
244,000
Share earns
.10
.07
Shares outst
5,050,000
3,750,000


Dining Out Guide: Japanese
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
Kitcho


Lebanon Battle Stirring Doubts in Israel
LEAD: In the aftermath of the Israeli Army's two-day sweep into southern Lebanon, Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin was criticized in some quarters today for deciding to attack a village that was a stronghold of Shiite Moslem militiamen.


Review/Theater; 'Club' Lets The Air Out Of Post-Mod Pretensions
LEAD: ''The Imperialists at the Club Cave Canem'' (at the Home for Contemporary Theater and Art) is, we are told, the epilogue to a four-part multimedia historical extravaganza.
According to the author, Charles L. Mee Jr., the subject is America after a Rome-like decline and fall, when ''all certitudes were gone'' and ''language itself was decaying.


North Star Universal Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Star Universal Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
57,581,000
52,334,000
Net inc
1,274,000
1,367,000
Share earns
.12
.13


Blues Guitarist
LEAD: louis Myers, a Chicago blues guitarist, will perform tonight and tomorrow at Tramps, 125 East 15th Street (777-5077), with sets at 9:30 P.M. and midnight.
There is a $10 cover and a two-drink minimum.


Supradur Companies reports earnings for Qtr to April 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Supradur Companies (OTC)
Qtr to April 3
1988
1987
Sales
10,216,000
7,199,000
Net inc
459,000
446,000
Share earns
.44
.43


Mattel Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mattel Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Sales
188,643,000
211,801,000
Net inc
254,000
18,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
47,825,000
38,282,000
The company said lower revenues in the first quarter reflect, in part, its objective of aligning shipments of higher priced merchandise more closely to the seasonality of the industry.


McGrath Rentcorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McGrath Rentcorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,442,871
7,300,811
Net inc
1,772,814
1,216,338
Share earns
.41
.28


MNX Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MNX Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,626,775
15,099,676
Net inc
659,252
b988,885
Share earns
.15
.26
Shares outst
4,389,995
3,789,995
b-Includes a $485,000 gain from an accounting change.


Walker Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walker Telecommunications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,157,948
6,201,137
Net loss
230,496
150,970


Brawley's Lawyers Call Party Account From Youth a Hoax
LEAD: WCBS-TV was accused yesterday of paying between $10 and $100 to a youth who told the station that he saw Tawana Brawley at a party in Newburgh, N.Y., during the four days last November when the black teen-ager has indicated she was being held by white abductors and sexually assaulted.


Labor Plans Radio Ad Campaign for Trade Bill
LEAD: Organized labor has chosen New York, California and five other states as the fronts where it will try to persuade senators to override President Reagan's expected veto of the trade bill.


Cavalier Homes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cavalier Homes Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,620,408
17,897,838
Net loss
352,366
b325,163
Share earns
-
.16
b-Net income


Hearings on Capitol Hill And Who They Attract
LEAD: Day in and day out, committees of Congress conduct a dozen or more hearings, often unheard of by the general public, at which outside experts are typically asked to help lawmakers solve the problems of the day.


Mets Game Postponed
LEAD: The Mets got a rainout instead of another shutout last night at Shea Stadium.
The postponed game with the Houston Astros will be made up as part of a twilight-night doubleheader July 1, a Friday.


Slain Indian Outpolls Rival In North Carolina Court Race
LEAD: Julian T. Pierce, a Lumbee Indian who was slain March 26, outpolled District Attorney Joe Freeman Britt on Tuesday in the race for a Superior Court judge's seat in Robeson County.
Mr.
Britt will become judge in December.


Soviet Team to Visit Bronx
LEAD: When the Soviet Union's junior national basketball team makes its second visit to New York in less than a year to play the New York Gauchos tomorrow, Billy Singleton will be there again.
This time, however, he will be cheering from the sideline.


Marks &amp; Spencer Planning Brooks Brothers Expansion
LEAD: Brooks Brothers' new British owner, Marks &amp; Spencer, plans to open at least 50 percent more stores and expand the offerings of women's and casual clothes.


From a Team of Women
''Sticky Fingers'' is the work of a female director (Catlin Adams), female screenwriters (Miss Adams and Melanie Mayron) and a mostly female cast (including supporting players like Eileen Brennan, Gwen Welles and Carol Kane), but it's less feminist than dizzily feminine.
The two leading characters, struggling musicians sharing a picturesquely shabby downtown flat, are as bubble headed as they can be.
This is especially apparent after fate sends a suitcase full of money their way, courtesy of a drug-dealing friend (Loretta Devine) who asks them to watch it for an indefinite period.
What do they do about this windfall?
They shriek, they squabble and then they shop.
Helen Slater and Melanie Mayron, careening through the film in the kinds of zany ''Desperately Seeking Susan''-inspired outfits that are fun as long as they're on somebody else, play the blithe Hattie and Lolly at a screwball pitch.
To enhance this, Miss Adams often directs them to talk frenetically at the same time, and she establishes the characters' charming eccentricity with cute shots of their unusual shoes.
A lot of care has gone into the film's earring wardrobe, too.
So ''Sticky Fingers'' tries too hard, but it does have a fundamental good-naturedness that comes through.


RAC Mortgage Investment reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RAC Mortgage Investment (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,311,000
-
Share earns
.16
-
The company went public in February 1988.


Review/Film; Recluse Woos Widow In 'In a Shallow Grave'
LEAD: As ''In a Shallow Grave'' begins, World War II is still being fought.
Garnet Montrose (Michael Biehn) returns from Guadalcanal so hideously scarred that people suck in their breath in shock when they see him.


Allure of Teaching Reviving; Education School Rolls Surge
LEAD: Ranald Jarrell was earning a six-figure income as a tax lawyer in Anchorage, but last year he forsook that life to go to New York to learn how to become a teacher.


Bolshoi Ballet to Visit China After 30 Years
LEAD: The Bolshoi Ballet is to visit China next year for the Soviet troupe's first performances there in 30 years, the official New China News Agency said Thursday.


Pork Prices Climb Sharply; Gains in Cattle Continue
LEAD: Pork futures prices climbed sharply on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange yesterday as cash markets reflected strong demand for pork products and chart signals indicated the market was ripe for a rally.
Most cattle futures also advanced.


Athletics' Streak Reaches 11
LEAD: Mark McGwire's one-out single in the seventh inning scored Carney Lansford to put Oakland ahead as the Athletics stretched their winning streak to 11 games today with an 8-5 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays.


India Asserts Afghan Leader Would Share Rule With Foes
LEAD: Najibullah, the Afghan leader, was described by senior Indian officials today as willing to share significant political powers with Afghan guerrilla groups and prepared to accept India as a mediator in bringing about such an arrangement.


Knicks Give Celtics No Rest
LEAD: The Boston Celtics planned to return home after Wednesday night's game against the Knicks at Madison Square Garden.
According to a team official, the Celtics wanted to allow the players to sleep in their own beds.


Playboy Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Playboy Enterprises Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
38,005,000
36,228,000
Net inc
b2,742,000
c1,139,000
Share earns
.29
.12
9mo sales
122,062,000
118,365,000
Net inc
b7,775,000
c4,069,000
Share earns
.83
.43


Cubic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cubic Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
92,878,000
88,728,000
Net inc
2,295,000
2,042,000
Share earns
.30
.27
6mo sales
180,270,000
176,874,000
Net inc
4,628,000
4,581,000
Share earns
.61
.60


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Dave Dravecky, the San Francisco Giants left-hander who is 2-2 with a 3.38 earned run average, had stiffness in his left shoulder Monday after his start against the Chicago Cubs that caused him to be placed on the 15-day disabled list yesterday. . . .
Tom Clements, former Notre Dame quarterback, retired from the Winnipeg Blue Bombers, ending a 12-year Canadian Football League career in which he played for Grey Cup champions in Winnipeg and Ottawa and twice was voted as the league's most valuable player.


Wells-Gardner Electronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wells-Gardner Electronics Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,229,000
6,728,000
Net inc
86,000
308,000
Share earns
.02
.09


Review/Film; Salome and Decadence, Via Wilde via Russell


Hearing the Knicks' Express
LEAD: THE subway-train noise has not been this loud in years.
It was rumbling and screeching four years ago when Bernard King was going head-to-head with Larry Bird in a marvelous seven-game playoff series, and it was roaring again Wednesday night, and it will surely throb tonight.


Kentucky Medical Insurance Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kentucky Medical Insurance Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b467,971
c112,451
Share earns
1.84
-
b-After a tax credit of $107,000.
c-Net loss


Cosmopolitan Care reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cosmopolitan Care (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
25,633,000
21,676,000
Net loss
b2,101,000
790,000
Yr sales
108,329,000
87,299,000
Net loss
b2,071,000
c751,000
Share earns
-
.14
b-After a gain of $525,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change for both the quarter and year.


Campaigns, Costly and Frugal
LEAD: The rising cost of campaigning has apparently not affected State Senator Abraham Bernstein, Democrat of the Bronx.
His bargain basement re-election campaign, the least expensive by an incumbent in the 1986 Senate election, cost $189.


Local Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Local Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
1,602,000
b241,000
Share earns
-
.14
9mo net loss
3,405,000
b675,000
Share earns
-
.39
b-Net income and the 9 months was after a charge of $467,000 from prepayment penalties on long-term debt.


Quinones Punished
LEAD: The Seattle Mariners shortstop, Rey Quinones, was placed on the club's disqualified list Wednesday and will be docked a day's pay and service time for each day he is away from the team.
Without club permission, he returned to Puerto Rico Tuesday night with his wife and child following the death of his wife's grandfather.


Laurel Savings Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laurel Savings Assn
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
209,000
240,000
Share earns
.43
-
9mo net inc
724,000
725,000
Share earns
1.48
-
Laurel Savings went public in April 1987.


Dominion Textile Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Textile Ltd
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
325,665,000
262,510,000
Net inc
b10,135,000
7,828,000
Share earns
.47
.37
9mo sales
861,956,000
743,676,000
Net inc
b52,326,000
18,677,000
Share earns
2.60
.84


Jamila Writer Is Married To Dr. Philip J. Weintraub
LEAD: Jamila T. Writer and Dr.
Philip J. Weintraub were married yesterday at the Conservatory Garden in Central Park by Rabbi Lavey Derby.


Hawaiian Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawaiian Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
169,973,000
138,011,000
Net inc
13,416,000
11,443,000
Share earns
.76
.67


American International Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American International Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b300,437,000
b233,967,000
Share earns
1.82
1.43
b-Includes realized investment gains of $28,012,000 for the latest quarter and $26,559,000 for the year-earlier period.


Behind the 2 Democratic Contenders, 2 Hard-Driving Campaign Managers; Susan Estrich Brings Assurance And Toughness to Dukakis Drive
LEAD: On Friday, Susan Estrich, campaign manager for Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, will take her first weekend off since Christmas.
She will go out to dinner with her husband.
She will read novels.
She will go to the movies.


Suspect in 50 Robberies Seized
LEAD: A resident of a Manhattan men's shelter who is a suspect in more than 50 holdups of take-out desert shops since last November was arrested yesterday after officers followed him from the scene of a robbery of an Upper West Side cookie store, the police said.


Newspaper Carrier Claim
LEAD: A newspaper carrier who was injured in a car accident while on the job can file a worker's compensation claim against his newspaper, a state appeals court ruled today The decision by the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court allows James Pittman to continue his claim against The Poughkeepsie Journal, a unit of the Gannett Company.


Las Vegas Tourney Halted by Winds
LEAD: In a rare decision by PGA Tour officials, play in the second round of the Panasonic Las Vegas Invitational tournament was suspended late this afternoon because of winds so severe that golf balls were blown off greens when placed for putting and golfers were in danger of being hit by flying debris and sand.


At the Movies
LEAD:  Celebrating Capra


R. D. Darrell, 84, Dies; Recorded Music Critic
LEAD: R. D. Darrell, a music critic and author who was one of the first American critics to concentrate primarily on recordings, died on Sunday at Kingston Hospital after suffering a stroke earlier in the week.
He was 84 years old, and lived in Stone Ridge, N.Y.


Devils' Youths Grow Up Fast
LEAD: Sean Burke and Doug Brown, who reflect the youthfulness of the Devils, were the heroes in the second game of the Stanley Cup series with the Bruins.


Micro Marathon
LEAD: A noncompetitive run for those under 12 years old is to be held tomorrow at 11 A.M. in Riverside Park, 72d Street, off Riverside Drive.
The race, called a Micro Marathon, is sponsored by B.J.'s Kids, a day-care center.
There is a $4 registration fee.
Information: 877-0684.


Home Federal Savings &amp; Loan (Salisbury) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal Savings &amp; Loan (Salisbury)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
406,287
682,657
9mo net inc
1,396,420
1,683,035
The share earnings are unavailable because Home Federal converted to a stock savings bank on March 15, 1988.


Loews Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loews Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,496,942,000
2,100,998,000
Net inc
b231,434,000
b87,065,000
Share earns
3.03
1.08
Shares outst
76,402,000
80,784,000
b-Included net from discontinued operations of $18,067,000 for the latest first quarter and $7,983,000 for the year-ago period.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Rockets Eliminated
LEAD: Mark Aguirre scored 38 points, including a club-record 27 in the third quarter, as the Dallas Mavericks eliminated Houston from the playoffs, 107-97, tonight.


Calumet Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calumet Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,215,000
8,831,000
Net loss
627,000
842,000
6mo sales
16,172,000
18,446,000
Net loss
1,048,000
771,000


Tseng Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tseng Laboratories
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,302,312
4,862,176
Net inc
339,093
848,402
Share earns
.02
.05


Centel Cable TV reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centel Cable TV
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
36,666,000
30,807,000
Net inc
1,806,000
b262,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


Julian Z. Millar, Executive, 86
LEAD: Julian Z. Millar, a former executive at the Western Union Corporation, died of cancer April 27 at his home in Summit, N.J.
He was 86 years old.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Stride Rite Assignment Is Awarded to Mullen
LEAD: Mullen, which used to be known as Mullen Advertising and is in Wenham, Mass., has just won a $2 million advertising account from the Stride Rite Corporation's Children's Group.


Imex Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imex Medical Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,303,428
1,003,395
Net inc
75,836
16,335
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
3,527,304
2,602,275
Net inc
174,208
36,196
Share earns
.03
.01


HPSC Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HPSC Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,504,000
5,485,000
Net inc
1,312,000
1,340,000
Share earns
.26
.25
Shares outst
6,585,000
6,520,000


House Signals Preference for Small Mobile Missile
LEAD: The House voted today to reverse the Reagan Administration's priorities on long-range mobile nuclear missiles, increasing the budget for a program the Administration wants to cancel while sharply cutting back on the system it prefers.


Campaign Trail
LEAD:  Debonair Dukakis


Review/Film; Guns and Corruption
LEAD: In ''Shakedown,'' something fancy happens every 15 minutes or so, which is part of what makes the whole film so unremarkable.
It becomes difficult to remember why the stolen police car being driven by the runaway thug, for example, has got upside-down amid the piles of burning rubble.
Or why the roller coaster has run amok at Coney Island, or why the taxi has been impaled on the wrecking ball.


Premier of Bahamas Denies Charges He Accepted Bribes
LEAD: The Prime Minister of the Bahamas, Sir Lynden O. Pindling, on Wednesday denied charges that he took bribes from drug smugglers.


Stanley William Hayter, 86, Dies; Painter Taught Miro and Pollack
LEAD: Stanley William Hayter, a widely exhibited painter and the most influential printmaker of the first half of the century, died of cardiac arrest Wednesday at his home in Paris.
He was 86 years old.


CPT Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPT Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
21,774,000
24,532,000
Net loss
4,364,000
4,874,000
9mo rev
72,349,000
71,798,000
Net loss
6,125,000
10,435,000


Pulaski Furniture Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pulaski Furniture Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 17
1988
1987
Sales
25,148,000
24,357,000
Net inc
1,434,000
1,065,000
Share earns
.50
.37
6mo sales
50,378,000
45,470,000
Net inc
2,205,000
1,917,000
Share earns
.77
.66


Merrimac Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrimac Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Sales
4,463,207
3,386,989
Net inc
436,637
b63,183
Share earns
.22
-
b-Net loss


Franklin Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Resources Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
50,300,000
53,500,000
Net inc
16,300,000
15,800,000
Share earns
.61
.59
6mo rev
99,600,000
102,800,000
Net inc
32,200,000
29,200,000
Share earns
1.21
1.09


Two Rock Bands
LEAD: Persian Gulf and the Corvairs, two rock bands, will perform tonight at 10 at the Rodeo Bar at Albuquerque, 375 Third Avenue, at 27th Street (683-6500).
There is no cover or minimum.


Dixon Ticonderoga Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dixon Ticonderoga Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,113,388
16,403,751
Net inc
378,299
b277,913
Share earns
.25
.18
6mo rev
33,316,283
28,959,833
Net inc
558,391
b543,299
Share earns
.37
.35


Dukakises Give Income Data
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis and his wife, Kitty, had joint income of $108,957 last year and paid nearly a quarter of that in Federal taxes, according to personal income tax reports made public today.


Guest Supply Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guest Supply Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,108,000
8,661,000
Net loss
565,000
60,000
6mo sales
29,342,000
16,761,000
Net loss
2,955,000
51,000


Photronics Corp reports earnings for Year to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photronics Corp (OTC)
Year to Feb 29
1988
1987
Net inc
1,401,208
1,061,891
Share earns
.69
.64
The company said that included in the 1988 results was $139,000 in net earnings from the receipt of funds from a bankruptcy claim.


Basic American Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Basic American Medical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
62,100,000
83,500,000
Net loss
6,900,000
1,600,000
Yr rev
293,300,000
314,400,000
Net loss
26,000,000
b1,600,000
Share earns
-
.20
b-Net income


Rogers, Milot Cut
LEAD: Coach Joe Gibbs of the Washington Redskins said he had evaluated films from last season and decided neither player could make the team this season.
So yesterday the Redskins released George Rogers, a running back, and Rich Milot, a linebacker.


Brady Panel Criticizes Inaction on Stock Crash
LEAD: The task force appointed by President Reagan to study last October's stock market crash issued a strong letter yesterday criticizing the lack of progress on legislation to correct what it sees as serious flaws in the market system.


Douce F. Correa, 82; Started Fleming School
LEAD: Douce Fleming Correa, founder of the Fleming School, died of cancer Wednesday at her Manhattan home.
She was 82 years old.
She founded the school, at 35 East 62d Street in Manhattan, in 1956 to provide a blend of American and French education.
In fact, it was meant as an alternative to the Lycee Francais, where Mrs.


Jets Feel Like A Team
LEAD: Joe Walton's intense off-season effort to get the Jets to coalesce has apparently succeeded.


Florida Rock &amp; Tank Line reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Rock &amp; Tank Line
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,920,000
7,565,000
Net inc
840,000
582,000
Share earns
.19
.13
6mo rev
15,574,000
15,390,000
Net inc
1,614,000
1,295,000
Share earns
.36
.28


Gordon Cole Is Dead; Union Editor Was 76
LEAD: Gordon H. Cole, a longtime journalist who for three decades was editor of The Machinist, the newspaper of the International Association of Machinists and Aeropspace Workers, died last Friday at Fairfax Hospital in Virginia after a long battle with bone cancer.
He was 76 years old and lived in Clifton,


Cilcorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cilcorp Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
144,519,000
135,053,000
Net inc
12,336,000
12,835,000
Share earns
.91
.95


Martinez &amp; Murphey Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Martinez &amp; Murphey Inc
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
249,323
417,131
Net inc
b31,602
b77,077
Share earns
.01
.02
b-Includes a tax benefit of $25,500, or 1 cent a share, compared with a tax benefit of $31,602, or 1 cent a share, a year ago.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 426 money market mutual funds increased $611.7 million, to $273.61 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 117 institutional funds increased $1.94 billion, to $76.04 billion.
Assets of the 212 general purpose funds were up $85.2 million, to $82.69 billion.


Northgate Exploration Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northgate Exploration Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
671,000
16,254,000
Net inc
648,000
b76,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Includes an $800,000 tax credit.
Revenue represents metal revenue.


U.S. Proposes Drug Testing Of Workers in Rail Industry
LEAD: The Transportation Department today proposed rules that would require random testing of railroad employees for drugs.


Councilman Helped Sell Trash Hauler
LEAD: A New York City Councilman intervened to help arrange the lucrative sale of a rubbish-carting company after it had operated illegally for a year, according to city records and officials.


Canadian Pacific Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Pacific Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,960,000,000
2,910,000,000
Net inc
183,900,000
b318,700,000
Share earns
.61
1.06
b-Includes a gain of $193,300,000 from the sale of CP Air and a CP Ships office building.


Lost in the Stars
LEAD: You don't have to consult astrologers to know which way the stars in their courses are pointing us.
As if there were not already enough greed, exploitation and sheer vulgarity in the world, ponder these recent additions:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We survived; we did not live.''  - Jean-Paul Kauffman, hostage released in Beirut.  [ A1:1. ]


Bomb Suspect: Puzzling Journey to an Arrest
LEAD: In his five weeks in the United States before his arrest, Yu Kikumura traveled far and wide.
Before he was seized in New Jersey on April 12 with three powerful homemade bombs, the suspected member of the Japanese Red Army logged 7,000 miles on the second-hand car he had bought in the Bronx on March 14, buying wiring, batteries, gunpowder and other bomb-making materials, according to documents unsealed today in Federal District


Manufactured Homes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufactured Homes Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
35,022,778
41,032,017
Net inc
40,194
1,058,577
Share earns
.01
.27


Hughes Aircraft's Chief Retires After 13 Months
LEAD: Albert D. Wheelon, the chairman and chief executive of the Hughes Aircraft Company, has abruptly retired at the age of 59, just 13 months after taking the top posts.


Selective Insurance Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Selective Insurance Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b10,890,000
b17,420,000
Share earns
1.20
1.92
b-Includes capital gains of $505,000 and $9,629,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


Crooks Die Hard But So Does Cop
LEAD: There is one scene in ''Dead Heat,'' now at the National and other theaters, that produces a cold sweat: A dead cop has a shootout with a dead bad guy.
Blat blat blat go their guns; thunk, thunk, thunk go their torsos.
Only nobody falls down.
The prospect that they will keep it up forever is enough to chill even the professional moviegoer.


Amgen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amgen Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,573,000
10,626,000
Net inc
488,000
232,000
Share earns
.03
.02
Shares outst
17,528,000
15,028,000
Yr rev
53,325,000
34,722,000
Net inc
1,725,000
1,137,000
Share earns
.10
.08
Shares outst
17,334,000
14,933,000


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 14.


Action Auto Rental Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Action Auto Rental Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,938,385
6,998,656
Net inc
876,718
402,871
Share earns
.15
.08
Shares outst
5,895,076
4,662,060


Jacor Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jacor Communications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,539,984
8,555,352
Net loss
2,601,027
1,905,897


Mets Win in 10
LEAD: Darryl Strawberry had removed the radio-interview headphones and was on his way to his locker when he was yanked into an adjacent television room by Howard Johnson.
He stood, watched the replay and shook his head in wonder.


Aquanautics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aquanautics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
514,164
298,949
Net inc
4,366
cd158,095
9mo rev
1,423,509
711,397
Net loss
b30,952
d659,356
b-After a gain of $75,000 on disposal of Imperial Manufacturing Corp.


Arizonan Focus of Fight On Prayer in Workplace
LEAD: All he wanted, Louis M. Pelvas said, was to be excused from the weekly mandatory religious services at the small mining equipment manufacturing company where he worked in Eloy, Ariz., and to be allowed to spend the time working at his job as machine shop supervisor at the Townley Engineering and Manufacturing


Mail-Order House of a Hundred Names
LEAD: If you've ever been intrigued by an advertisement for a startlingly cheap watch, toy, perfume or pearl necklace, you may have been looking at the handiwork of Raffoler Ltd.


Richard S. Caliguiri Dies at 56 In 3d Term as Pittsburgh Mayor
LEAD: Mayor Richard S. Caliguiri, whose administration steered the city through the death of big steel to the birth of a diversified economy, died of heart failure today.


2 Staged Play Readings will Benefit AIDS Fund
LEAD: The first of two staged readings to benefit the AIDS fund of Actors Equity will take place May 16 at 8 P.M. at Symphony Space, Broadway and 95th Street.
The reading, from the play ''The Value of Names'' by Jeffrey Sweet, will feature Larry Black, Dinah Manoff and Norman Rose, artistic director of Readers


Meridian Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian Diagnostics (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,219,000
1,360,000
Net inc
37,000
102,000
Share earns
.01
.02
6mo sales
2,705,000
2,559,000
Net inc
186,000
236,000
Share earns
.04
.05


Baseball; Cubs Take 4th Straight, 3-2
LEAD: Ryne Sandberg and Jim Sundberg hit home runs today to lead the Chicago Cubs to their fourth straight victory, a 3-2 triumph over the San Francisco Giants.


Winners Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Winners Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
24,406,000
26,323,000
Net loss
760,000
1,294,000


Blast Kills Briton in Cyprus
LEAD: A mortar shell exploded among British troops on maneuvers today, killing a soldier and wounding 16, a military spokesman said.


Young and Wary Strikers Take Solace From Walesa
LEAD: Stubble covered his face and exhaustion was written around his eyes as Lech Walesa spoke to the shipyard workers whom a Government propagandist derides as ''Walesa's teen-agers.''


T.W.A. Backs Offer by Icahn
LEAD: The board of directors of Trans World Airlines Inc. said yesterday that it had approved a bid of $50 a share in cash and debt from its chairman, Carl C. Icahn, for the 23 percent of the company he does not already own.


Coherent Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coherent Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
44,722,000
37,965,000
Net inc
62,000
b926,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
92,262,000
72,990,000
Net inc
995,000
b1,738,000
Share earns
.12
-
b-Net loss


CORRECTION
LEAD: A Media Business article in Business Day on Thursday about New York City's tabloid newspapers misstated New York Newsday's circulation in Brooklyn and Manhattan.
It is about 37,000 in each borough.


Aloette Cosmetics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aloette Cosmetics Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,936,000
3,361,000
Net inc
511,000
355,000
Share earns
.17
.12


Confertech International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Confertech International Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,350,704
475,587
Net inc
80,506
46,289
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
10,500,000
7,355,687


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 2-6, 28  Poland's bishops denounced the Government's use of force to end the strike at a major steel complex near Cracow.
The decision to use force indicated divisions in the Polish Communist leadership.
Page 1  Lech Walesa spoke to young strikers at the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk as riot police massed outside the gates.


Fixed-Rate Mortgages Higher Last Month
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages headed higher in April, ending the decline that began after October's stock market plunge.


Korea Talks Seen Gaining
LEAD: United States trade officials who had been threatening retaliation against South Korea have begun expressing pleasure over steps promised by Seoul during four days of talks that ended today, Americans familiar with the negotiations said.


AFGHAN CHIEF COURTS GUERRILLA MODERATES AND ISSUES WARNING
LEAD: President Najibullah of Afghanistan today appealed to ''moderates'' among the Afghan insurgents to join his Government.
But he asserted that even after Soviet troops withdraw, the Afghan Army could easily defeat the guerrillas on the battlefield.


Continental Materials Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Materials Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
13,035,000
14,033,000
Net loss
681,000
b472,000
Share earns
-
.36
b-Net income and after a gain of $902,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Deerfield Federal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deerfield Federal
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
921,000
686,000
Share earns
.80
-
There are no year-ago quarter share earnings because the company went public on March 31, 1987.


Foster Care And AIDS: Joy and Pain
LEAD: Margie Wilson was trying to convince the feverish little boy who stood solemnly before her in his pajamas and a bathrobe that he should swallow his medicine.


Optical Specialties Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Optical Specialties Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,600,000
1,600,000
Net loss
1,300,000
1,100,000
6mo rev
3,900,000
4,800,000
Net loss
2,700,000
1,300,000


Decom Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Decom Systems Inc
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
2,219,000
2,371,000
Net inc
48,000
c99,000
Share earns
.02
.11
6mo sales
3,722,000
5,283,000
Net loss
126,000
bc607,000
Share earns
-
.22
b-Net income


For Computers, the Year 2000 May Prove a Bit Traumatic
LEAD: The dawn of the new century may come as a shock to thousands of computers around the world.
Programs that record years in two digits and know no time but the 1900's may be stymied by the year 2000.


Learning Together For Peace in Ulster
LEAD: To the Editor:


Costantino Nivola, 76, A Sculptor Of Public and Small-Scale Works
LEAD: Costantino Nivola, a sculptor who did public commissions for buildings at Harvard, Yale and a number of other sites in the Northeast, died of a heart attack Thursday at Southampton (L.I.) Hospital.
He was 76 years old and lived in The Springs on Long Island.


White Castle's Search for Youth
LEAD: For years, the Ingram family ran its White Castle restaurant chain in a stubbornly old-fashioned way.
Instead of advertising heavily, franchising or resdesigning stores, it relied on a simple menu of a square little hamburger that die-hard fans would buy by the bagful and devour at one sitting.


Niagara Exchange Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Niagara Exchange Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b663,000
b499,000
Share earns
.40
.28
Shares outst
1,635,740
1,780,740
b-Includes capital gains of $53,000 and $79,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


EMC Insurance Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EMC Insurance Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
31,752,311
34,458,040
Net inc
3,668,913
3,909,252
Share earns
.42
.46


Horse Racing; Goodbye Halo Romps in Oaks
LEAD: Goodbye Halo ran down her entrymate, Jeanne Jones, to post a 3 3/4-length victory today at Churchill Downs in the $242,600 Kentucky Oaks, the filly equivalent of the Kentucky Derby.


Citizens Growth Properties (Co) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Growth Properties (Co)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Net loss
928,000
b211,000
Share earns
-
.41
Yr net loss
1,250,000
b568,000
Share earns
-
1.09
b-Net income


Jazz; Lunceford Recaptured
LEAD: The American Jazz Orchestra, in its ninth concert since its inception two years ago, realized the potential it has been reaching for Thursday evening at Cooper Union in a brilliantly played concert of the music of Jimmie Lunceford's orchestra.


Unemployment Shows a Decline To 14-Year Low
LEAD: The nation's unemployment rate fell a tenth of a point last month to 5.4 percent, the lowest since 1974, as the proportion of the population with jobs hit a record, the Labor Department reported today.


Nu Horizons Electronics Corp reports earnings for Year to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nu Horizons Electronics Corp (AMEX)
Year to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
29,663,456
18,223,051
Net inc
369,005
476,771
Share earns
.08
.10


Federal Screw Works reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Screw Works (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,893,000
17,491,000
Net inc
55,000
559,000
Share earns
.04
.44
9mo sales
44,987,000
43,587,000
Net loss
443,000
b168,000
Share earns
-
.13


Dr. James Leland, 80, Ex-Medical Professor
LEAD: Dr.
James Liebmann Leland, a former clinical professor of medicine at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, died of sepsis, a blood disease, on Wednesday on a visit to California.
He was 80 years old and lived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.


Chyron Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chyron Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,150,000
10,608,000
Net inc
529,000
733,000
Share earns
.05
.07
9mo sales
34,075,000
29,021,000
Net inc
b2,371,000
2,009,000
Share earns
.23
.20


Whitehall Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whitehall Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,197,000
8,705,000
Net loss
721,000
b2,559,000
Share earns
-
.70
b-Net income


Taiwan Ends Broker Curbs
LEAD: The Cabinet approved proposals this week that would allow new securities firms to be established, ending a 15-year ban on such licenses.


Koch to Propose Special Agency For City Bridges
LEAD: The Koch administration will propose creating an independent authority to spend $2.7 billion to repair, rebuild and - when necessary - replace bridges in New York City.


Chinese 'Silicon Valleys'
LEAD: China is planning to develop high-technology industries by setting up six ''silicon valleys,'' the official New China News Agency said today.
The zones will be in Beijing, Shanghai, Canton, Tienjin, Wuhan and the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone, near Hong Kong.


Aide's Comments on Whites Put Chicago Mayor in a Critical Spot
LEAD: The tenure of Acting Mayor Eugene Sawyer became even stormier this week after disclosures that one of his aides, a black man, had delivered a series of speeches attacking whites, especially Jews.


Buehler International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Buehler International
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,785,000
15,108,000
Net inc
865,000
638,000
Share earns
.17
.13


Aid Plan Vetoed
LEAD: A businessman's plan to help former Memphis State athletes finish college has run afoul of National Collegiate Athletic Association regulations.
Avron Fogelman, a Memphis real estate developer and co-owner of the Kansas City Royals, announced a plan in February to help pay the tuition of any former Memphis State athletes who have used up their playing eligibility but have not earned college degrees.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Hostage Brutality Reported


US West Newvector reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US West Newvector (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
26,000,000
21,000,000
Net loss
6,900,000
4,400,000
The company made its initial public offering last month.


Suchard Increases Stake in Rowntree
LEAD: Jacobs Suchard S.A., a Swiss food and confectionery maker, raised its stake in the British confectioner Rowntree P.L.C. to 29.9 percent, the maximum allowed under British law short of a full takeover bid.
Jacobs Suchard has paid an estimated $:450 million (about $841 million) for the Rowntree shares, which it has acquired gradually since getting a 14.9 percent stake on April 13.


Delegate Tally
LEAD: Current breakdown of Presidential preference of delegates to national political conventions, compiled by The New York Times.
Preferences are based on state laws, party rules, delegates' public statements and projections from early results in caucus states.
DEMOCRATS  Dukakis . . . 1,495  Jackson .


YANKS FALL
LEAD: Billy Martin spent most of tonight watching passively from the Yankee dugout, his team going down quickly to the Texas Rangers at Arlington Stadium.
And then, the manager and his team suddenly and unexpectedly erupted.


Bell &amp; Howell Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell &amp; Howell Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
162,791,000
156,262,000
Net loss
7,453,000
b1,326,000
Share earns
-
.12
b-Net income and after net from discontinued operations of $1,615,000.
The company said there were no discontinued operations in the latest quarter.


Airlines Told to End Use of Waste Plant
LEAD: Airlines were ordered yesterday to stop dumping the contents of chemical toilets into Bradley International Airport's inadequate sewage treatment plant by June 1.


UNEMPLOYMENT: The Biggest States
LEAD:  Civilian unemployment in March and April. Figures are seasonally adjusted.
March
April
Calif.
5.0%
5.1%
Fla.
4.9
5.3
Ill.
7.3
7.2
Mass.
2.9
2.9
Mich.
8.3
7.4
N.J.
4.0
3.5
N.Y.
3.8
3.5
N.C.
3.8
3.7
Ohio
7.7
6.3


METRO DATELINES;
LEAD: New York State Attorney General Robert Abrams presented a check to Mayor Koch yesterday for $3.6 million from funds recovered from milk dealers who illegally fixed prices.
The money is to be used for nutrition education in the city's schools.


Dance; Four City Ballet Premieres, One by Martins
LEAD: After a slow start last week, the American Music Festival at the New York City Ballet finally hit its stride Thursday night with a major new ballet by Peter Martins and three other premieres - by Laura Dean, Richard Tanner and Robert La Fosse.


General Housewares Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Housewares Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,181,000
15,631,000
Net inc
72,000
42,000
Share earns
.03
.02


G.M. Electronic Unit Has Texas Bank Stake
LEAD: The Electronic Data Systems Corporation, the data processing subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, has purchased a 6.7 percent stake in the First City Bancorporation of Texas Inc. for $20 million.


Election Could Splinter the French Right
LEAD: Deep and possibly momentous fissures are opening within France's loosely united rightist parliamentary majority as President Francois Mitterrand, a Socialist, remains a heavy favorite in Sunday's presidential election.


Insituform East reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Insituform East (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,982,298
2,361,098
Net inc
405,861
b319,269
Share earns
.09
-
9mo sales
14,770,692
10,305,338
Net inc
1,527,823
284,438
Share earns
.33
.06


Heavy-Water Transfer Defended
LEAD: A West German company accused by Norway of diverting a chemical used in nuclear reactors acknowledged today that the shipment had gone to Switzerland rather than West Germany.
But the company insisted that Norway knew of the change and that no laws were violated.


Why Wait? Write Today
LEAD: First you work for a President, then you write a book.
Only probably you don't write it. ''But you don't have to write it,'' says the publishing man.
That's a relief, because when is the last time you wrote anything at all, even a letter to your mother?
And remember what she wrote back?


Daniel Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Daniel Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
33,896,000
28,931,000
Net loss
5,163,000
1,112,000
6mo rev
67,853,000
58,618,000
Net loss
5,889,000
1,907,000


U.S. Issues Fatality Data on 65 M.P.H.
LEAD: Preliminary figures show that traffic fatalities on rural Interstate highways with a 65 mile-per-hour limit rose last year at virtually the same rate as on rural Interstates that have kept the limit at 55 m.p.h., the Transportation Department said today.


In a 'Moral Rut'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Texaco Shares Up
LEAD: Shares of Texaco Inc. rose yesterday on speculation that its largest shareholder, Carl C. Icahn, would make a bid for the company soon.
Texaco gained 75 cents, to $52.125, in heavy New York Stock Exchange volume of three million shares.
It was the second-most-active issue on the Big Board. ''There's a lot of fast money that thinks a bid is coming over the weekend,'' one trader said.


'He Always Runs at the End'
LEAD: With the slanting sun behind him as if it had been positioned there by a lighting expert, Charlie Hadry stood outside Barn 37 at Churchill Downs in a tan cap, tan windbreaker over a brown sportshirt, tan slacks and brown shoes.
Short and stocky, he's been around race horses in Maryland for 40 years.


Continental Medical Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Medical Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
29,636,000
16,472,000
Net inc
1,353,000
b523,000
Share earns
.10
.04
9mo rev
82,263,000
33,370,000
Net inc
3,363,000
b1,027,000
Share earns
.25
.09
Shares outst
13,393,401
11,652,751


Triangle Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triangle Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,602,000
14,087,000
Net inc
434,000
b564,000
Share earns
.18
.22
b-Includes a $156,000 gain from the cumulative effect of an acounting change.
Share earnings reflect a 10-percent stock dividend paid in December.


China Is Praised in Pravda
LEAD: Pravda today praised changes in Chinese economic policy that have attracted foreign investment, and it called for a rebirth of the work ethic to bring similar prosperity to the Soviet Union.
The Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, has made favorable references to recent Chinese economic experiments, but the article in the Communist Party daily was the most complimentary Soviet report on such changes in China.


A Paean to New York's Fetid Subways
LEAD: The masters of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority have decided to invest $1 million in an advertising campaign to tout something called ''Midday Business Service.'' The purpose is to entice ''25-to-44-year-olds with household incomes of at least $50,000'' back to the IRT.
I wish them luck.
But as someone in the target group, I don't need to be persuaded.


Consolidated Mercantile reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Mercantile
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
26,181,302
25,339,667
Net inc
1,462,549
694,332
Share earns
.43
.20
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I know him.
I know him well.
I know him favorably but I must say I'm troubled by some of these allegations.
But I think fair play dictates that the system go forward and make the determination.'' - Vice President Bush, on Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d.  [ 1:2. ]


Buyers Baffled by Mall Acquitted of Stealing
LEAD: Two ''unsophisticated shoppers'' from New York City charged with shoplifting from a mall here have been aquitted by a jury that believed their claim that they did not understand how malls work.


Man Gets 3 Years in Sex Case
LEAD: A 37-year-old man was sentenced to three years in prison yesterday for unlawfully transporting two girls from Brooklyn to a New Jersey motel for sex.
The defendant, Victor Einhorn, pleaded guilty in February to two Federal charges of unlawfully transporting minors - aged 11 and 12 - across state lines to engage in unlawful sexual activity.


Phoenix Re Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phoenix Re Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,799,054
8,679,097
Net inc
b1,862,967
1,034,130
Share earns
.46
.68
b-Includes a ''fresh start'' benefit of $34,000, or 1 cent a share.


Texas Air Cites Loss For Eastern
LEAD: The Texas Air Corporation reported yesterday that its Eastern Airlines subsidiary had a net loss of $31 million in the first quarter of the year.
But some analysts said they had been told by Texas Air executives that the carrier had an operating profit of $13.8 million in the period.


President Angry Over Regan's Book
LEAD: President Reagan had harsh words today for a book written by Donald T. Regan, his former chief of staff, that discloses details of the First Family's deep interest in astrology.


Clean Harbors reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clean Harbors (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
19,391,000
13,174,000
Net inc
1,119,000
436,000
Share earns
.17
.08
Yr rev
73,514,000
46,723,000
Net inc
3,700,000
1,716,000
Share earns
.66
.34


CORRECTION
LEAD: A picture caption in Business Day on Thursday with an article about an American-Japanese trade dispute misidentified Japan's Farm Minister.


Placid in Deal to Leave Chapter 11
LEAD: The Placid Oil Company, part of the Hunt family's dwindling fortune, and 23 creditor banks today filed a court document signaling formal agreement on a deal to take the independent oil company out of bankruptcy, lawyers said.


Amnesty for Aliens; Only the First Step to Citizenship
LEAD: The end of the application period for illegal aliens seeking amnesty does not end the long path toward legal status set up by the nation's 1986 amnesty law.


Saatchi Expansion
LEAD: The British-based Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, the world's largest advertising agency, said it had agreed to aquire the Los Angeles-based Corporate Planners and Coordinators Inc., an estate consulting concern.
The purchase was the latest in a series of acquisitions by Saatchi in a drive to diversify beyond advertising and build up a global presence.


Metalclad Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metalclad Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,427,000
5,094,000
Net inc
126,000
156,000
Share earns
.03
.06


Taipei Journal; A Rambo Tries to Beat Life Into Dying Legislature
LEAD: They call him Mr.
Rambo.
He roams the chambers of the nation's legislature, smashing microphones, jumping on desks, and shouting at his 80-year-old antagonists and fellow lawmakers.


Armatron International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Armatron International Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,758,000
4,676,000
Net inc
43,000
b1,211,000
Share earns
.02
.48
6mo sales
10,773,000
6,606,000
Net loss
639,000
b780,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $1,500,000 for both the quarter and 6 months.


Bush Calls Jackson a 'Hustler'
LEAD: Vice President Bush characterized the Rev.
Jesse Jackson as a ''hustler from Chicago'' today.


How to Get the Means to Keep Our Bridges From Falling Down
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pratt Hotel Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pratt Hotel Corporation (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
52,259,000
52,656,000
Net loss
4,742,000
b520,000
b-Includes tax credits of $72,000.


Schult Homes Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schult Homes Corp
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
23,458,000
27,512,000
Net inc
13,000
b217,000
9mo sales
81,422,000
84,999,000
Net loss
2,160,000
c399,000
Share earns
-
.15
b-Net loss  c-Net income and includes a tax credit of $59,000.


Shultz May Fly to Mideast In June for More Peace Talks
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz may make another trip to the Middle East in June in a further effort to promote Arab-Israeli peace talks, a United States official said today.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 10.


Judge Trims Utility Suit
LEAD: A Federal judge has dismissed the damage claims of some of the bondholders suing the Washington Public Power Supply System over the termination of two nuclear power plant projects.


Interprovincial Pipe Line Limited reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interprovincial Pipe Line Limited (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
224,700,000
204,700,000
Net inc
30,000,000
30,100,000
Share earns
.76
.76
The results are in Canadian dollars.


ISRAEL TO DEPORT AN ARAB-AMERICAN
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir today ordered the deportation of a Palestinian-American who has advocated nonviolent resistance in the Israeli-occupied territories.
The United States strongly objected to the move.


Medical Sterilization reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Sterilization
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,183,230
784,169
Net loss
192,819
245,732


Treasury Issues Tumble on Jobless Report
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities tumbled yesterday as the latest report on employment indicated an improving economy and heightened fears that the Federal Reserve may tighten credit.


Murray Rejects Electrolux Bid
LEAD: The Murray Ohio Manufacturing Company, which makes bicycles and lawn mowers, yesterday rejected a $182 million takeover bid from Electrolux A.B. of Sweden.
The directors of the Brentwood, Tenn., company called the $48-a-share offer inadequate and filed a suit seeking to bar Electrolux from taking any further action to acquire Murray.


Infinity Broadcasting Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Infinity Broadcasting Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,126,000
12,565,000
Net loss
1,476,000
734,000


Consumer Debt Climbed Sharply Again in March
LEAD: Americans took out $4.46 billion more in installment credit in March than they paid off, providing more evidence of strong consumer spending.


Prudential Sues Over Asbestos
LEAD: The Prudential Insurance Company of America said it had sued the First Republicbank Corporation of Dallas for $135 million for the cost of removing asbestos from a building in Dallas that First Republicbank sold to Prudential.
In its suit, filed in Federal court in Dallas, Prudential said that the company had known about the asbestos problem in the Renaissance Tower but withheld the information.


Cuomo's House Is Sold for $320,000
LEAD: The house in Queens that Governor Cuomo and and his family have owned for almost 30 years has been sold for $320,000, aides to the Governor said yesterday.


Alienated Young and Their Solipsistic Pleasures
LEAD:  Not a Free Show  By Helen Schulman  165 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.
Loonglow  By Helen Eisenbach  264 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $16.95.


Gish Biomedical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gish Biomedical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,184,000
2,599,000
Net inc
b214,000
c198,000
Share earns
.12
.13
9mo sales
9,112,000
7,035,000
Net inc
b739,000
c450,000
Share earns
.42
.28


Japan-Europe Trade
LEAD: Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita of Japan today urged an expansion of trade between the European Community and Japan. ''The importance of increased economic cooperation between Japan and Europe cannot be underestimated,'' the Prime Minister told reporters after meeting with West German officials as part of an 11-day European tour.


France Letting Ship Saboteur Return
LEAD: Two days before France's presidential election, Prime Minister Jacques Chirac infuriated New Zealand's Government today by summoning home a secret agent convicted of sabotaging an environmentalist group's ship.
France had agreed that the agent would be held on an obscure Pacific island until July 1989.


Beverly Investment Properies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beverly Investment Properies Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,254,000
7,039,000
Net inc
3,162,000
3,423,000
Share earns
.39
.42


American Capital Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,863,000
2,759,000
Share earns
.02
.14


Workers in Nicaragua End Fast, With Both Sides Claiming Victory
LEAD: Both the Sandinista Government and union leaders claimed victory today after protesting construction workers called off a 10-day hunger strike.


International Power Machines Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Power Machines Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,751,000
4,718,000
Net inc
b174,000
c672,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Included a gain of $216,000 from an insurance recovery.
c-Net loss


About New York; 8th Ave. Woes: Red Tape, Crime And a Sure Thing
LEAD: Dan Marcus and Martin Port reached what they thought was a cool, intelligent business decision a couple of years ago in West Germany.
In Frankfurt, they had found, they could make 3,000 marks a day selling pretzels in a train station that accommodated 50,000 passengers every 24 hours.
What, then, were the pretzel possibilities in a place like the incredible Port Authority of New York and New


Bird Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bird Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
40,286,000
43,550,000
Net inc
b142,000
c1,260,000
Share earns
-
.20
b-Includes a pretax gain of $1,339,000 from the sale of European and other operations.
c-Includes a tax credit of $462,000.


Schoenfeld Is Penalized
LEAD: Coach Jim Schoenfeld angrily confronted Referee Don Koharski in a hallway after both left the ice following the Devils' 6-1 loss to the Bruins.
He received a gross-misconduct penalty for his actions and could face a suspension when the league reviews the incident Saturday.


Unemployment at 3.5% In Jersey and New York
LEAD: Propelled by a diminishing labor force and busy times for several key industries, New York State's unemployment rate dropped last month to its lowest level in 18 years, the United States Department of Labor reported yesterday.


Petroleum Heat &amp; Power Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petroleum Heat &amp; Power Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
197,534,000
130,959,000
Net inc
17,437,000
11,035,000
Share earns
1.11
.74
Latest quarter reflects the results of 12 acquisitions the company completed in 1987 and four acquisitions it made during the latest first quarter.


Tories Hold Their Own In Local British Voting
LEAD: Britain's governing Conservatives weathered a test for Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Government today, maintaining its strength in local elections.
The opposition Labor Party made gains.


Cedar Fair L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cedar Fair L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
320,000
258,000
Net loss
7,416,000
12,188,000


Bird Rated No. 1
LEAD: Even with the home-system advantage, Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls finished second by a slim margin to Larry Bird of the Boston Celtics, who was declared the National Basketball Association's best player according to a new statistical method of rating basketball players.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Advest Group Inc., Hartford, a diversified financial services company, said it had agreed in principle to acquire Lyons, Zomback &amp; Ostrowski Inc., a financial consulting and corporate finance firm.
Terms were not disclosed.


League Refuses to Cut Rose Suspension
LEAD: The National League's three-man executive committee unanimously denied an appeal yesterday by Pete Rose, the manager of the Cincinnati Reds, for a reduction of the 30-day suspension he received Monday from A. Bartlett Giamatti, the league president.


Chicago Milwaukee Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chicago Milwaukee Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,872,000
8,372,000
Net inc
b7,442,000
b4,899,000
Share earns
3.03
2.00
b-Includes tax credits of $2,974,000 for the latest quarter and $1,748,000 for the year-earlier period.


American Income Properties LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Income Properties LP (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
823,000
-
Net inc
488,000
-
Share earns
.24
-
Share earnings are cents a unit.
Comparable year-ago results are not applicable; the company purchased First Property in September 1987.


Airbus Agrees To a Shake-Up
LEAD: The European aircraft consortium Airbus Industrie agreed this week to shake up its management structure to improve its efficiency in response to a critical report from a panel of experts.


Circon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,712,000
10,338,000
Net loss
1,136,000
517,000


PEN Translation Prize Goes to Ralph Manheim
LEAD: Ralph Manheim, the translator into English of Gunter Grass, Hermann Hesse and Marcel Proust, is the winner of the PEN Medal for Translation, given every three years to a translator who has demonstrated exceptional dedication to excellence in the body of his work.


Dukakis Loses Plea on Troops
LEAD: A Federal district judge today rejected a lawsuit filed by Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis aimed at preventing Massachusetts National Guard troops from training in Central America.


Oak Hill Sportswear Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oak Hill Sportswear Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,057,000
26,918,000
Net inc
22,000
893,000
Share earns
.01
.24
Shares outst
3,215,000
3,720,000


Equitable of Iowa Cos reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equitable of Iowa Cos (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b652,000
b4,800,000
Share earns
.08
.53
b-Includes realized investment gains of $369,000 and $2,591,000 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


Cosby Rerun Ad Time Is Sold for $60 Million
LEAD: In one of the biggest programming barter deals yet made for American television, Viacom International Inc. has sold 1,820 30-second segments of commercial time in reruns of ''The Cosby Show'' for a total of about $60 million.


New Line Cinema Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Line Cinema Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,730,000
15,768,000
Net inc
44,000
3,072,000
Share earns
.01
.50


ENSR Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ENSR Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
25,100,000
15,900,000
Net inc
630,000
1,279,000
Share earns
.06
.17


27 Die as Shiites Clash in Beirut And Palestinian Refugees Battle
LEAD: Rival Shiite Moslem factions fought running gun battles today in the streets of southern Beirut as Palestinian guerrillas fought among themselves in a nearby refugee district.
The authorities reported that 27 people died in the two battles, which did not appear to be related.


RMS International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RMS International Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,020,223
3,061,359
Net loss
44,976
27,838


Halliburton Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Halliburton Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,047,500,000
801,500,000
Net inc
b31,800,000
c8,200,000
Share earns
.30
-
b-After a gain of $9 million from an accounting change.
c-Net loss


D'Amato Says Helping Wedtech Fell Within His Role as Senator
LEAD: Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato testified yesterday that it was his responsibility as a United States Senator to help the Wedtech Corporation win Government contracts and that he would have helped the company without requests from Representative Mario Biaggi or anyone else.


Home Beneficial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Beneficial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b9,559,890
b9,883,230
Share earns
.89
.84
Shares outst
10,766,050
11,694,387
b-After capital gains of $14,603 for the latest first quarter and $38,415 for the year-ago period.


Sterling Software Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Software Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
50,201,000
45,953,000
Net inc
1,359,000
1,248,000
Share earns
.10
.13
Shares outst
5,913,350
9,050,000
6mo rev
102,295,000
91,261,000
Net inc
b3,795,000
3,207,000
Share earns
.32
.31
Shares outst
6,066,074
9,060,000


BSN Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BSN Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
21,500,000
17,958,000
Net loss
1,878,000
581,000


Oil Prices Advance Again; Report Sees Rising Demand
LEAD: Oil prices rose again yesterday following a report of increasing demand and amid fears of tighter supplies in the United States because of a major refinery fire.


Belgian King Asks Prime Minister to End Impasse
LEAD: King Baudouin today asked Wilfried Martens, the caretaker Prime Minister, to form a new government, ending a 144-day political stalemate in Belgium.


Brad Ragan Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brad Ragan Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
43,914,000
35,745,000
Net inc
28,000
b384,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: N.B.A.
Bucks 105, Hawks 99: Terry Cummings and Jack Sikma led a fourth-quarter rally last night as the Milwaukee Bucks beat the visiting Atlanta Hawks to even their first-round Eastern Conference playoff series at two games apiece.
The fifth and deciding game will be played tomorrow in Atlanta.


Bel Fuse Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bel Fuse Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,042,000
7,421,000
Net inc
822,000
762,000
Share earns
.17
.16


At End, Knicks Look Forward
LEAD: Moments after the Knicks had been eliminated from the playoffs last night, the players milled round the locker room, not sad, not happy, but more or less in a state of contented relief.
They had lost, but they had won.
They had fallen short, but they had also taken great strides.


Hutton Charged With Laundering Money
LEAD: The United States Attorney in Providence, R.I., filed criminal charges against E. F. Hutton &amp; Company yesterday, accusing the securities firm of being involved in a money-laundering conspiracy for organized-crime figures and business executives.


Federated's President Is Resigning
LEAD: Robert H. Morosky has agreed to resign as president and chief operating officer of Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores, the Campeau Corporation said yesterday.


Lay President for Duquesne
LEAD: Duquesne University today named John E. Murray as the first lay president in the Roman Catholic school's 110-year history.
The 55-year-old law professor at the University of Pittsburgh succeeds the Rev.
Donald S. Nesti, who was president since 1980 and resigned in August.


Bridge; FOREIGN PRESENCE IS REDUCED IN CAVENDISH INVITATIONAL EVENT
LEAD: The prestigious Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs, to be played today and tomorrow at the club's premises at 105 East 73d Street in Manhattan, was expected to have a big foreign participation.
But the withdrawal of players from Brazil, England and Poland has reduced the number.


Salsa and Jazz
LEAD: Manny Oquendo's Libre and Los Pleneros de la 21 will play salsa and jazz at 8 o'clock tonight at the Lehman Center for the Performing Arts, Bedford Park Boulevard West and Goulden Avenue, in the Bronx (960-8833).
Tickets are $10.


Chelsea Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chelsea Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
42,939,000
39,239,000
Net loss
490,000
b63,000
Share earns
-
.03
6mo sales
84,636,000
77,623,000
Net loss
348,000
b607,000
Share earns
-
.26


Oncor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oncor Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
385,000
151,144
Net loss
402,132
322,418
Yr sales
1,009,883
585,570
Net loss
1,839,154
839,103


Furr's-Bishop's Cafeterias reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Furr's-Bishop's Cafeterias (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
63,563,000
-
Net loss
2,062,000
-
No comparable results for 1987 are available since Furr's-Bishop's became a limited partnership on Sept. 10, 1987.


Penn Engineering &amp; Manufacturing Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penn Engineering &amp; Manufacturing Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,245,000
13,333,000
Net inc
1,416,000
562,000
Share earns
.82
.32


2 Ex-Bankers Face Retrial
LEAD: Prosecutors say they have decided to retry two former bank executives on Federal fraud charges related to the near-collapse of the Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company.
Their first trial resulted in a hung jury.


Albany Halts Bridge Repairs
LEAD: New York State has halted some repairs to its decaying highway bridges because of concern over possible health hazards from lead-based paint, state transportation officials said yesterday.


Fellowship Awarded
LEAD: The Kansas City Chiefs have established a coaching fellowship for black college coaches and Charles Coe, running backs coach at the University of Missouri, will fill it the first year.


Central Louisiana Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Louisiana Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
68,322,000
68,741,000
Net inc
8,094,000
8,811,000
Share earns
.66
.65
Shares outst
11,212,414
11,174,425


National Fuel Gas Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Fuel Gas Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
317,871,000
295,164,000
Net inc
34,986,000
26,911,000
Share earns
1.35
1.13
Shares outst
25,872,611
23,857,772


Allied Products Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Products Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
147,345,000
126,659,000
Net inc
1,075,000
4,895,000
Share earns
.14
.91
The latest quarter included pre-tax charges of $442,000 associated with amortization of deferred charges.


Canada Jobless Rate Dip
LEAD: Canada's unemployment rate dipped to 7.7 percent in April from 7.8 percent in March, Statistics Canada reporteds today.
The Government agency said the jobless rolls declined by only 10,000 in the month and remained over the one million mark.


R. D. Darrell, 84, Dies; Recorded-Music Critic
LEAD: R. D. Darrell, a music critic and author who was one of the first American critics to concentrate primarily on recordings, died on Sunday at Kingston Hospital after suffering a stroke earlier in the week.
He was 84 years old, and lived in Stone Ridge, N.Y.


U.S. QUARANTINE ON BEE MITE IS LIFTED
LEAD: A month-old, 13-state Federal quarantine to curb the spread of tiny bee mites was lifted today because it has proved unworkable, the Agriculture Department said.


Shock Absorbers for the Insurance Cycle
LEAD: Three years ago, everyone suddenly seemed beset by a crisis in liability insurance - municipalities, day care centers, ski lifts.
Premiums soared, more than doubling in some cases.
Insurers imposed sharp restrictions on coverage.
In many places, they canceled policies altogether.


Seagull Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seagull Energy Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
48,547,000
48,335,000
Net loss
1,351,000
b4,928,000
Share earns
-
.59
b-Net income


Webb, Del E Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Webb, Del E Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,925,000
41,716,000
Net loss
b4,125,000
b6,640,000
b-Includes a loss of $2,743,000 and $7,748,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively, from discontinued operations; the year-ago quarter also includes a loss of $3,834,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Dr. Yarborough Bride Of John Patrick Burke
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
N.
Patricia Yarborough, the president of Post College in Waterbury, Conn., and John Patrick Burke, the president and chief executive officer of Centerbank in Waterbury, took place yesterday at St.
John of the Cross Roman Catholic Church in Middlebury, Conn.
The Rev.
Joseph Divine performed the ceremony.


Akorn Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Akorn Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,622,392
2,025,812
Net inc
441,489
c214,254
Share earns
.04
.02
9mo sales
7,109,265
5,910,539
Net inc
b6,691,052
c481,609
Share earns
.58
.04
b-Includes a gain of $5,480,136 on the sale of an affiliate.


Furnishings 2000 reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Furnishings 2000
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
24,844,000
20,731,000
Net loss
179,000
3,762,000
9mo sales
78,295,000
64,160,000
Net loss
947,000
8,742,000


Chock Full o'Nuts Stake Purchased
LEAD: Martin D. Gruss, the New York investor, and companies that he controls told the Securities and Exchange Commission they had purchased the equivalent of a 10 percent stake in the Chock Full o'Nuts Corporation and said they might seek control of the New York-based coffee concern.


Diamond Shamrock Offshore Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diamond Shamrock Offshore Partners LP (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
32,100,000
30,800,000
Net inc
11,500,000
5,000,000
Share earns
.21
.10


Orthomet Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orthomet Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,915,232
2,814,261
Net loss
40,860
b38,697
Share earns
-
.04
9mo sales
4,489,644
8,070,267
Net loss
787,614
b1,546,335
Share earns
-
1.46
b-Net income


BUSH IS TROUBLED BY ISSUES RAISED ON MEESE'S ETHICS
LEAD: Vice President Bush conceded publicly for the first time today that he was ''troubled by some of these allegations'' of ethical impropriety surrounding Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d.
He said Mr.
Meese's fate should depend on the findings of a special Federal prosecutor.


Television; Makarova Dances Juliet, Live Tonight on 13
LEAD: ''Live From the Met'' has now become ''The Metropolitan Opera Presents,'' acknowledging the fact that its broadcasts on PBS have been taped earlier in performance. ''Live From Lincoln Center,'' however, can still deliver what its title promises.
Tonight's broadcast of American Ballet Theater's ''Romeo and Juliet'' is indeed being transmitted live from the stage of the Metropolitan Opera.


Cytogen Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cytogen Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,792,000
2,518,000
Net loss
3,125,000
280,000


Repair the Williamsburg
LEAD: To the Editor:


Death Toll Up to 6 in Blast
LEAD: Workers wearing protective clothing and carrying oxygen tanks found three bodies in the hot, twisted ruins of a Shell Oil refinery in Norco, La., last night, raising the death toll from an explosion to six.
One person was missing.


Scor US Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scor US Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b4,456,000
b3,461,000
Share earns
.36
.27
b-Includes investment gains of $408,000 and $350,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Irish Music
LEAD: Jack Coen and Michael Preston on flutes and Dessie Groake on tenor banjo will perform Irish traditional music tonight at the Eagle Tavern, 355 West 14th Street (924-0275).
Sets are at 9 and 10:30 P.M.; tickets are $5.


Early Pace Is Theme of Classic
LEAD: An undefeated colt, a front-running filly and a slightly tarnished champion are the favorites to win the 114th Kentucky Derby at Churchill Downs Saturday.
Their respective chances of victory should be clear long before they reach the wire.


Poly-Tech Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Poly-Tech Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,700,000
18,500,000
Net inc
b1,253,000
131,000
Share earns
.37
.04
b-Includes a gain of $981,000 from an accounting change.


Western Capital Investment Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Capital Investment Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
327,000
4,017,000
Share earns
.03
.43


Columbia First Federal Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia First Federal Savings &amp; Loan
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
429,000
2,687,000
Share earns
.18
1.10
6mo net inc
986,000
5,400,000
Share earns
.40
2.21


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, MAY 7, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Aron Alperin, 87, Dies; Edited Yiddish Papers
LEAD: Aron Alperin, a writer and the editor of the Yiddish-language newspapers The Jewish Day and The Morning Journal for a quarter-century, died of a heart attack Wednesday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 87 years old and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.


Thermo Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thermo Environmental (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,936,000
3,867,000
Net inc
b701,000
170,000
Share earns
.12
.04
Shares outst
6,044,000
4,703,000
b-Includes a gain of $50,000 from repurchase of debentures.


Police Say They've Captured Long-Sought Dapper Bandit
LEAD: A man who shot and wounded himself when the police cornered him after a bank robbery was identified Thursday as the courteous Dapper Bandit who baffled authorities for a decade with dozens of smoothly executed hold-ups.


East German to Dance As Ballet Theater Guest
LEAD: Mikhail Baryshnikov, American Ballet Theater's artistic director, has invited Oliver Matz, a principal dancer with the Deutsche Staatsoper Ballet in East Berlin to appear as a guest artist with the company this season.


Dynamics Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dynamics Corp of America (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
30,537,000
27,468,000
Net inc
b4,757,000
c9,000
Share earns
1.18
-
b-Includes a gain of $3,964,000, or 98 cents a share, from settlement of a patent award and a charge of $174,000 from the company's equity in CTS's charge from an accounting change.


Pegasus Gold Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pegasus Gold Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
27,354,000
6,387,000
Net inc
1,686,000
b272,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


AIDS Babies Find Love With Foster Parents
LEAD: Chelli Jackson singing to her foster child, who has AIDS.
While many people hesitate to tell friends and neighbors their foster children have AIDS, some have found support for their venture.
Page 29. (NYT/Fred R. Conrad)


WNS Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* WNS Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,341,000
15,929,000
Net loss
230,000
b556,000
b-Includes a tax benefit of $512,000.


Aide Says Congressional Offices Are Safe Despite the Wright Fire
LEAD: An official in an office that oversees Congressional buildings said today that they were safe despite a fire in the office of House Speaker Jim Wright.


Condor Chick Meets 'Mom'
LEAD: Molloko, the first condor bred in captivity, has begun taking its meals from a hand puppet built to resemble an adult condor, officials at the San Diego Wild Animal Park say.


Live Aid in Ethiopia, 1988 Style
LEAD: Two million lives are now at imminent risk from famine in Ethiopia, twice the number who died in the 1984-85 calamity.
Then, the world couldn't send emergency help fast enough.
This time the problem is different.
It's not the lack of food, but the regime's refusal to let it reach the famished.


Texas Air Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Air Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,126,191,000
2,040,201,000
Net loss
b124,275,000
100,662,000
b-After a gain of $33.5 million on the sale of assets by the company's Eastern Air Lines unit and included a charge of $14.1 million for preferred dividend payments to Eastern's preferred stockholders.


Brooklyn Philharmonic
LEAD: Lukas Foss is to conduct the Brooklyn Philharmonic in the New York premiere of Morton Gould's ''Classical Variations on Colonial Themes,'' a work based on two Colonial hymns and a popular song of the era, Francis Hopkins's ''My Days Have Been So Wondrous Free,'' tonight at 8 at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place.


Telequest Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telequest Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,631,000
6,742,000
Net loss
867,000
306,000
The company said latest quarter results include revenue of $431,000 from liquidated products sold at about book value.


9 Arrested in Gambling Raids
LEAD: Nine people were arrested when the police broke up several sports gambling rings that netted $300 million in bets annually, the police said.


Helmerich &amp; Payne International Drilling Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helmerich &amp; Payne International Drilling Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
41,922,000
40,208,000
Net inc
5,736,000
4,986,000
Share earns
.24
.21
6mo rev
80,409,000
81,486,000
Net inc
10,649,000
15,485,000
Share earns
.44
.64


BRT Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BRT Realty Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,626,000
4,630,000
Net inc
3,765,000
2,114,000
Share earns
.65
.57
Shares outst
5,763,057
3,697,153
6mo rev
14,919,000
8,247,000
Net inc
7,239,000
b4,167,000
Share earns
1.30
1.18
Shares outst
5,551,677
3,543,212


Computer Factory Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Factory Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
62,450,000
41,194,000
Net inc
2,095,000
1,299,000
Share earns
.26
.20
Shares outst
8,103,000
6,567,000
6mo sales
138,951,000
94,362,000
Net inc
6,772,000
4,262,000
Share earns
.84
.67


Courier Dispatch Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Courier Dispatch Group Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,506,038
9,854,356
Net loss
427,913
b254,409
Share earns
-
.10
9mo rev
31,131,943
29,435,715
Net loss
354,169
b912,044
Share earns
-
.34


Dorchester Hugoton Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dorchester Hugoton Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,393,000
755,000
Net inc
866,000
272,000
Share earns
.16
.05


Kohl Aide Is Asking U.S. Atom Missiles For German Planes
LEAD: A leading member of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's party proposed today that West German planes be outfitted with American nuclear-tipped missiles to demonstrate the solidarity of the NATO alliance after the new missile treaty.


Koch Proposing Boost In Budget for Recycling
LEAD: Next week, the Koch administration will propose spending $25 million a year - six times as much as it does now - on solid-waste recycling as part of a plan to require New York City to recycle up to 20 percent of its garbage by 1996.


Kay Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kay Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
273,500,000
144,100,000
Net inc
415,000
1,975,000
Share earns
.07
.34
The year-ago quarter results are restated to reflect changes in accounting standards relating to income taxes.


Fisher Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fisher Foods Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
107,110,000
122,762,000
Net loss
3,387,000
2,978,000


Ticket Seekers Hold Umbrellas and High Hopes
LEAD: Fans camping in the rain outside Madison Square Garden's ticket office, hoping to walk away with a coveted ticket to one of Bruce Springsteen's five New York concerts, which sold out.
He is scheduled to play at the Garden on May 16, 18, 19, 22 and 23. (NYT/John Sotomayor)


36 Are Feared Killed In Norway Plane Crash
LEAD: A Norwegian domestic airliner with 36 people aboard crashed and burst into flames on Norway's coast tonight, and rescue workers at the site found no survivors.


Dollar Mostly Lower in U.S. After Posting Gains Abroad
LEAD: The dollar finished mostly lower in domestic trading yesterday after rising overseas.


Republic Capital Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Capital Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
282,584
327,666
Share earns
.20
.89
Net inc
1,933,798
3,263,374
Share earns
1.53
2.84


Strong Winds Fade, but Lohr Doesn't
LEAD: The 55-to 60-mile-per-hour winds that disrupted play in the second round of the Panasonic Las Vegas Invitational Thursday dropped to a mere 35 miles this morning when 71 golf pros were able to complete their second rounds.


Coping/With Buying an Air-Conditioner
LEAD: First the tulips come out, then the songbirds, and soon after, the window air-conditioners.
Anyone who plans to add or replace a unit this year can save money on the purchase price and operating costs by doing a little homework beforehand.


Knicks Show Will, but Celtics Show Way and Win
LEAD: The mood of the capacity crowd at Madison Square Garden told the story for the Knicks last night.


Bush Calls Jackson a 'Hustler'
LEAD: Vice President Bush characterized the Rev.
Jesse Jackson as a ''hustler from Chicago'' today.


Irish-Soviet Venture
LEAD: Irish linen, Waterford crystal, calculators, tape decks and marmalade have gone on sale at Moscow's Sheremetyevo International Airport at a duty-free shop run as an Irish-Soviet joint venture.
Young Irish women at the shop said the customers included many Soviet citizens as well as foreigners, although the shop did not accept rubles as payment.


Colonial Commercial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colonial Commercial
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
450,055
1,650,593
Net loss
415,689
220,719


A Composer's Musings on Life
LEAD: Engaged in a political squabble, Mikis Theodorakis left Greece in 1985.
Now he has returned - sort of.


Tourney Skips the Puddles
LEAD: Drops fell from the water-stained ceiling into a bucket in the lobby of the Port Washington Tennis Academy, a reminder of why a handful of professionals, including Andre Agassi and Slobodan Zivojinovic, were mingling with all the would-be John McEnroes from the local junior leagues today.
The setting may have lacked tradition, but at least the Har


Rutgers Linebacker Charged in Car Crash NEW BRUNSWICK
LEAD: Drunken-driving charges have been filed against a Rutgers football player in a car crash that injured him and killed a teammate.


Dancer Jumps In as Choreographer
LEAD: Four years ago, Miriam Mahdaviani choreographed her first ballet.
It was a dance for students at the School of American Ballet, and Miss Mahdaviani, a 27-year-old corps dancer at the New York City Ballet, created it in response to a school bulletin-board notice calling for new choreographers.


Centocor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centocor Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,721,000
11,984,000
Net inc
1,993,000
b2,815,000
Share earns
.17
.24
b-Includes a tax loss carryforward of $1,267,000.


Coloradans Want Blended Fuels, Not Gasohol
LEAD: To the Editor:


Glenn on Vice Presidency
LEAD: Senator John Glenn said today he would consider an offer to run for Vice President on the 1988 Democratic ticket but will not seek it.


Regis Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regis Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
48,409,000
42,815,000
Net inc
1,685,000
1,065,000
Share earns
.20
.13
9mo sales
142,031,000
125,941,000
Net inc
5,791,000
4,708,000
Share earns
.71
.56


Vallone Forms a Group to Press Council 'Equality'
LEAD: The City Council majority leader stepped up his campaign yesterday to make the Council ''an equal partner'' in New York government by announcing a political action committee under his command.


American Home Shield Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Home Shield Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,540,000
10,079,000
Net inc
1,003,000
1,109,000
Share earns
.11
.16
Shares outst
9,244,000
6,838,000
The company said the year-ago comparisons are not applicable because it recorded $590,000 of income tax expense in the latest quarter while, due to the carryforward of prior years' operating losses, there was no income tax expense in the year-ago quarter.


Atlanta Gas Light Co reports earnings for 12mo March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlanta Gas Light Co (OTC)
12mo March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
972,679,000
1,027,417,000
Net inc
50,863,000
35,259,00
Share earns
2.60
1.88


Mr. Franse Shortchanges Children
LEAD: New York City's Board of Education needs improvement, and the Legislature is pondering changes in its size and structure.
But a single change in the present membership would greatly enhance its quality: removing Stephen Franse.


U.A.W. Unit Passes Chrysler Pact
LEAD: Leaders of the United Automobile Workers approved a tentative contract today with the Chrysler Corporation, clearing the way for a ratification vote by 66,000 workers in the United States.


American Cruise Lines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Cruise Lines
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
760,100
963,200
Net loss
1,546,500
855,800
9mo rev
4,132,100
5,271,700
Net loss
3,500,100
978,200


Angels Drop Buckner
LEAD: Bill Buckner, the leader among active major leaguers with 2,607 career hits, was waived yesterday by the California Angels.


Lydall Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lydall Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
37,534,000
32,573,000
Net inc
311,000
627,000
Share earns
.10
.22
The year-ago net has been restated to reflect a change in accounting for earnings of Compudyne Corp., in which Lydall holds a 50.5 percent stake on a fully diluted basis.


Buffer for Civil War Site
LEAD: Two House Democrats who are Civil War buffs moved Wednesday to protect a historic Civil War battlefield in Virginia from nearby development of a shopping center.
The two, Representatives Robert Mrazek of Nassau and Suffolk County, New York, and Michael Andrews of Texas, introduced legislation for the Government to buy 600 acres next to the Manassas National Battlefield Park, where the Battles of Bull Run, known in the South as the Battles of Manassas, were fought.


Vendo Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vendo Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
27,259,000
24,461,000
Net inc
b542,000
145,000
Share earns
.20
.05
b-Includes a $39,000 tax credit.


SOLAR DISCHARGE SENDS STORM OVER EARTH
LEAD: The Sun has thrown out a small piece of itself, causing a major geomagnetic storm over the Earth. the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said today.


Black Hills Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Black Hills Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
63,954,000
28,000,000
Net inc
6,048,000
3,458,000
Share earns
.65
.36


Vote Affirmed, Gillette Reports
LEAD: The Gillette Company, the subject of an April 21 proxy fight spearheaded by its largest shareholder, Coniston Partners, said yesterday that its independent inspector had confirmed that Gillette's four nominees to the board had defeated the dissident slate by 4 percent.


Survivors Recall Terror of Tower Fire
LEAD: It began as a quiet worknight for Zora Imamovic, supervisor of 44 janitors at the First Insterstate Bank tower in Los Angeles.
She was on the 58th floor, opening doors, and when the first fire alarm came at 10:38 P.M., she dismissed it as a false alarm.


Ready-Made Reading Glasses: New York Next?
LEAD: In drugstores, supermarkets and department stores from coast to coast, consumers can buy nonprescription reading glasses, often right next to the sunglasses.


Pacificorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacificorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
583,600,000
543,400,000
Net inc
104,200,000
78,900,000
Share earns
1.43
1.10


Should Patent Law Favor Mice Over Men?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Admar Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Admar Group Inc
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,839,700
2,190,800
Net inc
b267,300
1,000
Share earns
.01
-
Yr rev
10,374,700
7,768,800
Net inc
b503,300
c264,200
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
38,623,975
32,054,249


The Finger of Blame for Drugs Points to Us
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the release of three French hostages in Lebanon misstated the occupation of one of them.
The former hostage, Jean-Paul Kauffmann, is a journalist for a French weekly magazine, L'Evenement du Jeudi.


Rose's Appeal of Suspension Is Refused
LEAD: Pete Rose, using a cane while recuperating from knee surgery, walking with A. Bartlett Giamatti, National League president, after hearing yesterday.
A three-man panel unanimously denied appeal by Rose for a reduction in his 30-day suspension for shoving an umpire last Saturday. (NYT/Neal Boenzi) Page 52.


Two Dancers Are To Receive Fred Astaire Awards
LEAD: Michael Smuin, the choreographer for ''Anything Goes,'' and Herbert L. Rawlings Jr., who danced in a revival last year of ''Dreamgirls,'' are the recipients of this year's Fred Astaire Awards, given annually by the Anglo-American Contemporary Dance Foundation for excellence in dance and choreography on


Balchem Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Balchem Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,804,100
1,587,200
Net inc
62,300
84,800
Share earns
.05
.07


Americans Were Treated Brutally, Freed Frenchman Reportedly Says
LEAD: A recently released French hostage was quoted today as saying American hostages in Lebanon were treated brutally because they had tried to escape.


Report on Brawley Is Offered
LEAD: A lawyer for a jailed Newburgh youth said today that his client could place Tawana Brawley at a party during the time of her disappearance last November and fill out other aspects of that four-day period.


Spring Cleaning
LEAD: A cold wind was blowing off Jamaica Bay.
Sixteen shivering students and their teacher from Lafayette High School in Brooklyn were cleaning up Plumb Beach.
The students, wearing white cotton gloves and carrying blue plastic garbage bags, picked up old milk cartons, beer cans, bottles, buckets, pieces of cardboard and plastic-foam plates - a winter's worth of litter washed up on the sand.


Florida Cocaine Seizure Weighs In as Record
LEAD: After three days of sawing, X-raying and weighing, officials said today that a cocaine seizure near here Tuesday was the largest in the nation.


BISHOPS DENOUNCE WARSAW FOR USING FORCE ON STRIKERS
LEAD: Poland's Roman Catholic bishops today denounced the Government's use of force to end the strike at a major steel complex near Cracow.


Quit Drugs, Jackson Exhorts Youths
LEAD: As fervent as a faith healer, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson today called forth more than 100 high school students who admitted trying illegal drugs.


Electro-Nucleonics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro-Nucleonics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,008,000
17,051,000
Net inc
327,000
64,000
Share earns
.07
.01
9mo sales
51,119,000
47,927,000
Net inc
724,000
b8,167,000
Share earns
.16
-


Xerox in Pact To Add Datacopy
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation said it would acquire the Datacopy Corporation, a supplier of desktop scanners and image processing systems, based in Mountain View, Calif., for $6 a share in cash, or about $31 million.
The Datacopy trade name will be retained, and Rolando Esteverena, Datacopy's president and chief executive, will remain as president as the company becomes a wholly owned Xerox subsidiary,


Amnesty for Aliens: The Curtain Rings Down to Some Mixed Reviews
LEAD: It was born in an uneasy political compromise, a program that was designed to be generous but not too generous, tough but not oppressive.


Bottled Tan: Bronze vs. Blotch
LEAD: Sun-wary (or sun-starved) consumers are snapping up self-tanning products at a record rate, cosmetics companies report.


Dr. Prelinger Is Wed To Stephen Messner
LEAD: At Healy Hall at Georgetown University in Washington, Dr.
Elizabeth Anne Prelinger, a daughter of Dorothy Prelinger of New Haven and Dr.
Ernst Prelinger of Killingworth, Conn., was married yesterday to Stephen Charles Messner, the son of Dr.
Arnold E. Messner of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Barbara R.


Universal Matchbox Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Matchbox Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
44,145,000
39,877,000
Net loss
5,782,000
b3,198,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $83,000.


Children March Against Drugs
LEAD: Students from Public School 20 on the Lower East Side braving the rain yesterday for the Third Children's March Against Drugs.
The parade started at Junior High School 56 and ended, after a mile and a half, with a rally at Tompkins Square Park at Avenue A and Seventh Street. (NYT/Angel Franco)


Turner Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Turner Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,112,000
730,000
Share earns
.25
.17


Ballet; AT THE MET, A STAR'S RETURN
LEAD: Natalia Makarova returned to the stage on Thursday in Sir Kenneth MacMillan's ''Romeo and Juliet,'' presented by the American Ballet Theater at the Metropolitan Opera House, and made this return from semiretirement the kind of gala event one would have expected from such a seasoned showwoman.
But her partner, Kevin McKenzie, gave her a run for her money, as did Johan Renvall as Mercutio, in a performance that will be repeated tonight for national telecast by the Public Broadcasting System on ''Live From Lincoln Center.


Hauserman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hauserman Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
42,840,000
33,716,000
Net loss
930,000
839,000
9mo sales
114,014,000
94,018,000
Net loss
4,390,000
153,000


Lynch Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lynch Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,915,000
4,475,000
Net inc
101,000
580,000
Share earns
.08
.42


Devils Are Overmatched
LEAD: The Devils tonight were outworked, outmuscled and outskated besides lacking the usual inspired goaltending from Sean Burke and Bob Sauve, who combined to allow three goals each in tonight's 6-1 loss to the Bruins.


Homeless Man Held In at Least 50 Thefts At Fast-Food Shops
LEAD: A man suspected of robbing more than 50 cookie, donut and ice cream shops on the Upper West Side of Manhattan was arrested late Thursday night, the police said, when he was caught stealing from one Mrs.
Field's cookie store too many.


Jean P. Hesse; U.N. Official, 85
LEAD: Jean P. Hesse, a retired United Nations administrator and officer with the Free French during World War II, died Monday in Montreal.
He was 85.


Indictment Cites Improper Loan For a Developer
LEAD: A real-estate developer in Brooklyn was indicted yesterday on four counts of bank fraud in connection with a $17 million real-estate loan he received from Chemical Bank, Federal investigators said.


New York Education Chief Revamps Agency
LEAD: After 10 months on the job, the State Education Commissioner has announced a major restructuring involving top administrators in his department.


Police Ask Brooklyn Rights Protesters to Surrender
LEAD: Police officials said yesterday that they had received bench warrants for the arrests of the Rev.
Al Sharpton, Assemblyman Roger L. Green and 16 other civil-rights protesters and that they would ask the people, through their lawyers, to surrender by next Tuesday.


Kaneb Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaneb Services Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
28,627,000
22,405,000
Net loss
8,417,000
b6,082,000
b-After a gain of $2.8 million from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Film
LEAD: Salsa As a Route To Greatness


Pension Unit Being Sold By Citicorp
LEAD: Citicorp yesterday became the third major banking company to withdraw from the pension management business this year.


Baldwin Technology Company Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baldwin Technology Company Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
25,651,000
18,678,000
Net inc
1,662,000
826,000
Share earns
.53
.28
9mo sales
66,408,000
52,816,000
Net inc
4,133,000
2,183,000
Share earns
1.31
.94


Proxy Fight Ends at Irving And Each Side Says It Won
LEAD: The chairmen of the Irving Bank Corporation and the Bank of New York each predicted victory yesterday after a proxy contest at Irving's annual meeting.


INDIA'S NUCLEAR ENERGY POLICY RAISES NEW DOUBTS ON ARMS
LEAD: Bolstered by advances in its own technology, India is proceeding with an ambitious nuclear energy program requiring the storage of tons of plutonium of potential use for nuclear weapons in installations without international safeguards, according to Indian officials.


American Consumer Products Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Consumer Products Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,533,000
9,198,000
Net inc
442,000
287,000
Share earns
.17
.11
Share earnings are adjusted to reflect a 5-for-4 stock split payable June 7.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.81
6.86
6.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.29
6.20
5.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.51
6.38
5.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.77
8.70
8.25
30-YR.


Noted Left Hand Takes Rare Turn
LEAD: The production line was moving smoothly and silently in the makeshift Brooklyn factory yesterday afternoon when Frank LoGuidice suddenly threw a monkey wrench into the well-oiled mechanism.


Film; 1960's Counterculture Spirit Becomes Airborne
LEAD: In ''Riders of the Storm,'' the anarchic spirit of the 1960's counterculture lives on in the persons of its stars, Dennis Hopper (''Easy Rider'') and Michael J. Pollard (''Bonnie and Clyde''), and in its general attitude, which is suitably unkempt.


GUIDEPOST: Mortgage Indexes
LEAD: Adjustable-rate mortgages, or ARM's, offer borrowers an alternative to fixed-rate mortgages, which now average 10.36 percent in the United States.
These variable-rate mortgages rise or fall with a particular financial index.
Lending institutions select their indexes based on an analysis of what best protects their loan portfolios.


BULLS AND BEARS
LEAD: JAY SPIELER SAYS HE'S STILL PARTIAL TO the vivid shirts, paisley ties and plaid suits he wore in the giddy days before Black Monday.
Spieler, a broker with Drexel Burnham Lambert, insists last October's market collapse hasn't caused him to change his image by a thread. ''In other words, '' he jokes, ''I'm not wearing a hair shirt.


POSTINGS: 200-Acre Tract; Preserving Woodlands, Fields and Ponds in Pawling
LEAD: While most condominium associations own an exercise room and maybe a sundeck, residents of Squire Green in Pawling, N.Y., will share West Mountain, not to mention South, West and East Lakes.
The mountain, actually a low ridge, and the lakes, really ponds, are part of a 268-unit town-house colony that will preserve over 200 acres of woods and fields.


Reagan's Legacy in Space: More Reach Than Grasp
LEAD: IN assessing the state of the nation's space program as the Reagan Administration nears an end, experts inside and outside the Government often use two words: muddle and disarray.
President Reagan, one of the biggest space enthusiasts to occupy the White House, will leave behind a host of costly projects and innovative policies.


OFFICIALS SAY BUSH HEARD '85 CHARGE AGAINST NORIEGA
LEAD: Vice President Bush was told nearly three years ago by the American Ambassador to Panama of allegations that Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega was involved in drug trafficking, according to Reagan Administration officials.


Hong Kong Sees Rising Emigration as Peril
LEAD: In a reversal, the Hong Kong Government has begun to acknowledge that rising emigration among skilled and professional workers is hurting the thriving economy of this British colony, which is due to be returned to China in 1997.


Ojeda and the Mets Have Fun on a Beautiful Afternoon
LEAD: With two out in the seventh inning and Bob Ojeda tiring slightly, Dave Johnson, the manager of the Mets, walked solemnly out of the dugout.
Almost instantly, Gary Carter took the mound in the bullpen and, smiling broadly, quickly signaled he was ready if needed.


New Report Says 18 Monks Died in Tibet Protest
LEAD: At least 18 Buddhist monks, including a 12-year-old boy, were killed during nationalist protests in the Tibetan capital of Lhasa in early March, according to a new report from a foreigner who went to Tibet after the violence.


'Waldheim: The Missing Years'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cooking Seafood to Perfection
LEAD: FISH cookery is a subtle art.


Miss Farrell Wed to F. D. Campbell
LEAD: Bridget Elizabeth Farrell, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. S. Farrell of Brooklyn and Point Lookout, L.I., and F. David Campbell, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Carlyle R. Campbell of Syracuse and Tully, N.Y., were married yesterday at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Justice Carmen Beauchamp Ciparick of State Supreme Court in


OUR HEROES, OUR MOTHERS
LEAD:  MOTHERSELF  A Mythic Analysis of Motherhood.
By Kathryn Allen Rabuzzi.  248 pp.
Bloomington:  Indiana University Press.
Cloth, $37.50.
Paper, $12.95.


Sonja Feige Is Married to William Slattery on L.I.
LEAD: The marriage of Sonja Feige, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harald Feige of New Hyde Park, L.I., to William Patrick Slattery, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Slattery of Garden City, L.I., took place yesterday at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Garden City.
The Rev.
Richard J. Neilson performed the ceremony.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Sick-Building Syndrome; The Growing Problem of Air Pollution in Offices
LEAD: THRIFTY energy habits, shrinking office quarters and sloppy maintenance are helping to pollute the air that workers breathe in many office buildings.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. The ceiling in our family room is stained and discolored because the toilet overflowed in the bathroom above this room.
Will it be necessary to replace this ceiling, or will it eventually dry out so it can be repainted?


'GRILL ME SOME BONES!' AND OTHER DELIGHTS FROM THE TIN-POT SCHOOL OF POETRY
LEAD: When it comes to entertaining children - your own or borrowed ones - the most rewarding activity is reading aloud to them.
Almost all children prefer being read to, even unskillfully, to watching any television program, no matter how violent and flashy.
We're talking post-Mother Goose and ''I'm a Little


Book Review/Section 7
LEAD: A special section on books for children, with works by Tolstoy, Virginia Woolf and many others, and including a look at how you can entertain children (your own or borrowed) by reading aloud - even unskillfully.


SECRECY IS THE CATCH IN ARMS CONTROL AT SEA
LEAD: ARMS control can be a daunting exercise.
But when it comes to controlling nuclear weapons at sea, the United States faces a particularly puzzling dilemma.


DATA UPDATE: May 8, 1988
LEAD:
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Mar. 88
Feb. 88
Mar. 87
New York
4,716
2,259
6,015
New Jersey
5,903
2,337
4,832
Connecticut
2,070
1,081
2,247
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Off Base
LEAD: Professional baseball managers often engage in lively debate with umpires, commonly questioning their eyesight and ancestry.
They are forbidden, however, to lay angry hands upon them, as Pete Rose, the manager of the Cincinnati Reds, did last weekend while vehemently disputing a play at first base.


Europe Opens Up, and the I.R.A. Walks In
LEAD: THE Irish Republican Army took advantage of the shape of things to come on the European mainland when it killed three British soldiers and wounded three others last weekend in separate car-bomb and gun ambushes in the Netherlands.
The men were relaxed in civilian clothes amid the off-base nightlife of Dutch border towns, far, but not far enough, from the Irish troubles.


TAP-DANCING ON THE EDGE OF A CLIFF
LEAD:  MEMORY  By Margaret Mahy.  278 pp.
New York:  Margaret K. McElderry Books. $13.95.  (Ages 14 and up)


Eva Soltys Is Married To William Clarke Jr.
LEAD: Eva Marie Wypijewska Soltys, a financial marketing associate in the New York office of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, was married yesterday at the Westover Episcopal Church in Charles City, Va., to William Turkington Clarke Jr., a bond broker with J. F. Hartfield in New York.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.


A Weapon In Battle On Vice
LEAD: SINCE the beginning of the year, AIDS has become one of this city's leading weapons in its fight against prostitution.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. The ceiling in our family room is stained and discolored because the toilet overflowed in the bathroom above this room.
Will it be necessary to replace this ceiling, or will it eventually dry out so it can be repainted?


'Strange Games': Lanyon Retrospective
LEAD: IT'S nice that Middle America has given its name to all that's average and respectable when it has been the stomping ground of so many weird artists.
One of the earliest and weirdest was Ivan Albright, who could make anything -from flesh to flowers - look as if it was in the last stages of putrefaction.


Morris Schreiber; Mathematician, 61
LEAD: Dr.
Morris Schreiber, a theoretical mathematician and professor at the Rockefeller University, died of congestive heart failure on April 30 at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.


New York's Game
LEAD: THERE were lines out the door in Manhattan, as poor souls from the outlying boroughs, deprived of cable television, tried to cram into bars and restaurants, where dual screens carried the defeats of the Knicks and the Devils.


Question of the Week; Do the Yanks and Mets Need Mascots?
LEAD: A Yankee Stadium mascot would be consistent with at least two other ways the Yankee management is already debasing the game: first, using the home run to sell beer during broadcasts and second, the traditional but painfully outdated use of excessive organ playing during the game, with a guaranteed rendition of the Campbell's Soup theme each time a


White Plains Readies for Loucks Games
LEAD: IMAGINE a city that once a year opens its homes to strangers, feeds them and is host to them in the largest on-campus high school event in the United States.


Miss Stearns Is Affianced
LEAD: The engagement of Bonne Marks Stearns and Howard Wasserman has been announced by Joyce S. Stearns of Waterbury, Conn., and Roland B. Stearns of Manhattan and Blue Mountain Lake, N.Y., parents of the future bride.
Mr.
Wasserman is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Wasserman of Miami.
A July wedding is planned.


His Songs Are the Scale That Measure All Others
LEAD: To many songwriters, myself included, Irving Berlin is the American Popular Song, not only for his handsome lyrics and wonderfully accessible melodies, not only for a body of work that twines ivylike around the events of this century, but also because he has become the grid upon which all other pop songs and songwriters are positioned.


Cutting Costs Means Painful Choices
LEAD: LAST January's headlines carried unexpected tales of woe for health care consumers.
First was the news that health insurance premiums for millions of workers would jump between 10 percent and 70 percent in 1988.
Then there was word that premiums for people on Medicare would rise 38 percent and that health maintenance organization costs would rise by as much as 20 percent in 1988.


Site in Manhattan Is Chosen For a New Ferry Terminal
LEAD: The New York City terminal for a new Hudson River ferry between Hoboken, N.J. and Manhattan will be built at the north end of Battery Park City, a short walk from the World Trade Center, officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and Battery Park City announced yesterday.


''Waldheim: The Missing Years'
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Goetz Trial Reheard Before the Cameras
LEAD: The makeup people pat Peter Crombie's face with water, so he will look just as sweaty as he did the first time they shot the confession scene for ''The Trial of Bernhard Goetz.''


Ms. Liu, a Medical Student, Weds Dr. Edward Trimble
LEAD: Cornelia Liu, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Darrell T. Liu of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to Dr.
Edward Lloyd Trimble, a son of Mrs.
I.
Ridgeway Trimble of Baltimore, and the late Dr.
Trimble.
The Rev.
Edwin Coleman performed the ceremony at St.
George's Episcopal Church in Nashville.


FICTION
LEAD:  BEAUTIFUL ISLANDS.
By Russell Martin. (Linden/ Simon &amp; Schuster, $17.95.) Russell Martin's well-written first novel traces a year in the life of Jack Healy, a decent, fortyish family man whose strenuous career has put too much pressure on his marriage.
This seemingly predictable material is made fresh because Healy is not a typical overworked professional but an astronaut, and because the year revolves around the real-life explosion of the space shuttle Challenger.


From Fresh Air Visits, Longtime Friendship
LEAD: Ana Torres studies Spanish and plays with a pit bull named Princess in a third-floor walkup in the South Bronx.
Betsy Langan studies French and plays with a poodle named Popper in a ranch house north of Philadelphia.


A Woman Grows with Motherhood
LEAD: THE problem with parenthood is that you never know how well you're doing until it's too late.
And the problem with motherhood is that no matter how well you do, it will still be your fault if the child ends up on a psychiatrist's couch.


Dr. Hans Popper, an Authority On Liver Diseases, Is Dead at 84
LEAD: Dr.
Hans Popper, an authority on liver diseases and a principal figure in the founding of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine of the City University of New York, died of pancreatic cancer Friday.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Open a Door for Iran
LEAD: Iran has suffered a chain of calamities in its seven-year war with Iraq.
Some stem from adroit American policy, which tilted toward Baghdad when the Iraqis seemed in danger of defeat.
The tilt has helped restore the military balance between Iran and Iraq; now it's time for America to adjust its diplomacy.


Question of the Week; Do the Yanks and Mets Need Mascots?
LEAD: Mascots are infantile, mindless travesties, unneeded and unwanted additions to a great game.
Yes, the Yankees should have a mascot.
ALAN MICHAEL SAFIE  New York


Science and Economics
LEAD: To the Editor:


Profits of New York Farmers Rose 23% in 1987
LEAD: Profits of New York's farmers increased in 1987 for the second consecutive year, up 23 percent from 1986, according to a report from the State Agricultural Statistics Service.


Gulch Captures Carter
LEAD: Gulch, trained by D. Wayne Lukas, who saddled the Kentucky Derby winner, Winning Colors, took the Carter Handicap at Aqueduct yesterday.
The horse took full advantage of the extremely fast racing surface to carry 124 pounds and Jose Santos seven furlongs, tying a stakes record of 1:20 2/5.
Afleet, the favorite, was runner-up in the field of eight.


The Rockies by Narrow Gauge Rail
LEAD: BETWEEN 1870 and the early 1890's optimism about Colorado, embodied in discoveries of gold but mostly of silver, crested in the Rockies and converged with the other national sensation of the era, the steam-driven narrow gauge railroad.
Along with their precious ore the trains carried ''the emotional treasure of a westering people,'' wrote Lucius Beebe, the extravagant chronicler of Colorado's railroads.


NATIONAL GRIDLOCK
LEAD: LIKE COUNTLESS OTHER STREETS and highways around the world at that very moment, the Harbor Freeway in Los Angeles was an instant catastrophe, the lines of cars jerking to a halt, the traffic congealing in the fuzzy Southern California sunlight.
A television camera was watching somewhere overhead.
Magnetic sensors embedded in the pavement measured the speed and density of passing cars.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Memphis
LEAD: Memphis begins at the river, wide and brown and swollen with the rains of spring.
From the bluffs in Confederate Park, at the edge of downtown, the Mississippi sweeps past in a kind of cinematic panorama: trains of barges moving slowly beneath the twin arcs of the Hernando DeSoto Bridge; small riverboats, copies of 19th-century paddle wheelers, churning upriver against the current.


SOUL-SEARCHING
LEAD:  NEW YORK, DEC. 9, 1987: Riots have erupted in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
The networks show scenes of rampaging Palestinian youths hurling rocks and insults, Israeli soldiers firing back.
Is this it?
Has the pot boiled over at last?
Twenty years of occupying an alien people, and now on our television screens a harvest of rage.


Lucie Livingston And Seth Aidinoff To Wed in August
LEAD: Lucie Livingston, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick R. Livingston of New York and East Hampton, L.I., and Seth George Aidinoff, the son of M. Bernard Aidinoff of New York and Amagansett, L.I., and the late Mrs.
Aidinoff, plan to marry in August.


Line Up Local Assets, Cure an Ailing Economy
LEAD: BEFORE a community can begin to repair itself, say development experts, it must understand itself.
Then, leadership must surface, and the townspeople need to work together.


Racing With Tray in Hand (Watch That Chicken!)
LEAD: Marathon and triathalon atheletes talk about ''hitting the wall,'' that moment when they find their energy reserves depleted.
For Kerry Downey, a runner in a recent quadrathalon held here, the problem was not hitting the wall but losing a beet.


62 Die as Shiites Battle to Control Beirut Suburbs
LEAD: The southern suburbs of Beirut were a battlefield today as rival Shiite Moslem militias fought for a second day for control of the area, using artillery, tanks and rockets.
Police and hospital officials said 62 people were killed and twice that many were wounded.


LACROIX OR LE CASH?
LEAD: Patricia Volk's article ''Lacroix or Le Cash''? (Hers column, April 10).
Priceless.
VIOLET M. KING  Gelview, Ill.


Sheboygan Route
LEAD: To the Editor: In Travel on March 13 you carried an interesting article on Sheboygan and its bratwurst.
With the article you included a map that depicted the Interstate highway system running through Wisconsin.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-15


American Translator Wins Award
LEAD: Gregory Rabassa, who has translated into English many of Latin America's most notable authors, is to receive the $10,000 Wheatland Prize, an annual award for a notable contribution to international literary exchange.
The award is to be presented today in Lisbon, at the second Wheatland Conference on


Katherine Howard, a Director of Sales For a Hotel Chain, Weds W. B. Bolton
LEAD: Katherine Howard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert G. Howard of Marblehead, Mass., was married there yesterday to William Bingham Bolton, a son of Mrs.
Edward L. Meister of Waite Hill, Ohio, and the late United States Representative Oliver Payne Bolton.
The Rev.
George A. Westerberg performed the ceremony at St.


Cooking Seafood to Perfection
LEAD: FISH cookery is a subtle art.


Oilers' Lead Cut to 2-1
LEAD: Brent Ashton scored twice, including the go-ahead goal late in the second period, as the Detroit Red Wings came back from two successive losses in Edmonton for a 5-2 victory over the Oilers in Game 3 of the Campbell Conference finals tonight.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Raising Cain Instead of Steins


Homeless Children: Strategies Shared
LEAD: WHATEVER steps are necessary must be taken to insure that homeless children receive the education they deserve while they wait for homes, Dr.
Margaret Gotti said last week at a conference at Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers. ''We know the housing situation is critical,'' she said, ''but in the meantime we have a lot of kids who are at risk.


ARE WOMEN BETTER DOCTORS?
LEAD: As a medical student in Boston, soon to begin a residency in obstetrics and gynecology, I read Perri Klass's article with interest.


The Elusive Penguin
LEAD: TO walk among the penguins has been a dream of mine ever since I learned that they existed.
The idea beckoned from my subconscious like an Art Deco vision, tantamount to stepping into an elegant black and white film filled with men in top hats and tails where everything would be clean and cool.


Vermont Ski Areas Post Second-Best Year
LEAD: Preliminary figures show that Vermont ski areas enjoyed their second-best season on record despite lower-than-average snowfall.


'Beetlejuice' Is Pap for the Eyes
LEAD: ''Beetlejuice,'' which is quickly turning into a hit of serious proportions (it earned more than $9 million in its first three weeks of release), is a farce for our place and time.
It's technically sophisticated and so amiable and well meaning that it seems rude to point out that, like some of our public figures, it is more of a bore to watch than to describe.


Mary O'Callaghan Weds
LEAD: Mary Anne Elizabeth O'Callaghan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. O'Callaghan of New York, and Thomas Francis McElroy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James McElroy of Fairfield, Conn., were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of Queens of All Saints in Brooklyn by the Rev.
Anthony M. Rucando.


Lotus Is Courting Small Businesses
LEAD: MANY PC users think of the electronic spreadsheet, of which Lotus 1-2-3 is the most widely known, strictly as a corporate tool.
In doing so, they overlook its usefulness as a financial planning tool for small businesses.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  A WORLD OF RUGS  ''The Life, Love and Compassion of the Orient Through Rug Design'' and ''Mystical Icons of Oriental Rug Designs'' are the subjects of two lectures to be given at 8 P.M.
Friday and 10 A.M.
May 18, respectively, in connection with a sale of hundreds of rugs at the Rye Arts Center.


U.S. Drug Policy: Colossal Ignorance
LEAD: The United States' war on drugs has recently led to the attempted ouster of Panama's military leader, the virtual kidnapping of a Honduran, new efforts to burn crops in Bolivia and a proposed Congressional resolution accusing Mexican officials of accepting bribes.
Only a short time ago, similar actions were directed at Pakistan, Colombia, Peru, Turkey and


Correction
LEAD: Because of a distributor's change of plans, a picture caption on page 19 of the Arts and Leisure section today and a film listing in the Arts and Leisure Guide give an incorrect date for the opening of James Bruce's horror movie ''The Suicide Club.'' It will open at neighborhood theaters on Friday, May 20, not May 13.


If Wanda Would Call Again, One Man Would Like to Talk
LEAD: SHE hung up on me.
I can't blame her; it was my fault.
Now I'm paying the price.
Night and day, the same questions whirl through my mind; Who is she?
What did she want?


U.S. LEARNS IT'S NOT EASY TO TURN OUT THE P.L.O.
LEAD: WHEN Congress passed a law prohibiting anyone in the United States from operating an office on behalf of the Palestine Liberation Organization, its purpose seemed clear and simple.
It wanted to close the P.L.O.'s observer mission to the United Nations because it had found the P.L.O. was a terrorist organization.


When Fairness Dictates That a Drug's Patent Be Extended
LEAD: To the Editor:


College Loans May Curb Abuse
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Shad Are Running and Spirits Are High
LEAD: TRAFFIC on the bridge one recent morning was, as usual, at a standstill.
Hundreds of Westchester-bound commuters sat hunched in their cars, watching the rain beat aimless patterns on their windshields.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: THEY'RE usually brief remarks, tossed off in passing, made casually without any great thought.
They're not mean.
They're not nasty - well, maybe a tiny needle - but what makes them absolutely maddening is that there's usually a grain of truth nestled somewhere.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If you are given the chance to work on the most difficult issues of the period in which we live, it has to be a privilege to swing at these toughest pitches.''


Dani Hutchins Weds
LEAD: At the First Presbyterian Church in New Canaan, Conn., Dani Jayne Hutchins, the daughter of Mrs.
Dan E. Hutchins of New Canaan and the late Mr.
Hutchins, was married yesterday to David James Mollenkamp, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. Mollenkamp of Apple Valley, Calif.
The bride, a cum laude graduate of Bryn Mawr College, is a management consultant at General Electric Consulting Services in Somerset, N.J.


Cooking Seafood to Perfection
LEAD: FISH cookery is a subtle art.


Women Demand Place On Vietnam Memorial
LEAD: WITH help from a Connecticut Congressman, another effort is being mounted to add a statue of a servicewoman to the Vietnam Memorial in Washington.


At City Hall, More Than the Usual Ill Will
LEAD: MAYOR KOCH is criticized by his own Police Commissioner, Benjamin Ward, for his unfettered attacks on the Rev.
Jesse Jackson before the New York Presidential primary.
He stammers like an exasperated parent as Mr.
Ward and the Fire Commissioner, Joseph F. Bruno, all but come to blows in public.
And he calls the chief engineer of his own Transportation Department a ''dummy'' for failing to warn of the rotting underside of the closed Williamsburg


Executive Wed To Lisa W. Cross, Psychotherapist
LEAD: Lisa Warren Cross, a daughter of Mrs.
Regis Gignoux of Bedford, N.Y., and Champtoce, France and Theodore Cross of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Dickon Pownall-Gray, a sone of Willoughby Pownall-Gray of Saliisbury, England, and the late Felicity Pownall-Gray.
Judge Richard Owen of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New


Me and My Piano
LEAD: WHEN I was a kid, like most kids, I had a million things I vowed I would never do when no one would be there to force me to do them.
I wouldn't wear a sweater when it was ''chilly,'' or keep my shoes on indoors (or outdoors, for that matter).
I wouldn't clean my room or swallow pills.
And I would never, ever practice the piano again.


Honoring a Memory: Aiding AIDS Victims
LEAD: FIVE minutes before, her husband had died.
In the intensive-care unit at Washington (D.C.) Hospital Center, Lucie McKinney took comfort in the people around her.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Cemetery Odyssey


GIVE US YOUR TIRED, YOUR POOR, YOUR NAZIS SCIENTISTS
LEAD:  BLOWBACK  America's Recruitment of Nazis  and Its Effects on the Cold War.
By Christopher Simpson.
Illustrated. 398 pp.
New York:  Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $19.95.


Stacy Salob Weds Michael Goldman
LEAD: Stacy Pamela Salob, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Salob of Brookville and Westhampton Beach, L.I., and Michael Steven Goldman, a son of Sharon Elliot of Merrick, L.I., and Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Morton Goldman, were married last evening.
Rabbi Robert Widom performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L


SERENDIPITY OFTEN ATTRACTS COLLECTORS
LEAD: BURIED in a dealer's bargain box at this year's New York International Stamp Exposition were two postcards that, despite their lack of bulk, are referred to hereafter as The Altoona Papers.


State Tightening Its Rules For Farmland Tax Status
LEAD: DEVELOPERS, gentlemen farmers and other owners of woodlands who qualify for farmland tax breaks must begin working their acreage in earnest this year if they want to retain their special farmland status.


The Right to Smoke Vs. the Right to Breathe
LEAD: Alice Schultze complains in her recent article  [ 'An Office Casualty: My Right to Smoke,'' Opinion Page ]  that ''No smoking in the workplace is the latest form of discrimination.''


YOU CAN THANK THE BEAVERS
LEAD: Natural history is so much more exciting than our clay-footed human variety.
Glacial invasions, global migrations, the decline and fall of great ecological orders - whether the actors are tiny plankton or colossal mountain ranges, the scale of events is epic.
Yet we scarcely give nature a nod as we dutifully keep trying to learn how to take charge by studying and restudying the Roman Empire, Napoleon and Henry Ford.


A DECLINE OF INTEREST AMONG THE STUDENTS
LEAD: A recent issue of the American Contract Bridge League's Bulletin brings bad news for the future of bridge in North America, but also a ray of hope.
A survey of student interests, conducted at nearly 400 colleges and universities by a group at the University of California at Los Angeles, showed bridge to be at the bottom of a long list.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Mamaroneck, N.Y.  $330,000  205 Melbourne Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 89-year-old Victorian; powder room, covered porch, 2 fireplaces; .20 acres; taxes $2,976.
South Salem, N.Y.  $470,000  98 Smith Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 38-year-old contemporary; master bedroom suite with fireplace, 2-car garage, 3.05 acres; taxes $5,372.


A New Campaign; NOW, TO GET NEW YORKERS TO TURN OFF THE FAUCET...
LEAD: Recollections of a drought disappear as fast as a flash flood fills a gully, and with the memories go the habits of conservation.
At a time when New York City's reservoirs are brimming, Mayor Koch has begun what he calls ''the first permanent water conservation campaign in city history.''


Withn the Mother-Grandmother Lives, Forever, the Little Girl
LEAD: MY WHOLE family lives with me in a multigenerational array.
The images of loved ones, frozen in time, live here in my home, displayed behind glass-fronted frames and - more deeply - locked in my memory.


THE PRISON AND THE CULT OF TEA
LEAD:  LETTERS TO OLGA  June 1979-September 1982.
By Vaclav Havel.
Translated by Paul Wilson.  397 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


A SPRING SHRUB KNOWN FOR FRAGRANCE
LEAD: LAST call to prune forsythia; work hard on overgrown shrubs by cutting out to ground level at least one-third of the old wood.
Spray fungicides on fruit trees, peonies and dogwoods to discourage fungus diseases later in the season.
Transplant spinach and lettuce seedlings to a thumb width apart in garden rows.


Canada-France Fishing Dispute Runs Deep
LEAD: The dispute between Canada and France has roots nearly 500 years old, and to many whose livelihoods do not depend on codfish in the Gulf of St.
Lawrence it is tinged with elements of farce.


Nature Is Saluted in Fair Lawn Show
LEAD: ALTHOUGH debatable as an idea, ''Painting Is Silent Poetry'' sounds right as the title for the Kornbluth Gallery's current show by four artists.


'CARRIE' GETS THE ROYAL TREATMENT
LEAD: One evening more than seven years ago, Lawrence D. Cohen, a successful young screenwriter, and his old friend Michael Gore, a Yale-trained composer, attended a performance of Alban Berg's ''Lulu'' at the Metropolitan Opera.
Mr.
Cohen, who had written the screenplay for the phenomenally successful 1976 film adaptation of Stephen King's novel ''Carrie,'' and Mr.


SEARCHING FOR OURSELVES IN THE CLASSROOM
LEAD:  AMERICAN EDUCATION  The Metropolitan  Experience 1876-1980.
By Lawrence A. Cremin.  781 pp.
New York:  Harper &amp; Row. $35.


THE WORLD: An Unusual Reticence; LEBANON AGAIN - AND THE ISRAELIS ARE QUIET
LEAD: MANY Israelis seemed reluctant last week to talk about their Army's latest victory.
For the first time, the Israeli Army sought a direct confrontation with the pro-Palestinian Party of God in southern Lebanon, killing 40 of the Shiite Moslem militiamen and losing three of their men.
The Israeli soldiers also came within a few miles of Syrian front lines in Lebanon, risking a conflict with Syria.


Black, White and Young Together Black, White and Young Together
LEAD: I'VE heard the complaints of white people who grew up in the predominantly black village of Roosevelt, about the difficulties they faced as children because of the color of their skin.


BRIGHT LIGHTS, BIG CITY, BAD ART
LEAD:  THE GOLDEN CALVES  By Louis Auchincloss.  213 pp.
Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company. $17.95.


Avery Fisher Awards
LEAD: The 1988 career grants of the Avery Fisher Artist Program have been awarded to Pamela Frank and Ida Kavafian, violinists; Andrew Rangell, pianist, and David Starobin, guitarist, each of whom will receive $10,000.


Devils Are Facing Their Toughest Challenge
LEAD: The Devils approached their first playoff appearance as if assigned to an experimental classroom.
Everything was new to them, but everything on the playoff syllabus seemed possible to study, comprehend, and eventually master before moving on to the next lesson.


Woven Wools From Sardinia
LEAD: THE island of Sardinia, off the west coast of Italy, is swept by eight different winds, and its sheep battle not only the elements but also the briny Mediterranean bush and scrub clinging to pink rocks in their pasturelands.
Their wool is rough, wiry and waterproof, not for delicate cashmere shawls or even Shetland sweaters.


WHEN THE PATIENT IS A PET
LEAD: PET OWNERS SUFFER AS MUCH AS their ailing animal companions, as may be seen in these photographs taken recently in the busy, 24-hour emergency room at the Animal Medical Center.
Founded in 1910 in lower Manhattan, A.M.C. moved uptown in 1961 to its eight-story, state-of-the-art quarters on East 62d Street, in the heart of New York's biomedical community.


Gary Lee Weds Jennifer Scheck
LEAD: The marriage of Jennifer Jane Scheck, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank F. Scheck of Chappaqua, N.Y., to Gary Wayne Lee, the son of Mrs.
James Mallicoat and Alton Lee, both of Spokane, Wash., took place yesterday at the Presbyterian Church in Menlo Park, Calif.
The Rev.
Jack Silvey Miller performed the ceremony.


FAITHFUL JAMES FELL OFF HIS PERCH
LEAD:  THE WIDOW AND THE PARROT  By Virginia Woolf.
Illustrated by Julian Bell.
Afterword by Quentin Bell.
Unpaged.
San Diego:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.


Mainers Strike Compromise on Ferry
LEAD: Spring, it appears, has finally come to this island off Maine and so has a sense of calm.
Islanders spent much of the winter grumbling about a new ferry they deemed unreliable, poorly designed and, all in all, just not what they needed.


BYRUM PUTTS HIS WAY INTO LEAD
LEAD: Curt Byrum sank some lengthy putts on the Spanish Trail Country Club course today to carry a one-shot lead into the final round of the $1.3 million Panasonic Las Vegas Invitational.
He is seeking his first victory in six years on the PGA Tour.


'The Story of My Wife'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Volunteers In Schools: New Roles
LEAD: Early this school year, Kenneth DeSanctis, a teacher at Public School 83 in East Harlem, worried that one of his students was getting lost in the shuffle of 26 clamorous first graders.


POPE, IN URUGUAY, GIVES HIS BACKING TO POLISH STRIKES
LEAD: Pope John Paul II today voiced his full approval of strikes by Polish workers, insisting that the crisis in his homeland could be solved only through fundamental political changes leading to democracy.


Steaming Through Pennsylvania
LEAD: ONCE upon a time, Pennsylvania ran on coal, steam and sweat.


LORDING IT OVER ENGLAND
LEAD: IN A NATION THAT CALLS ITSELF democratic, an unelected House of Lords is, of course, a splendid impertinence.
For years there have been clamors for reform, even for abolition, but their lordships refuse to go quietly.


Rental Upgrading
LEAD: To the Editor:


FROM FRANCE, BEAUTIFULLY HONED DANCERS
LEAD: The height of the dance season is not necessarily the best time for a small foreign company, even one attached to France's national opera, to make a New York debut.
There is no question that the sleek, streamlined and superb dancers of the experimental dance troupe that is part of the Paris Opera Ballet were nearly overlooked amid the attention paid to the feathers and ruffles of Christian Lacroix's very French costumes for American Ballet Theater's new production of ''Gaite Parisienne.


Heidi Ann Jensen To Marry in July
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Charles Jensen of New York and Mystic, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Heidi Ann Jensen, to Charles L. Young, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence Young of Shrewsbury, Mass.
A July 3 wedding is planned.


AMONG THE KIBBUTZNIKS
LEAD:  THE BOY FROM OVER THERE  By Tamar Bergman.
Translated by Hillel Halkin.  181 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.


Singapore Asks Removal of U.S. Envoy
LEAD: The Government of Singapore today accused an American diplomat of interfering in its domestic affairs and asked Washington to withdraw the envoy.


Watching Over 'Dum-Dum' Robins
LEAD: WE first noticed the robins preparing to build on June 23 last year.
That was late, so we assumed it was their second nest.
What had happened to their earlier home -whether it met with some natural disaster or its occupants were successfully fledged - was none of our human business.


Hope Fades for Panama's Economy
LEAD: Anyone interested in seeing how quickly a political crisis can destroy an economy should pay a visit to Panama these days.


Playoff Preview: Coast-to-Coast Battles Looming
LEAD: Now that it's evident the Mets and the Yankees will win the Eastern Division championships, this is a good time to take an early look at the teams they may face in the playoffs five months hence.


Question of the Week; Do the Yanks and Mets Need Mascots?
LEAD: New York teams don't need guys running around in chicken suits, or other crazy antics.
JACK CHVAT  Maplewood, N.J.


Trailblazing a New Appalachian Route e
LEAD: A GOOD hiking trail is more than a path people have walked on a lot.
Nature, and boots, need help, which is just what is being provided for the new western route of the Appalachian Trail.


Blast in Nevada Cut Off Supply Of Fuel Element
LEAD: The explosion that destroyed a rocket fuel plant in Nevada last week has cut off the nation's supply of a vital ingredient used to power military missiles as well as the space shuttle, at least temporarily.


OLYMPIC PROFILE: Abdi Bile; Running as a Nation Watches
LEAD: In a land where more than 60 percent of the people are nomads, living in the deserts with the cattle, camels and sheep they raise, heroes are in short supply, most of them men of the sword or cloth.


Hard-Line Coach
LEAD: He may work in Washington, but that doesn't mean that John Thompson, the Georgetown basketball coach, has been caught up in the thaw in Soviet-American relations.


'The Price' Is Right For Emelin's Plans
LEAD: ALTHOUGH ''The Price'' by Arthur Miller never made a big dent in the commercial theater, it has had a flourishing regional afterlife.
Now, 20 years after its Broadway premiere, the play holds up as a work of masterly craftsmanship, psychological validity and emotional force.
For the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck, which is striving to gain a professional theatrical foothold in the county, ''The


Julie Larson Has Wedding
LEAD: The marriage of Julie Joy Larson and Thomas Gaylord Brown, both assistant buyers at Macy's New York, took place yesterday at the Woodlands Inn in The Woodlands, Tex.
The Rev.
Charles C. Hendricks, pastor of the Woodlands Community Presbyterian Church, performed the ceremony.


MYTHS OF THE AUDIO WONDERLAND
LEAD: In wonderland, the White Queen told Alice that it only takes practice to believe impossible things. ''Why, sometimes,'' she said, ''I've believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast.''


BROUGHT TOGETHER BY THANH
LEAD:  PARK'S QUEST  By Katherine Paterson.  148 pp.
New York: Lodestar Books/E.
P.
Dutton.


Shamir Defends Deportation Of a Palestinian-American
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's office today defended the decision to deport Mubarak E. Awad, a Palestinian-American advocate of nonviolent protest.


PERSPECTIVES: Bensonhurst Co-ops; Offering Buyers a 'Handyman's Special'
LEAD: THE ''Co-ops for Sale'' signs on the sides of multifamily buildings tell the story of housing in transition on Bay Parkway in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn.
Apartment houses built for rental occupancy over the first half of this century are gradually being converted to owner occupancy.


On His Honor
LEAD: If Oliver North considers it an honor to have been indicted in the Iran-contra affair, as he said last week, will he be embarrassed if he is found not guilty?
And, if so, would that affect any political ambitions he has?
Mr.
North, who is charged with conspiring to defraud the Government by diverting arms-sales profits to the Nicaraguan contras, talked about the case in a speech at Liberty University in Lynchburg, Va.


WHO PROFITS FROM COURT'S ANTITURST DECISION?
LEAD: THE reaction was classic last week when the Supreme Court ruled that the Sharp Electronics Corporation could lawfully conspire with one of its high-price retailers to shut out a discounter from selling Sharp products.


Tony O'Reilly Astride Two Worlds; In Ireland, Publisher and Prospector
LEAD: AT dusk, Anthony O'Reilly is strolling the grounds of his 500-acre estate, Castlemartin, surveying with satisfaction his breeding cattle, his race horses and his 18thcentury 28-room mansion house.


Cindy Moelis and Robert Rivkin Marry
LEAD: The marriage of Cindy S. Moelis and Robert S. Rivkin, both 1987 graduates of the Stanford University Law School, took place last night at Water's Edge at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Town Square Reborn in Shopping Center
LEAD: A $175 MILLION commercial development called Somerset Square, rising on 80 acres in a quiet and affluent suburb of Hartford, includes a shopping center designed by Robert A. M. Stern, the noted Manhattan architect and Columbia University professor.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. The ceiling in our family room is stained and discolored because the toilet overflowed in the bathroom above this room.
Will it be necessary to replace this ceiling, or will it eventually dry out so it can be repainted?


WHAT'S NEW IN REVIVING RURAL AMERICA Looking for a Batch of 2 Percent Solutions
LEAD: THE farm woes of the 1980's overshadowed a far more widespread rural crisis, a depression that decimated mining and lumber towns in the West and textile communities in the South.
The damage was so severe that more than half the nation's non-metropolitan counties lost population from 1983 to 1986, the Census


James Joseph Pinto, an Investor, Wed To Dale Whiteman, a Cornell Alumna
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y., Dale Rollins Whiteman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Whiteman of Rye and Savannah, Ga., was married yesterday to James Joseph Pinto, a son of Mrs.
John H. Pinto of Bel Air, Calif., and the late Mr.
Pinto.
The Rev.
Brian Frawley performed the ceremony.


STREETSCAPES: The Russell Sage Foundation Building; From Rentals to Cooperatives: Reconverting a Grand Palazzo
LEAD: NOT all preservation in New York is the result of noisy hearings before the Landmarks Preservation Commission, for most old buildings fall or survive without controversy, as the result of coincidence or chance.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''From an inflationary concern, we may be closer to full employment than we wis but you can't say that from a social point of view.'' - Roger Brinner, an economist at Data Resources.


Saving Up for the College Dollar Crunch
LEAD: AS many high school seniors rejoice over college acceptances, their parents worry about meeting next fall's tuition bill.
Unfortunately, there isn't much they can do between now and September to amass an education fund other than to take out a home equity loan.


LESLIE TISHMAN BECOMES A BRIDE
LEAD: Leslie Ann Tishman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Tishman of Nw York and Warren, Vt., was married yesterday to Gary Mark Inman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bobby M. Inman of Mount Airy, N.C.
The Rev.
Shannon Bernard, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Tishman home in New York.


Poland's Young Demand Change From an Unchanging System
LEAD: FOR Lech Walesa, the head of Poland's outlawed but remarkably vigorous Solidarity trade union, they were, through most of the week, the ''kids.''


Bush Calls Jackson 'Hustler From Chicago'
LEAD: Vice President Bush has characterized the Rev.
Jesse Jackson as a ''hustler from Chicago.''


Question of the Week; Do the Yanks and Mets Need Mascots?
LEAD: Come on, they already have them.
They are Steinbrenner for the Yanks and Strawberry for the Mets, in case you've never heard of them.
TAE KIM  New York


'Import Substitution' - or Buying from the Neighbors
LEAD: LAST Christmas, merchants in Gregory, S.D., subsidized low-interest loans for shoppers at local lending institutions, provided the money was spent with Gregory merchants.
To make sure that it was, the lenders issued ''Gregory Bucks,'' redeemable only with participating merchants in the town of 1,500.


POSTINGS: A.I.A. Convention; Tours for All
LEAD: Next Sunday, 10,000 architects from Maine to Guam will converge on New York City and the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center for the 120th annual national convention of the American Institute of Architects.
Besides professional workshops and seminars, the four-day event will afford New Yorkers who have never craned their necks at a New York building the chance to see them in the company of some rather astute visitors.


Frances Littell to Wed in July
LEAD: Frances Littell's engagement to Adam D'Arcy Sherman Heath, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Desmond P.S.
Heath of New York City and Staatsburg, N.Y., has been made known by her father, Walter D. Littell of New Haven.
The couple plan to marry in July.


Gentlemen, Start Your Engines
LEAD: IT IS, SO TO SPEAK, A CHIP OFF the old engine block.
Conceived as a successor to the British-built Cosworth engine that has captured every Indianapolis 500 since 1978, the Chevrolet-Ilmor V-8 was initially designed, in fact, by two former Cosworth engineers. ''We ran it in one of our spare cars in 1985,'' says Derrick Walker, vice president and general manager of Penske Racing, which, along with Chevrolet, financed the endeavor of the two designers, Mario Illien and Paul Morgan.


POSTINGS: Factory Conversion; South Slope Pioneering
LEAD: Park Slope traditionalists recognize nothing south of Eighth Street, but Stephen Mandell insists the Brooklyn neighborhood includes the South Slope area where his 24-unit condo conversion is nearing completion.
It has the right sounding address - 279 Prospect Park West - but its location between 17th and 18th Streets leaves it closer to Greenwood Cemetery than Prospect Park.


A Different Benefit
LEAD: To the Editor:


William C. Speidel; Author and Guide, 76
LEAD: William C. (Bill) Speidel, author and founder of Seattle's Underground Tours, died Tuesday.
He was 76 years old.


Yanks and Mets: Stranger than Fiction
LEAD: Even in the off season you knew it would be a year of destiny: ours, theirs, New York's.
Both teams had power and speed to burn - the pitching needed only continued health, or a little shoring up.
October was in the air before spring arrived.
We were ready to tell the commissioner to have Series tickets printed.


Signs of Success in 'Poster Pollution' Crusade
LEAD: A. J. Buttler, a man with a consuming aversion to untidiness, regularly walks the night streets of Manhattan, ripping down posters and handbills as he goes.


Are Schools Just a Line in the Welfare Budget?
LEAD: THERE is a trend in New York State education that has not got the public airing it deserves.
Perhaps that is because no one has brought it up as a specific issue.


ON THE TRAIL OF TREBITSCH LINCOLN, TRIPLE AGENT
LEAD: I cannot say quite when I first heard of Trebitsch Lincoln.
He is one of those types, notorious in their own day, who sink rapidly into obscurity after their deaths, sometimes hovering briefly in the footnotes of history.
I believe that the outline of Trebitsch Lincoln's bizarre story was recounted to me some years ago in Jerusalem by the editor of the Encyclopedia Judaica, Geoffrey Wigoder, whose encyclopedic knowledge of such historical byways is unrivaled.


Recital; Songs And Arias By Hines
LEAD: Friday's tribute to Jerome Hines at Carnegie Hall could have been better managed.
Planning and promoting require more than renting a big hall; they mean making sure it is full.
Mr.
Hines's audience was embarrassingly small, enthusiastic though it was.


Contamination at Kodak
LEAD: The first state testing of ground water at the Eastman Kodak Company's industrial park has found chemical and metal contamination, officials said.
An analysis by the Department of Environmental Conservation showed that at least 12 chemicals and five heavy metals were present in ground water in and around the site in amounts that exceed state levels.


Staging an Edith Wharton Novel In 19th-Century Genre-Painting Style
LEAD: Eight years ago, Donald Sanders, the founder of the collective known as the New York Art Theater Institute, had an esthetic revelation.
While visiting the Hudson River Museum, the director and writer, whose work had always been strongly influenced by changing trends in contemporary painting, found himself overwhelmed by the mystical landscapes of the 19th-century painter Thomas


45 Runs for College Team
LEAD: Everything Grand Canyon College of Phoenix did Friday turned into a run.
And the game turned into the highest-scoring runaway in college baseball history.


A Planto Ease the Housing Crisis
LEAD: FOR ALMOST 15 years, the National Housing Institute, based in Orange, has worked to improve housing conditions and opportunities for both tenants and homeowners.


The Many Guises of 20th-Century Opera
LEAD: It might seem something of a stretch to discuss new recordings of Alberic Magnard's ''Guercoeur,'' Kurt Weill's ''Aufstieg und Fall der Stadt Mahagonny'' and Leonard Bernstein's ''A Quiet Place'' in one article.
Yes, all three are 20th-century operas, although Magnard's barely qualifies, having been completed in 1900.


The Economy Still Churns Out Jobs
LEAD: Unemployment went down again in April, reaching a level not seen in 14 years.
The April rate was put at 5.4 percent, down from 5.5 percent in March.
While no doubt encouraging to the 606,000 people who found jobs last month, the steady decline in unemployment is raising concern that a tight labor market could push wages up enough to produce worrisome inflation.


State Pressed on Mandate Funds
LEAD: IN THE middle of the ongoing tug-of-war between the state and local levels of government over taxing and spending policies, a new slogan that has the ring of simple justice is being spoken more often: ''State Mandate, State Pay.''


U.S. to Deny Visa to Vietnamese Economist
LEAD: The State Department intends to deny a visa to an American-educated Vietnamese economist who is regarded as a leading advocate of economic liberalization in Hanoi, according to groups and individuals in the United States supporting his application.


Putting East Bloc Cars on the Road
LEAD: EVERY Sunday morning, several acres of an old military airfield west of Warsaw become, for a few hours, the city's most active automobile salesroom.
At what appears more like a county fair, with hot charcoal grills wafting the scent of browning kielbasa, enterprising buyers browse among dumpy little Polski Fiats (the locally assembled Fiat subcompact), new Mercedes Benz sedans and occasional old Pontiacs or Chevrolets that have often been brought into the country by


Mary McManus, A Nurse, Is Wed
LEAD: The marriage of Mary Alice McManus, a daughter of Mrs.
John Herbert McManus of Bethesda, Md., and the late Mr.
McManus, to Dr.
Richard L. White Jr., a son of Mrs.
John H. Keating Jr. of Rumson, N.J., and the late Dr.
White, took place yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Annunciation in Washington.


LEADING THE PARADE
LEAD: When the talk turns to songs and litling tunes that set the toes to tapping, it's time to remember the composer who set the standard by which standards are judged.
The songwriter Rupert Holmes pays homage to Irving Berlin and his incomparable influence on his profession.
Page 14.


DECIDING WHOSE BUSINESS IT IS WHEN PLANTS CLOSE
LEAD: IT took three years of close work between Republicans and Democrats and labor and business to craft the trade bill that the Senate and House passed by large margins last month.
And all sides - including the White House - appear to agree on the measure's get-tough-with-your-trading-partners thrust.


Lilco Proposes Users Tighten Energy Belts
LEAD: IF your house has an electric water heater, central air-conditioning or a swimming pool with an electric pump, the Long Island Lighting Company may want to talk to you soon about turning them off.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Bang - You're Alive!
The most enthusiastic shooting in World War II came at the very end, as if all the unexpended ammunition and aggression had to be got rid of at once.
This is from ''Flights of Passage'' by Samuel Hynes (Frederic C. Beil/Naval Institute Press).


Rejecting Relativism; How the Methodist Church Reflects a New Mainstream
LEAD: THE Methodists have been called the most American of American churches.
Once the nation's largest religious group, their 9.5 million members now rank behind the 52.5 million Roman Catholics and the 14.5 million Southern Baptists.
But the denomination, which became independent of the Church of England when the colonies became an independent nation, remains a sensitive barometer of


Miss Milano and C. L. Burgess Jr. Wed
LEAD: Maurren Patricia Milano, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael R. Milano of Teaneck, N.J., and Carter Lane Burgess Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burgess of Roanoke, Va., were married yesterday at St.
Elizabeth's Episcopal Church in Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas R. Jordan, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.


Seafood of the East and West
LEAD: THE Restaurant at Stamford Landing, another addition to Stamford's ever-expanding dining scene, has a novel idea: In a setting overlooking Mill River, it presents a menu that combines fresh seafood with the products of a Japanese sushi bar.
The best of two seafood-loving worlds, one might think.
It would be, if the Western selections on the menu were as successful as the oriental ones.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  'PETER PAN' EXHIBIT  Early 18th-century photographs of the two boys who were the inspiration for ''Peter Pan'' and other items related to the evolution of the original stage version will be displayed at the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library of Yale University.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the State University of New York at Stony Brook misidentified George Bidermann.
He is the treasurer of the Graduate Student Organization.
The goals of some members of the Chapin Apartments Residents Association were also misstated.
They are seeking a rent freeze.


WEIRDOS ON THE BARRICADES
LEAD:  FREAKY DEAKY  By Elmore Leonard.  341 pp.
New York:  Arbor House/William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.95.


IN PLAYING STUNTS, THE TRICK IS TO SURVIVE
LEAD: PUTTING one's head into the lion's mouth is not only a great stunt in the circus but also in the chess arena.
The problem is the same in both domains: getting it out again.


Beth Ackerman and Bruce Bolander Are Married
LEAD: Beth Laurie Ackerman and Bruce David Bolander were married yesterday afternoon at Petit St.
Vincent, a resort on St.
Vincent Island in the West Indies, by Bertham Richardson, the Minister of Marriage, who performed a civil ceremony.


Helpful Anecdotes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Showdown Time At Cowboy Shrine
LEAD: TORN by internal feuding and saddled with millions in debts, the National Cowboy Hall of Fame, some folks said, was headed for the last roundup in Oklahoma City.


Good Guys, Bad Guys
LEAD:  THE UNTOUCHABLES  Starring Kevin Costner (in photo, right) Robert DeNiro, Sean  Connery (in photo), Andy Garcia, Charles Martin Smith, Billy Drago.
Directed by Brian De Palma. 1987.
Paramount Home Video.  119 minutes. $89.95.
Rated R.


Special Flair For the Young
LEAD: MRS.
TAKI'S KIDS is a new line of children's clothes that is stylish enough to appeal to grown-ups.
It is from Takihyo Inc., which brought us Anne Klein, Anne Klein II and Donna Karan, and it takes its design inspiration from those lines.


Yankees' Offense Fizzles; Chambliss Is Activated
LEAD: The day had already taken a bizarre turn, but then it got a bit stranger.
The Yankees, who had seen their manager finally arrive at Arlington Stadium today after he said he was attacked in a nearby night spot just after midnight Friday, received another unexpected jolt.


Holly Curtis Becomes Bride
LEAD: At St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in New York, Hilary Whittaker Curtis, the daughter of William G. Curtis 4th of New York and the late Roberta Lamm Curtis, was married yesterday to William George Hartman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Hartman Jr. of Northbrook, Ill.
Msgr.
Henry J. Mansell performed the ceremony.


Cooking Seafood to Perfection
LEAD: FISH cookery is a subtle art.


Navy Day-Care Rule May Oust Hundreds of Civilian Children
LEAD: HUNDREDS of children could be ousted from their day-care programs because of a change in policy at the Submarine Base in Groton.


Fireworks-Job Bidders Exchanging Red Glares
LEAD: The Fourth of July celebration on the Mall, the nation's birthday in the nation's capital. is the stuff that fireworks makers' dreams are made on.


Is 'The Last Emperor' Truth or Propaganda?
LEAD: The advertisements these days are proclaiming it ''the most honored film in 25 years,'' and indeed, Bernardo Bertolucci's new movie, ''The Last Emperor,'' which won nine Oscars at last month's Academy Awards ceremonies, does dazzle the eye.
The film, in telling the life story of Henry Aisin-Gioro Pu Yi, the last, quivering twig on the Manchu Dynasty's venerable tree, is distinguished by its gorgeous re-creation of the lacquered, ceremonious interior of the Forbidden City, where Pu Yi was virtually imprisoned for 12 years after the tottering dynasty crumbled into nothingness in 1912.


Alexandra Masterson Weds John R. Dumke
LEAD: The Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Alexandra Masterson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Masterson of New York and Houston, to John Ralph Dumke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Dumke of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the ceremony.


ALSO KNOWN AS S.P. EAGLE
LEAD:  SPIEGEL  The Man Behind the Pictures.
By Andrew Sinclair.
Illustrated. 162 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $17.95.


Kidney Transplants Are to Begin at the County Medical Center
LEAD: THE County Medical Center has secured state approval to become the first hospital in the Hudson Valley region to perform kidney transplants.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. The ceiling in our family room is stained and discolored because the toilet overflowed in the bathroom above this room.
Will it be necessary to replace this ceiling, or will it eventually dry out so it can be repainted?


Tolstoy's Fables
LEAD: In 1849 Count Leo Tolstoy established a school for peasant children at his country estate, Yasnaya Polyana (Clear Glades).
He also taught at the school, and wrote and published a primer that included sections on teaching reading, handwriting and arithmetic, as well as the fables he wrote for the pupils.


INSIDE
LEAD:  On the Border


Theater; Comedy About a Reluctant Saint of Central Park
LEAD: Hugo DePew, the protagonist of Jeffrey Kindley's mild little comedy ''St.
Hugo of Central Park,'' is that stock literary figure, a poor misunderstood youth crushed by the evil material world.
Any parallels between the life of Christ and the character's eventual martyrdom are purely intentional.


U.S. Parks Board Acts on Jay Site Designation
LEAD: THE National Park System Advisory Board last week deferred to the Secretary of the Interior on the question of designating the Post Road Historic District in Rye as a National Historic Landmark.


HOME VIDEO
LEAD:  Hiding Out  Starring Jon Cryer, Keith Coogan,  Annabeth Gish, Oliver Cotton, Claude  Brooks, Tim Quill.
Directed by Bob  Giraldi. 1987.
HBO Video.  98 minutes. $89.99.
Rated PG-13.
Some  strong language.


To Pare Expenses, Ration Services
LEAD: One method of cutting medical costs is to ration services.
Robert H. Blank, author of the book ''Rationing Medicine,'' and associate director of the program for biosocial research at Northern Illinois University, talked with the Business Forum editor, Joel Kurtzman, about some of the choices society must make to contain medical costs.


Smoking
LEAD: To the Editor: I was amused to read of Joan Shangold's dismay (Letters, March 20) when people in the nonsmoking section at the Free Time restaurant in Paris lit up anyway.


Joyner-Kersee Sets U.S. Mark
LEAD: Jackie Joyner-Kersee, competing in the 100-meter hurdles for the first time this year, set an American record tonight by winning the women's event in 12.70 seconds at the S&amp;W Modesto Invitational track and field meet.


Talks to End Strike Begin in Gdansk
LEAD: The management of the big Lenin shipyard met today for the first time with workers striking for higher pay and for the legalization of the Solidarity trade union.


E.P.A. BACKS PLAN TO DRILL OFFSHORE
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency has given a qualified endorsement to a sale of offshore oil and gas leases in the North Atlantic despite a top agency official's belief that the sale, planned for next February, should be scuttled.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Sylvester Gray and Marvin Alexander, who were dropped from the Memphis State basketball team because they dealt with an agent, will play in the United States Basketball League this summer. . . .
Gary Williams, the Ohio State basketball coach, has told the Charlotte Hornets that he is not interested in taking over the N.B.A.


Prospects; Regulating for Safer Skies
LEAD: Since airline deregulation in 1978, traffic has almost doubled, putting strains on the system.
An increase in near misses, allegations against the Boeing Company of poor quality control, and last month's damage to an Aloha Airlines jetliner, have intensified concern over safety.
What changes will be made in the way the skies are regulated?


PAPER FILIGREE: AN ART FOR LEISURE
LEAD: The colorful and ex-quisitely worked decorations in the exhibition ''Rolled, Scrolled, Crimped, and Folded: The Lost Art of Filigree Paperwork'' at the Florian Papp gallery are a wonderful surprise.
Most are superb examples of a craft that was popular among women in Britain in the 18th and 19th centuries but is virtually unknown today.


THE GORILLA WAS ON HIS SIDE
LEAD:  JOHN PATRICK  NORMAN McHENNESSY  The Boy Who Was Always Late.
Written and illustrated by John Burningham.
Unpaged.
New York:  Crown Publishers. $12.95. (Ages 4 to 7)


First Maryland
LEAD: To the Editor:


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending April 23  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $505,000  32 Washington Square West  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. co-op in a recently renovated prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, maid's room, fireplace, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,600, 31% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)


THINGS THAT GO BAA IN THE NIGHT
LEAD:  THE DREAM FACTORY  Written and illustrated by Nurit Karlin.
Unpaged.
New York: J. B. Lippincott. $12.95.  (Ages 2 to 6)  SLEEPERS  Written and illustrated by Dayal Kaur Khalsa.
Unpaged.
New York: Clarkson N. Potter. $7.95.  (Ages 2 to 5)


'Wet Carpets' at the Crossroads
LEAD: THE FINAL show of the season also marks a new beginning for the 10-year-old Crossroads Theatre Company.


POSTINGS: Mount Vernon Condos; Geographical Compromise
LEAD: Stephen Weiss and Stuart Berelson build for ''dinks,'' and ''dinks'' go both ways, which makes southern Westchester County a good place for them. ''Dinks'' are dual-income couples without kids, and commuting ease often is the prime factor in where they settle.
Southern Westchester can be a geographical compromise between a spouse who works in Manhattan and one who works in White


Correction
LEAD: An article in The Times Magazine last Sunday about Robert Maxwell's media empire stated the ownership of The International Herald Tribune incompletely.
The newspaper, in Paris, is owned by the Whitney Communications Corporation along with The New York Times Company and The Washington Post Company.


Jordan Hovers Above The Rest
LEAD: No one claims to have seen Michael Jordan walk on water, though some basketball fans are convinced he could if he put his mind to it.
Many, however, believe they have actually seen Michael Jordan walk on air.
Often.
In a number of cities in America.
With his size-13 sneakers.
This they would testify to in a court of law.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Smoking Bans On British Air


Kathleen Hughes Wed in California
LEAD: Kathleen Freeman Hughes, a daughter of Eileen L. Hughes of New York and the late Emmet John Hughes, was married yesterday to Philip Stimson Murphy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry L. Murphy of Los Gatos, Calif.
Jean Davidson of the Universal Life Church officiated at the couple's home in Los Angeles.


The Need For Recycling
LEAD: I commend Keep America Beautiful Inc. for its efforts (''Litter Is a Behavioral Problem,'' March 27).
I hope the organization will now help with the massive problem of solid waste by encouraging businesses to reassess their packaging, use more glass containers and aim for a uniform plastic that can be recycled easily.


ON CAPTURING ''THE DECISIVE MOMENT'
LEAD: ALTHOUGH auto-focusing cameras seem to be everywhere these days, they're not the only game in town.
Last week, for example, I needed a lightweight, portable, 120-roll-film camera that could hang at my side while I toured the exotic avenues of Barcelona.
Ever see a 120-format point-and-shoot camera with automatic focusing?


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bayport  $195,000  3 Cole Court  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 8-year-old ranch; basement, hardwood floors, 2-car garage; taxes $4,900.
East Meadow  $174,000  396 Avalon Place  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.


Black Prep School Faces Money Crisis
LEAD: ''GOOD morning, Miss Shelley and visitor.'' In collective voice, the students of Long Island's only black prep school sprang to their feet at the sight of their school administrator.


Robert F. Sage; Philanthropist, 72
LEAD: Robert F. Sage, a Michigan philanthropist, died April 29 at St.
Joseph Mercy Hospital in Ann Arbor at the age of 72.


Units Open To Victims Of AIDS
LEAD: A CHURCH group in Hartford is beginning the first scattered-site housing program in the state for people with AIDS.


D. J. Norton Weds Sarah J. DeCrane
LEAD: Sarah Juliana DeCrane, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred C. DeCrane Jr. of Bronxville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Daniel John Norton, a son of Anne Strannahan Norton of Binghamton, N.Y.
Msgr.
James M. Connolly performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.


ISRAEL BEGINS ITS CAMPAIGN ON ONE ISSUE
LEAD: The West Bank seems far removed from this cement-block development town just north of the Negev.
But a visit from Foreign Minister Shimon Peres made clear that the Palestinian uprising is a blazing political issue for virtually every Israeli.


Japanese Gone Brazilian: Unhurried Workaholics
LEAD: It was 1908 when the first 781 Japanese walked off a migrant ship to reach out for the riches promised by a wild and tropical land.
Instead, they found themselves replacing recently freed slaves on coffee plantations in the interior of Brazil.


Freed Frenchman, Emotionally Distressed, Back in Hospital
LEAD: A French diplomat who has said he was subjected to mock executions during the three years he was held captive in Lebanon returned to a military hospital today suffering from a nervous condition, his wife said.


Alice E. Hill to Wed Mark R. Nicholson
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Hill of Inuvik, Northwest Territories, Canada, of the engagment of their daughter Alice Eddy Hill to Mark R. Nicholson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ian Nicholson of Canberra, Australia, and Stockholm.


PRICEY JAPAN
LEAD: AN AMERICAN FRIEND who recently visited Japan returned home saying that when he feels like bringing back memories of his trip, he plans to take a $10 bill from his wallet and set it on fire.


In Maremma, Etruscan Ghosts Linger
LEAD: MAREMMA L'AMARA it was called, Maremma the bitter, for the harsh life of its inhabitants, their unforgiving lands, their ruined villages.
Of all the well-traveled regions of Tuscany, it was the most feared and remains the least known.
Yet it is the one that most captivated the Tuscan imagination - from Dante's lugubrious evocations of violent death and disease in the region he elevated to a symbol of human vanity and eternal despair, to Giovanni


A Show Equal To an Artist Larger Than Life
LEAD: There's a new man in town in Washington and for someone born in 1848 he's looking remarkably fresh.
With his high-crowned astrakhan hat, his dark blue overcoat with its prominent gold buttons, and his white-gloved, silver-ringed hand clutching a cane carved by himself, he cuts an unmistakable figure.


Luxury Yacht Is Seized With Bit of Marijuana
LEAD: A $2.5 million luxury yacht was seized today after a Coast Guard search turned up less than a tenth of an ounce of marijuana on board.


Music; THE 'GLAGOLITIC' MASS AND OTHER CZECH WORKS
LEAD: Michael Tilson Thomas put together a thoughtful all-Czechoslovak program for the Pittsburgh Symphony's concert at Carnegie Hall on Thursday night.
And one thing that can be said right away about the performances was that the orchestra itself is sounding very good.
Occasionally, when the violins ventured into their topmost range, things sounded a little stringy and acidic.


Jeanette Kelleher Married To Gregory Stein, a Lawyer
LEAD: Jeanette Marie Kelleher, an assistant economist at the Federal Reserve Bank in New York, and Gregory Michael Stein, an associate at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, were married yesterday at the Back Bay Hilton in Boston.
Rabbi Allan L. Press and the Rev.
John MacInnis, a Roman


Memory Is Last Shackle As Salvadoran Is Freed
LEAD: After years of assaults and intimidation in her native El Salvador, then months in a detention center fearing deportation, Telba Dora Erazo was granted political asylum this week in a cinder block courtroom in this sun-baked border town.


Filly Wins the 114th Kentucky Derby
LEAD: Winning Colors, with Gary Stevens up, crossing the finish line at Churchill Downs to become only the third filly to win the race.
Forty Niner finished second and Risen Star was third. (AP) Section 8.


Decorating Challenges Of a Room for Display
LEAD: FOR AMS Interiors Inc. of Greenwich, designing a children's sitting room goes beyond dollhouses and teddy bears, especially when it is in the Kips Bay Show House in Manhattan.


A DEBATE OVER DISCLOSURE TO PARTNERS OF AIDS PATIENTS
LEAD: SHOULD doctors warn sexual partners of AIDS patients that they may have been infected, even if the patient objects?
The New York Legislature will soon consider that question, and the result could be the first state law in the nation permitting doctors to make such disclosures.


Needed: Pacific Strategy
LEAD: Soviet foreign policy initiatives under Mikhail Gorbachev have so far been addressed mainly to the U.S. and Western Europe.
A swing through four Far Eastern capitals makes it clear that there is more to come in the Pacific region.


Koch Proposes Doubling of Capital Spending for New York Schools
LEAD: Mayor Koch proposed doubling capital spending for the New York City school system yesterday, saying he would seek $5.2 billion over the next 10 years.


In Brawley Inquiry, a Turn to Drug-Infested Streets
LEAD: Having found only a blind alley in Tawana Brawley's assertions of racial and sexual abuse by a gang of white abductors, investigators have now turned to the drug-infested streets of Newburgh, N.Y., for fresh clues to the black teen-ager's mysterious four-day disappearance last fall.


THE WOLF INSIDE
LEAD: In his poignant article ''The Wolf Inside'' (Body and Mind, April 3), John Stone showed great sensitivity for the suffering and pain of lupus patients.
The outlook has indeed improved since Flannery O'Connor was diagnosed in the early 1950's, but there are still too many lives cut short by this pernicious and complex disease.


ARE WOMEN BETTER DOCTORS?
LEAD: Perri Klass asks if women are better doctors.
The question is sexist and irrelevant.
A female physician is no less able to perform open-heart surgery than a male doctor is able to tell patients, caringly, that they have cancer.
Sensitivity, empathy and sincerity are not female qualities; they are human ones.


New Haven Celebrates Its Museums
LEAD: ASK almost anyone where the Gowie-Normand House Museum is and chances are he wouldn't know.
It is in New Haven and, like some of the area's 16 museums and cultural centers, is not well known.


Effectiveness of Abortion Protests Is Debated
LEAD: More than 600 anti-abortion demonstrators left New York City yesterday after a week of blockades, arrests and prayer vigils, leaving behind a debate over whether they had significantly helped the anti-abortion movement.


Soviet Junior Team Wins
LEAD: The Soviet Union's junior national basketball team made its second trip to the Bronx last night, and this time it won, beating the New York Gauchos, a squad of schoolboy stars, by 99-82 before a crowd of 1,000.


Splitting the Check for Allied Defense
LEAD: AS United States military spending is steadily declining, pressure is rising on America's allies to carry a larger share of the financial burden of their defense.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: MAY 8, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
(Warner, $4.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis
among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
9
FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $4.95.)
The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's.


TALKING: Seller Loans; Cashing In A Private Mortgage
LEAD: WHEN the housing market weakens or interest rates start to soar, sellers often help to finance sales of their homes by offering buyers mortgages at below-market rates of interest.


American Gothic Rides High In Atlanta's I.B.M. Building
LEAD: ATLANTA


Question of the Week; Do the Yanks and Mets Need Mascots?
LEAD: If a New York baseball team adopts a mascot, it should not be an animal but a vegetable.
A bush.
Because that team will be truly bush league.
MARISA HAGAN  New York


CORRECTION
LEAD: A dance review last Sunday about the April 27 performance of the American Ballet Theater production of ''The Sleeping Beauty'' misidentified the dancer who performed the ''Gold'' solo.
He was Johan Renvall.


Dance; A Humanist Approach In Byrd's Choreography
LEAD: Donald Byrd is a choreographer who has the gift of making dancers move.
He is a humanist who responds to the world around him, seeming to acknowledge it as providing a valid and valuable context for dance.
His is a bold, clear, strong voice - trying to find its way through a good deal of static clutter.


A Critical Mass of Merchants on Main Street
LEAD: MOST rural development specialists decry the Federal Government's pullback from support to rural areas.
Apart from burgeoning farm subsidies, Federal spending in the countryside has been trimmed dramatically since 1980.


Hope Gittis Wed To Robert Sheft
LEAD: Hope Susan Gittis, a daughter of Sondra Gittis of Philadelphia and Howard Gittis of New York and Palm Beach, Fla., and Robert Sheft, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wallace Sheft of Roslyn Heights, L.I., were married last evening at the Pierre Hotel in New York.
Rabbi David Wice performed the ceremony.


Dr. Finch Weds Peter G. Coe
LEAD: Dr.
Elizabeth Lathrop Finch, the daughter of Elizabeth J. Finch of New York and Quogue, L.I., and Edward R. Finch Jr. of New York and Westhampton Beach, L.I., was married yesterday to Peter Goodwin Coe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm D. Coe of Bassett, Va.
The Rev.
F.
Forrester Church performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New


Four Men on a Filly at the Kentucky Derby
LEAD: It's as if Martina Navratilova won the Wimbledon men's singles.
As if Nancy Lopez won the Masters.
As if Jackie Joyner-Kersee won the men's Olympic decathlon.


AT A GLANCE: ROCKEFELLER FOUNDATION
LEAD:  History


Ford's Luxurious Drive Into the Future
LEAD: Tom Wagner was the relatively new top guy at Ford Motor Company's Lincoln-Mercury division when he showed up in New York earlier this year to talk about his new baby, the Lincoln Continental.


FICTION
LEAD:  UNDERCOVER.
By Soledad Santiago. (Bantam, Paper, $3.95.) Two cops - one brutal and vengeful, the other kind and caring - patrol the mean streets of Alphabet City in this gritty first novel about the drug subculture of New York's Lower East Side.
True to the schematic conventions of such crime procedurals, the ''human'' partner oozes compassion for the local criminals and their prey, who are joint victims of the rampant illegal drug economy, while the hard-nosed cop just wants to beat all the dope fiends to a pulp.


Still Haggling on Trade
LEAD: Senate approval of the foreign trade bill last month didn't end the legislative maneuvering that has dogged its three-year course across Capitol Hill.
Normally, the bill would have gone straight to President Reagan, who is poised to veto it because he's adamantly opposed to the requirement that businesses give 60 days' notice for large layoffs and plant closings.


For Presidential Candidates, Optimism Appears a Winner
LEAD: Psychologists have their own view of American Presidential elections.
For some, the outcome in November hinges on optimism.


LACROIX OR LE CASH?
LEAD: Patricia Volk captured my own feelings when she wrote, ''Is it Lacroix?
Is it La Salvation Army?
What, besides $14,950, is la difference?''


Newark Airport
LEAD: To the Editor: When I returned recently to Newark International Airport, I learned the meaning of compound stupidity.
I retrieved my car from long-term parking and went to pick up my wife, 6-month-old son and six bags from the sidewalk outside the baggage claim area.
I followed the signs to Arrivals and pulled the car near where my family and luggage were waiting.


Veterans' Suit Challenges System Of Appeals on Denial of Benefits
LEAD: The Veterans Administration's system for reviewing veterans' appeals of denied benefits has been attacked in a lawsuit as ''assembly-line'' justice that denies fair hearings to thousands of claimants.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  PARIS NOTEBOOKS: Essays &amp; Reviews.
By Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $17.95.) Reviewers' copies of new books commonly come with fliers from the publisher tucked in, lauding the author's previously published work.
There is one such accompanying ''Paris Notebooks,'' a collection of Mavis Gallant's essays and reviews, mostly written for The New Yorker and this publication, praising her latest book of short stories.


Anchors for Making Strong Joints
LEAD: THE ability to hammer nails skillfully has always been required for most carpentry tasks.
But in recent years, fastening aids called construction anchors have been developed that allow strong joints to be created with less skill, particularly in toenailing, the difficult technique of driving nails at angles.


Miss Petrick Wed To Daniel Zweig
LEAD: Sally Anne Petrick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon M. Petrick of Cranford, N.J., was married yesterday to Daniel Ephram Zweig, the son of Mollie Levinson Zweig of Oroville, Calif., and Jonas Zweig of Passaic, N.J.
The Rev.
William J. O'Brien, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Alfred Landsburg officiated at the Petrick home.


Maureen Anne Walsh Wed
LEAD: Maureen Anne Walsh, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Andrew C. Walsh of Cumberland Center, Me., was married yesterday to Jonkheer Ferdinand Folef Hooft Graafland, a son of Lydia Z. Hooft Graafland-Stahl of Wassenaar, the Netherlands, and the late Jonkheer Folef Ferdinand Joan Hooft Graafland.
The Rev.
Willem Dyckmeester performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Dorpskerk in Wassenaar.


GOODBYE TO ALL THAT
LEAD:  WASHINGTON GOES TO WAR  By David Brinkley.
Illustrated. 286 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


A Town Sells Off Pieces of Its Soul
LEAD: MONEY magazine recently singled out Stamford, Danbury and Norwalk as Connecticut cities that are among the most desirable places to live in America.
By all accounts, remarkable economic strides have been made in Stamford in the last 25 years.
But there are clearly two Stamfords.


Susan Druyanoff Married
LEAD: Susan Debra Druyanoff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Druyanoff of Los Altos Hills, Calif., and Dr.
Joshua Wieder, the son of Arline Wieder of Syosett, L.I., and the late Daniel Wieder, were married last evening at the Essex House in New York by Rabbi William Kloner.
The bride is the assistant casting director at Myers-Teschner Casting in New York.


To Avoid Dengue Fever, Take Grandma's Advice
LEAD: OLD-FASHIONED precautions, including mosquito nets, are the latest thing for the traveler to the tropics.
When I recently heard malaria and dengue fever discussed, the physicians stressed not treatments and prophylactic drugs but anti-mosquito measures.
I had a kinesthetic memory of wiggling when my Victorian-style grandmother tried to get a hat and a shirt on me in the Carolina Low Country sun and recalled her urging me indoors at sundown.


Besting a Bullet's Havoc: A Sergeant Is Honored
LEAD: Friday was the 93d anniversary of Theodore Roosevelt's swearing in as New York City Police Commissioner.
Friday was also a big day for Sgt.
Clement C. Johnson of the 105th Precinct in Queens Village.


TRAVEL BOOKSHELF
LEAD:  Baedeker's Rail Guide to Europe  296 pages.
Prentice Hall.
Paperback. $15.95.
Europe by Eurail: How to Tour Europe by Train  By George Wright Ferguson and LaVerne Ferguson. 639 pages.
Globe Pequot Press, Chester, Conn.
Paperback. $11.95.


Dry's New High
LEAD: KAZUYOSHI TAKEI, barkeep at a watering hole in the Ginza,'' went the bright lead on a story from Tokyo by Fred Hiatt of The Washington Post, ''admitted that the word dry used to conjure nothing but dry cleaning in his mind.
That was before the 'dry boom' hit Japan, before 'the dry wars' began. . .


Edible Ferns of New England
LEAD: FIDDLEHEADS, so aptly named because they resemble a violin scroll, are as sure a harbinger of the new season as asparagus, shad or fresh morels.
These tightly furled young fronds, which in spring appear at the crown of all varieties of ferns, grow throughout the world.
Indeed, the woodlands of the northeastern United


THE PRICE IS RIGHT
LEAD: YOU KNOW THAT feeling you get when, after a couple of hours at a crowded, noisy party, you step out on a porch or balcony for a bit of quiet and fresh air?
That's the feeling I get every so often when, to get away from the overheated discussions of $40 cabernets and $50 Bordeaux and $100 Burgundies, I open the mail and find the latest copies of my old friend Art Damond's Wine


Margaret Eliasberg Is Bride of Joseph Cochran 2d
LEAD: Margaret Anne Eliasberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Eliasberg of Sands Point, L.I., and Joseph Edward Cochran 2d of Phoenix, the son of Joseph E. Cochran and Patricia Sieckman, both of Boonville, Mo., were married yesterday.
Judge Edward V. Alfieri of the Village of Sands Point performed the ceremony at the


TUNISIAN FORESEES A GRAND ALLIANCE
LEAD: Ismail Khelil, the Central Bank Governor, deals not from crystal balls, but he does have a dream that one day the poor nations of North Africa will be linked economically by their own version of the European Community.


Wife Beating and the Rule of Thumb
LEAD:  HEROES OF THEIR OWN LIVES  The Politics and History of Family Violence:  Boston 1880-1960.
By Linda Gordon.
Illustrated. 383 pp.
New York: Viking. $24.95.


Askew of Florida Quits U.S. Senate Campaign  New York Times Regional Newspapers
LEAD: Former Gov.
Reubin Askew of Florida, the clear front-runner in that state's race for a seat in the United States Senate, withdrew yesterday from the campaign for the Democratic nomination.


Good Old Days Gone for Baseball
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Tudor Runs Week's Hitless-Innings Streak to 13
LEAD: Terry Pendleton hit a sacrifice fly with one out in the ninth inning to score Willie McGee as the St.
Louis Cardinals beat the Los Angeles Dodgers, 2-1, today after John Tudor pitched seven hitless innings.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.77
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.32
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.68
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
8.88
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
13.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
17.75


Proposed Ethics Code Provokes Dispute
LEAD: A PROPOSED new code of ethics for the county's 8,600 employees surfaced for the first time last week before the full Board of Legislators and quickly drew angry exchanges between Democrats and Republicans over some of its requirements.


John Sloan's Bygone New York Depicted in All Its Splendor And Squalor
LEAD: There is a German say-ing that could serve as a motto for much of the work of the American artist John Sloan: ''The air of the city makes you free.'' No doubt city air can also oppress, and Sloan's art finds room for some of its harsher and more desolating effects.
But the sense of freedom is what comes across most strongly - freedom to be yourself, to stay up at all hours, to share the life of the street; freedom to stroll around and observe.


Miss Marple Unearths a Murderer
LEAD: THE Arena Players Repertory Company usually offers at least one Agatha Christie mystery each season.
This time around it is presenting ''Murder at the Vicarage,'' a mystery thriller with a plethora of subjects.


BRIGHT LIGHTS, BIG CITY, BAD ART
LEAD:  TRUST  By Mary Flanagan.  292 pp. New York:  Atheneum. $17.95.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  PARADE IN PRINCETON  Princeton will mark the 200th anniversary of its Fire Department Saturday with a celebration that begins with a parade and ends with fireworks.


Correction
LEAD: An article on April 24 about the Westchester County Hispanic Advisory Board misidentified George Castellanos.
He is the board's chairman.


THE IMPORTANCE OF SIMPLE THINGS
LEAD:  A THIEF IN THE VILLAGE  And Other Stories.
By James Berry.  148 pp.
New York: Orchard Books/  Franklin Watts. $12.95.  (Ages 12 and up)


Anchors for Making Strong Joints
LEAD: THE ability to hammer nails skillfully has always been required for most carpentry tasks.
But in recent years, fastening aids called construction anchors have been developed that allow strong joints to be created with less skill, particularly in toenailing, the difficult technique of driving nails at angles.


Options Crisis
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q and A
LEAD:  Absentee Tenant


THE RIGHT NONSTUFF
LEAD:  A BOX OF NOTHING  By Peter Dickinson.  110 pp. New York:  Delacorte Press.


Sizing Up The Shape of Music
LEAD: I used to have record shelves.
They held LP's and 45-r.p.m. singles, more or less alphabetized.
In the late 1970's, I squeezed in 12-inch singles and a handful of cassettes, and set aside a shelf end for a novelty, 10-inch EP's.
Then the 1980's came, and the Walkman.
Cassettes started to stack up -cassettes with more songs than the album with the same title, cassettes of rare albums, cassette-only recordings, dance tapes.


Question of the Week; Do the Yanks and Mets Need Mascots?
LEAD: The Yankees already have George Steinbrenner and the Mets could use Mayor Koch.
He has been making a fool of himself lately.
MALCOLM R. HALSEY  Ocean, N.J.


Amid the Finales, a Season Opens with a Piano Recital
LEAD: WITH finales sprinkled throughout the schedule, it is comforting to report on a seasonal start.
The 37th annual arts series at the Merryall Community Center began last evening with a lecture by the gossip columnist Liz Smith.


Gymnast Paralyzed
LEAD: Two days after she broke her neck when she fell while warming up for the vault competition at an international tournament in Tokyo, Julissa Gomez, a 15-year-old American gymnast, remained in critical condition yesterday, paralyzed and unable to breathe normally.


The Modern's Dead. Long Live the Modern
LEAD: Every generation, or at least every art-world generation, has its own Museum of Modern Art - a complicated institution that it loves, learns to know by heart and almost invariably loses.
This is because the museum has, since its inception, regularly changed and expanded.
Nonetheless, every change takes some getting used to.


French Campaign Ends With Flurry by Challenger
LEAD: Despite a spectacular last-minute offensive to turn the tide against him, President Francois Mitterrand, a Socialist, heads into Sunday's presidential election favored to win a second seven-year term.


Instruments of 17th Century Prevail
LEAD: THE literature for string quartet is usually thought of as beginning with the works of Haydn, Mozart and the other classical composers, which leaves such earlier masters as Byrd, Purcell and Gabrieli out in the performing cold.
To remedy that situation, ''original instrument'' quartets were formed, in New York and


ARE WOMEN BETTER DOCTORS?
LEAD: Perri Klass mentions the scarcity of women in leadership positions in medicine.
Working at a university has given me the opportunity to observe this phenomenon, and to think about it.


Anchors for Making Strong Joints
LEAD: THE ability to hammer nails skillfully has always been required for most carpentry tasks.
But in recent years, fastening aids called construction anchors have been developed that allow strong joints to be created with less skill, particularly in toenailing, the difficult technique of driving nails at angles.


The Winfield Fiasco Is the Last Straw
LEAD: Even for the most devoted Yankee fans who have been distracted but not deterred by his management techniques, George Steinbrenner has raised the specter of total alienation by threatening to trade Dave Winfield for a Houston Astro named Bass.
After years of brushing aside Steinbrenner's obnoxious handling of Yankee personnel because of the team's consistently superior performance, I will not follow the Yankees this year, or any other baseball team, if Steinbrenner trades Winfield for


Historians Give Prizes To Writers
LEAD: Richard B. Morris, Gouverneur Morris Professor of History Emeritus at Columbia University, has been awarded the $5,000 Bruce Catton Prize for lifetime achievement in the writing of history by the Society of American Historians.
The Catton and other awards were presented Wednesday evening at the Harvard Club during the society's annual meeting.


Jane Ellen Gifford Wed To Keith J. Lindenburg
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Gabriel the Archangel in Saddle River, N.J., Jane Ellen Gifford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Gifford of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Keith Jude Lindenburg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Lindenburg of Bristol, R.I.
Msgr.
Robert T. Lennon performed the ceremony.


Question of the Week; Do the Yanks and Mets Need Mascots?
LEAD: Not in my worst nightmare would the Mets bring in a mascot to Shea Stadium. (How about bringing back the organist, though?)  PAMELA ROMANO  White Plains


Art; ALBERS, COMPUTERIZED, AT THE GUGGENHEIM
LEAD: Why does coffee often appear to be a different color in the pot than in the cup?
Why does tea look lighter in a spoon than in a cup, while milk appears to be the same color, no matter what the container?


FOR LAUGHS, BILL IRWIN DONS DANCING SHOES
LEAD: Bill Irwin, as a rubber-legged, befuddled soft-shoe dancer, blows kisses into the lens of a video camera he's holding inches from his face.
He desperately wants to attract the beautiful danseuse who's watching the TV monitor, where she now sees her zany suitor, in wobbly, wide-angle close-up, looking like a demented trout.


OPERA SEEN THROUGH A PLAY OF THE SAME NAME
LEAD: Purist music lovers - the kind who regard anything more grandiose than a chamber-music concert as borderline vulgarian -look with extreme suspicion on opera.
Not only is it big and noisy and emotionally crude (they think), but it is inherently sullied by not being strictly music at all.
Opera is a hybrid, a form of musical theater that partakes of both music and theater.


Battling Rain In the Military
LEAD: AFTER wrestling for two decades with a weighty problem - Should men in uniform be allowed to use umbrellas in the rain? - the Navy decided last November: Why not?


Failure of Fraternity
LEAD: After James Callahan died in a fraternity hazing incident at Rutgers University in February, some students rationalized his death as being the 18-year-old freshman's own fault.
After all, he consented to the hazing; he just got in over his head.
Indictments this week of 15 fraternity members send a different message, one that may prevent more senseless tragedies.


Time For a Hasty Retreat
LEAD: Firefighters in New Orleans abandoning their hose early yesterday as a burning building collapsed.
Three people were injured in the five-alarm blaze.
Arson is suspected. (AP)


Vivian Elaine Riefberg Weds John E. Ashford
LEAD: Temple Beth Elohim in Brewster, N.Y., was the setting last evening for the wedding of Vivian Elaine Riefberg, the daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Morton Riefberg of Danbury, Conn., to John Edward Ashford, the son of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Volney Clinton Ashford of Marshall, Mo.
Rabbi Solomon Ackrish performed the ceremony.


Janice Facibene Weds Environmental Lawyer
LEAD: Janice Ann Facibene and Christopher Robert Carpentieri, lawyers in New York, were married yesterday at the New York Yacht Club.
The Rev.
Harris Riordan, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony.


Verbatim; Teaching Is Hot
LEAD: 'This year's class really blew our socks off.
Our applications were up 50 percent.
We originally planned to accept 55 students, but the quality was so good we increased the class size to 75. '  Katherine K. Merseth  Director of teacher training,  Harvard Graduate School of Education,  where a rush of new applicants reflects the revived allure of teaching among college students.


Quagmire Is Really Not a Dirty Word
LEAD: To the Editor:


Street Fashion; It's Not a Shirt; It Just Acts Like One
LEAD: LOOK what burst out of their cocoons this spring: men's jackets, which have been drastically reshaped by a handful of forward-thinking designers.


THE WOLF INSIDE
LEAD: As a member of the medical advisory board of the Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Foundation, I was pleased to read Dr.
Stone's article.
However, he may have created additional stress for people with lupus.
He states that 60 percent of the patients have a rash on the face that is ''similar to the facial markings of a wolf.


A Repair Blitz on Norwalk Houses
LEAD: AFTER 20 volunteers finished with her house in Norwalk, Dorothy Farington had not seen it looking so good in years.


DINNER GUESTS FROM OUTER SPACE
LEAD:  COMPANY'S COMING  By Arthur Yorinks.
Illustrated by David Small.
Unpaged.
New York: Crown Publishers.


Knicks, With New-Found Respect, Look to Future
LEAD: Through the years, the Boston Celtics have never been known as gracious winners or losers.
Their feeling of superiority would never allow it.
But that was not the case Friday night after the Celtics rallied in the final minutes to defeat the Knicks, 102-94, at Madison Square Garden and eliminate New


IN SOVIET, CHANGE STRUGGLES TO EMERGE
LEAD: The Soviet Union is embroiled in a turbulent struggle against its own authoritarian tradition.


The Right to Smoke vs. the Right to Breathe
LEAD: I would like to respond to ''An Office Casualty: My Right to Smoke.'' In her article, it would seem that Alice Schultze attempts to make an analogy between the negative effects from sitting next to an employee who smokes and the negative effects from sitting next to an employee who is sneezing from the cold or flu.


10 States to Honor Generations of Farmers
LEAD: SIXTEEN families who have farmed their New Jersey spreads continuously for more than 200 years will be honored next month at a jubilee that will feature tributes by the Secretaries of Agriculture of 10 states from Maine to Delaware.


THREE DECADES OF LABOR UNREST
LEAD: In Poland, the Government's attempts to raise prices have often triggered resistance.  1956 - Workers at engineering factory in Poznan strike over wages, food and working conditions and attack nearby prison.
Authorities respond with tanks; as many as 70 people are killed and hundreds are injured.


Fairfield County Abounds With Condominiums, But Sales Lag
LEAD: FAIRFIELD COUNTY has a surplus of condominiums, real estate experts say, and some estimate that prices may have dropped as much as 10 to 15 percent over the past year.


Ann Shoemaker, Legal Assistant, Engaged to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Ann Elizabeth Shoemaker and Charles Montgomery Meredith 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Meredith 3d of Quakertown, Pa., has been announced by the future bride's mother, Barbara May Shoemaker, of Erdenheim, Pa.
A December wedding is planned.


Poland Warned By U.S. on Aid
LEAD: The Polish Government's violent crackdown on recent labor protests has jeopardized American support for the country's economic recovery plan, the State Department's second-ranking official said.


Side Streets Getting Fashion Showrooms
LEAD: FOR decades, it was a tradition in the garment center that most of the elite fashion designers had their showrooms in just two Seventh Avenue buildings, 550 or 530, both at 39th Street.
The clothes may have been made in Brooklyn or Pennsylvania, Hong Kong or India, but the designers showed their new models to buyers from around the country in elegant settings on Seventh


NAJIBULLAH IN NEW DELHI
LEAD: PRESIDENT rrxhNAJIBULLAH of Afghanistan emerged from relative silence last week and, on an official visit to India, appealed to ''moderates'' among the anti-Communist Afghan insurgents to join his Government, which is supported by the Soviet Union.


FICTION
LEAD:  GREEN CITY IN THE SUN.
By Barbara Wood. (Random House, $19.95.) An interesting tale of Africa in the stormy days before independence is buried under about 300 pages of excess verbiage and extraneous characters in this new novel by the author of ''Domina'' and ''Vital Signs.'' In ''Green City in the Sun,'' Barbara Wood chronicles life in Kenya from 1919 to the present through the experiences of two families, the English Trevertons and the African Mathenges.


U.S. Reported to Seek More Philippines Aid
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is seeking support for a multi-nation aid plan for the Philippines, according to Administration officials and Congressional aides.


MOTHERHOOD: VARIATIONS ON A THEME; Motherhood: Variations on a Theme
LEAD: A FEW years ago I had a bumper sticker on my car that asked ''Have you hugged your stepmother today?'' Everyone who saw it laughed.


Going On In the Northeast
LEAD:  BACH FESTIVAL


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  HAPPY MOTHER'S DAY  Today's the day mothers get their due, and those who want to go beyond the ordinary - the card and the dinner to say you care the most - can take advantage of some offbeat ways to share togetherness on Mother's Day.
For example, there's Coe Hall, the restored Gold Coast mansion that sits in the middle of the 409-acre Planting Fields Arboretum in Oyster Bay.


LACROIX OR LE CASH?
LEAD: Patricia Volk's arithmetic explained: A 10 percent discount after New York City sales tax nets out to about 2 percent.
Fifty Lacroix dresses ($750,000) less 2 percent discount equals one Lacroix ($15,000) free (no discount, no sales tax, dated register receipts and price tags required).
FRANK J.


AGNES DE MILLE: EAGER AS EVER
LEAD: When, in 1975, the American choreographer Agnes de Mille suffered a debilitating stroke, it was believed she would never again speak, never again walk and, most tragically, never again make dances.
Indeed, Miss de Mille's career, spanning some 50 years, was thought to be virtually over, marking a sad end to an extraordinary chapter in dance history.


Fisher Is Out
LEAD: He got off to a great start, but after pitching his way to a 3-0 record and helping the Pirates challenge the Mets for first place in the National League East, Brian Fisher, a former Yankee, is going to be sidelined for a while.
Fisher, who strained his right shoulder in his last start, against San Diego


No Headline
LEAD: THE vibration of the gong washed over the tones of the other instruments.
Suddenly, the drummer reared his head and the pace became frenetic.
Dynamics and density escalated.
The wooden hammers struck the bronze keys relentlessly, in perfect synchronization.
Rhythmic patterns repeated and repeated; melodic lines interlocked precisely.


A Festival of All Those Notes in Between
LEAD: Most Western music is based on an octave divided into 12 equal pitches.
Of course, the octave can be split differently, as it is in other cultures, and as composers of the Microtonal persuasion have argued for decades.
Microtonalists insist that the mathematically pure intervals yielded by, for instance, a 31-note scale, are inherently more pleasing than the slightly impure ones we are used to.


Karen Merdinger to Wed
LEAD: Karen Beth Merdinger and Mark Spencer Labe plan to marry June 12.
Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Merdinger of Rye, N.Y., have announced their daughter's engagement to a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Labe of New Milford, N.J.
Miss Merdinger is a senior sales representative for Chemical Bank in New York.
Her father is the president of Simplex Machinery, a machine tool importer and distributor in Hackensack, N.J.


Behind the Shortage of Housing
LEAD: FOR TOO long, many of us who own property in places like Hudson County have had to listen to the demagoguery of people like Allan De Fina, president of the West New York Housing Organization.


Question of the Week; Do the Yanks and Mets Need Mascots?
LEAD: A mascot for the Yankees?
Absolutely yes!
He should be oversized and out of proportion so he can easily be seen from the far reaches of the Stadium.
He should possess a large enough mouth so that he can be heard at least two sections away.
The ideal mascot will also be able to involve the players in his nutty antics.


Don't Take Entitlements From the Truly Entitled
LEAD: To the Editor:


Anchors for Making Strong Joints
LEAD: THE ability to hammer nails skillfully has always been required for most carpentry tasks.
But in recent years, fastening aids called construction anchors have been developed that allow strong joints to be created with less skill, particularly in toenailing, the difficult technique of driving nails at angles.


Newark Hospitals Forming AIDS Unit
LEAD: FACED with the strain of a constantly increasing number of AIDS patients, this city's five major hospitals -University, St.
Michael's Medical Center, Columbus, Beth Israel and United Medical Center - are forming a consortium to open a nonacute-care facility for such patients.
It would provide a level of treatment similar to that of a nursing home.


BLISSFULLY WREAKING HAVOC
LEAD:  GRANDMA GETS GRUMPY  Written and illustrated by  Anna Grossnickle Hines.
Unpaged.
New York: Clarion Books/  Ticknor &amp; Fields. $13.95. (Ages 3 to 6)


Negotiations Gap
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q and A
LEAD:  Turkey


Martin Hurt in Bar Fight
LEAD: Billy Martin, whose career as a player and manager has been interrupted by frequent battles with players and barroom brawls, was involved in a fight at a bar just after midnight Friday that resulted in a cut inside his left ear and required an overnight stay at a hospital, the team said today.


Some Golf Rules Are Outdated
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Japan's Favorite Tax Inspector
LEAD: Japanese think of themselves as an honest lot, and, for the most part, the self-trust is not misplaced.
Their low crime rate attests to that.
But sometimes they give themselves too much credit.
Take Japanese tax codes.
The law allows the shopowner, the farmer, the real-estate speculator - basically anyone in business for himself - to declare his own income and expenses.


Business Dials 1-900-PROFITS
LEAD: DIAL 1-900-909-1234.
Woody Woodpecker picks up. ''It's Woody Woodpecker,'' he says. ''Thanks for calling.
Haaa-haa-ha-ha-haaa.'' Then he puts on Dinosaur Buddy who tells how the telegraph and the telephone came about.


CONTROLS WHEN SLUGS GO ON A MARCH
LEAD: TO most gardeners, slugs are slimy, voracious pests.
To Dr.
Alan Gelperin, a research scientist at Bell Labs in Murray Hill, N.J., they are creatures worthy of respect. ''The degree of sophistication and complexity of their biological machinery is awe inspiring,'' he said in a recent interview.


A HISTORY WRIT IN OIL
LEAD:  THE EAGLE AND THE LION  The Tragedy of American-Iranian Relations.
By James A. Bill.
Illustrated. 520 pp.
New Haven:  Yale University Press. $25.


Serving Seafood, Not Stereotypes
LEAD: THEODORE'S in Oyster Bay doesn't serve clam chowder, shore dinners or breaded fried shrimp, yet it bills itself as a seafood restaurant.
Which goes to prove that there are seafood restaurants and seafood restaurants.
Theodore's calls itself unique, and is.
Here, smoked shark, fish soup Provencal, snapper en croute and bouillabaisse tempt fish fanciers.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND: How Higher Education Has Failed Democracy and Impoverished the Souls of Today's Students, by Allan Bloom. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $7.95.) Are tribal arts as high-minded as paintings by the old masters?
Is Beethoven no better than the Clash?
Allan Bloom believes that creeping relativism is eroding society - and that it's partly Nietzsche's fault.


In Nebraska, Presidency A Secondary Race in '88
LEAD: Over the years, Nebraska's Presidential primary has often generated excitement.


BEST SELLERS: MAY 8, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
9
THE ICARUS AGENDA, by Robert Ludlum.
(Random House, $19.95.) A congressman's secret
dealings with terrorists may bring him the
Presidency - or death.
2
4
3
LOVE IN THE TIME OF CHOLERA, by Gabriel
Garcia Marquez.


Pair of Lungs Transplanted Into Carolina Congressman
LEAD: Surgeons completed a double-lung transplant on Representative Floyd Spence of South Carolina early today.


Political Marketing; Ad Man For Schrafft's Gets Ready to Sell Bush
LEAD: It worked for President Reagan in 1984: reinforcing the political image makers with the advertising executives who promoted Alka-Seltzer and Puppy Chow.


LIVING WITH A VOLUNTARY LAW
LEAD: URGING President Reagan to accept the plant-closing provision of the trade bill, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis points to a law enacted in his own state in 1984.


California
LEAD: To the Editor: I just returned from a trip to the San Francisco Bay Area where I picked up an auto tape tour in a bookstore for the Monterey Peninsula and Big Sur.
It really made the trip, from start to finish.


Mothers a la Mode
LEAD: In the public mind, mothers have their ups and downs.


INTO THE KITCHEN
LEAD: THIS IS NOT YOUR TYPICAL COUNTRY kitchen, but then the house - a three-story, brick Georgian structure designed in 1906 by the architect Charles Platt - is not your typical country house either.
The 13,000-square-foot building is the epitome of the grand homes that burgeoned in communities outside of New


SMILING AS THEY GO BY
LEAD:  WAVING  A Counting Book.
Written and illustrated by Peter Sis.
Unpaged.
New York: Greenwillow Books. $11.95.  (Ages 4 and up)


Lost in the 20's On Catalina Island
LEAD: EVER since childhood Santa Catalina Island has rung in my head like an old tune - or maybe an old movie.


Horse Comes In But Bet Doesn't Pay
LEAD: Kentucky Derby Day at Churchill Downs got off to a strange start with a series of mix-ups surrounding the day's first race.
A bettor made a winning $20,000 bet by accident, then thanked track officials for canceling it for him.


DUKAKIS
LEAD: IN A PUERTO RICAN COMMUNITY center in the South Bronx, its walls tattooed with graffiti, the crowd is jammed into every available space, anxiously awaiting the candidate.
Outside, a chill rain is falling, splattering the chunks of broken cars in an adjacent vacant lot; the noise of an elevated subway train rumbles through the room.


Le Hot Seat In Paris Taxis
LEAD: MOVING to outwit robbers and muggers, Paris taxicab drivers introduced an electrifying solution in October: the ''blazing seat.''


Many Officers in New Haven Call in Sick to Protest Delay
LEAD: Numerous New Haven police officers called in sick today, apparently in protest of stalled contract negotiations.


It's Becoming Easier to Find Places to Laugh
LEAD: THE heavy-set young comedian with a style bordering on the manic-depressive was on the stage of the Treehouse Cafe and Comedy Club in Westport on a recent ''open mike'' night, and things were not going well.


Suffolk Expands Export Drive
LEAD: SUFFOLK COUNTY EXECUTIVE Patrick G. Halpin's promised foreign trade initiative, designed to expand Long Island's exports, will get under way tomorrow amid growing pressure for the county to step up its efforts.


Elaine M. Stately; Indian Leader, 57
LEAD: Elaine M. Stately, a co-founder of the American Indian Movement, died of cancer April 27.
She was 57 years old.


Matthew Boyse And Miss Kuhn To Wed Aug. 13
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Kuhn of Salisbury, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Eleanore Hopkins Kuhn, to Matthew Gordon Boyse, the son of Mrs.
W.
E.
Boyse of Grosse Pointe, Mich., and the late Mr.
Boyse.
The wedding is planned for Aug. 13.


Brief Encounters: Agassi Advances Easily
LEAD: On the surface he appears to be a series of contradictions, a flamboyant teen-ager with a punk hairdo and blue denim designer tennis shorts, who waved to an appreciative crowd after his match yesterday, but said he has not been particularly influenced by growing up in Las Vegas, the ultimate showtown.


In Managua, Not Exactly Last Hurrah
LEAD: Shock waves spread through Nicaraguan political circles last month when Moises Hassan Morales, Mayor of Managua and a veteran Sandinista leader, was removed from his post and then announced he was quitting the Sandinista Front.


Turnpike Redecking on Schedule
LEAD: REDECKING of the western spur of the New Jersey Turnpike north of Newark is proceeding on schedule.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Glen Ridge  $400,000  89 Ridgewood Avenue  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 48-year-old colonial; fireplace, Jacuzzi, pool, oak woodwork; taxes $8,896.
Millburn  $238,000  17 Greenwood Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, flagstone porch, basement; taxes $3,413.


The Slow March Toward More Trade
LEAD: THE political thaw in Soviet-American relations is beginning to work its effect on the commercial front.
This is the impression I brought back from last month's United States-Soviet Union Trade and Economic Council meeting in Moscow.
This twice-postponed event brought together 500 chief executives from major American corporations and their Soviet counterparts in a four-day series of seminars and talks devoted to improving bilateral trade ties.


Mideast Peace Hurdle
LEAD: To the Editor:


NORTH AND SOUTH
LEAD:  NANOOK OF THE NORTH  Directed, written, photographed and edited by Robert J. Flaherty.  1922.
The Classic Film Collection/Home Vision.  69 minutes. $29.95.
LOUISIANA STORY  Produced and directed by Robert J. Flaherty.
Music composed by  Virgil Thomson. 1948.
The Classic Film Collection/Home Vision.


From Drama Thesis To Production Company
LEAD: WHILE the emergence of an original full-scale musical, even with a title like ''Last Tango in New Wango,'' may not be uncommon for a drama student's thesis, it isn't every semester that a production company is formed as part of the project.


Faulty Diagnosis
LEAD: When physicians working for the Phoenix Cardinals determined that Ken Easley, the All-Pro defensive back the Cardinals had obtained in a trade with the Seattle Seahawks, was suffering from a kidney condition, the medical report seemed to come as a surprise to everybody concerned.


THE NATION: Iowa Disputes a Call; AS THE CENSUS BUREAU CHARTS THEIR DECLINE, SOME STATE PROTEST
LEAD: IN the last two years, Iowa has added more than 60,000 jobs and increased its tax revenues by $52 million.


IN MEMORY OF THE 58,156
LEAD: To some children the Vietnam War may be dry history.
Yet the two intersecting black granite walls of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial bearing the names of 58,156 servicemen and women who died in the war or are still missing, have become a site of pilgrimage for families and other visitors to Washington.


ECUADOR CHOOSES A PRESIDENT TODAY
LEAD: After a turbulent campaign dominated by the rabble-rousing style of one of the candidates, Ecuadoreans choose in a runoff presidential election Sunday between two men with similar political views and dramatically different personalities.


Does Anyone Make a Bad Move In 'Chess'?
LEAD: How much actual chess is present in ''Chess,'' the musical that recently opened at the Imperial?
Not much, really.


Car Rental
LEAD: To the Editor: This is a warning to European travelers: Check carefully before renting a car, especially on a short-term basis.
We rented a deluxe car from Hertz in Paris for a two-day trip to the Loire Valley.
It cost almost $600, based on the five-day, unlimited-mileage rate (which was cheaper than the daily rate with mileage -about 400 miles - added) and 33Y percent tax.


Rockefeller Foundation Selects a New President
LEAD: After an eight-month search, the Rockefeller Foundation has named Peter C. Goldmark Jr. as its new president, choosing a corporate executive with a 20-year career in public service and a reputation in New York State and New York City government as an ingenious problem solver.


Social Events; Muses for Many Causes
LEAD:  Understudies' Big Night  May 8 - As understudies, they are usually anonymous, waiting in the wings to perform in place of an absent star.
Tonight is their night, as they sing the songs they have rehearsed but usually do not perform each night in ''Phantom of the Opera,'' ''Anything Goes,'' ''Into the Woods,'' ''Me and My Girl'' and other current Broadway shows.


Albany Notes; Cuomo's Private Moments Go Public, Sort Of
LEAD: Without ''conceding a legal obligation to do so,'' the Cuomo administration today made public the Governor's ''private'' schedules for the last five years after several news organizations requested them under the state's Freedom of Information law.
There was only one catch.
Everything private was missing.


Music; Schoenberg, Bruckner And Mehta
LEAD: This week's New York Philharmonic concerts were to be an all-Mussorgsky program, with Martti Talvela, the Finnish bass, as the soloist.
But Mr.
Talvela was ill, so Zubin Mehta revamped the program, offering instead the original chamber version of the Schoenberg ''Kammersymphonie'' No. 1 (Op. 9), and the 1878-80 version of Bruckner's Fourth


Tony O'Reilly Astride Two Worlds; At Heinz, a Bottom-Line Leader
LEAD: BY textbook definition, the H. J. Heinz Company should be a pretty tense place.
Its managers are constantly asked to squeeze yet another penny out of costs.
Subsidiary presidents must vie at planning meetings for capital resources.
Annual earnings and growth goals are ambitious, yet a good portion of each executive's compensation depends on meeting them.


Great Lake Cities Replace Gray With Gleam on the Waterfront
LEAD: The banks of the Maumee River used to be a grimy tangle of wharves and warehouses, rail yards and parking lots, all backed up to downtown.
After civic leaders cleared the waterfront in the 1970's as part of an urban renewal project, their first idea was to pave it over, with a freeway.


40 YEARS LATER, BUT IT'S NEVER TOO LATE
LEAD: When he was in his 20's Harold Shapero was thought by many to be the young American composer most likely to succeed.
He had everything going for him.
He was an impressive pianist.
His music displayed an inspired ability for tune making and technique to fashion works intricately detailed yet cohesive.


Power-Guzzling Homes Trouble Utilities
LEAD: REAL ESTATE developers across the country are coming into conflict with utility companies over the rising electric energy consumption of new homes, and some state and utility officials are calling for penalties against builders who put up the residential equivalents of gas-guzzlers.


Barry Rawlinson Marries Mary Cunniff, Executive
LEAD: Mary Cunniff, a daughter of Dr.
Charles L. Cunniff of Jersey City and the late Margaret Norton Cunniff, was married yesterday to Barry Rawlinson, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Rawlinson of Hove, England.
Capt.
Carl Ruthberg, a Salvation Army minister, performed the ceremony at the couple's home in New York.


Schedule of Week's Music Events
LEAD: Following are among the musical events scheduled for this week:  TODAY


IN MOTHER'S QUILT, IN FATHER'S FIELD
LEAD:  YONDER  By Tony Johnston.
Illustrated by Lloyd Bloom.
Unpaged.
New York:  Dial Books for Young Readers.


GROWTH IN CASH RESERVES BOLSTERS FINANCIAL PROGNOSIS FOR MEDICARE
LEAD: Medicare's fortunes have improved and its trust fund is now likely to have cash reserves until the year 2005, the system's trustees say.


United Way Widening Drive Among Workers
LEAD: The United Way in the New York metropolitan region plans to solicit contributions this year from 2 million workers and retired employees who have not been asked for donations in past fund-raising campaigns.


Next Week; Was Pete Rose's Suspension Fair?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


A Glimmer of Hope
LEAD: Gen.
Jannie Geldenhuys, Chief of Staff of the South African Defense Force, stepped aside with Gen.
Ulises Rosales del Toro, Chief of Staff of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Cuba.
For an hour and a half they talked.


ENHANCED BY DARKNESS
LEAD:  GOOD HEARTS  By Reynolds Price.  275 pp. New York:  Atheneum. $18.95.


DATA BANK: May 8, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
I Q'88
IV Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,902.6
$3,880.8
$3,735.2
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.3
4.8
4.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
IV Q'87
III Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$144.2
$141.9
$144.2


BERLIN AT 100: LIFE ON A HIGH NOTE
LEAD: In the 1950's, when Irving Berlin com-plained that 20th Century-Fox had paid more to Rodgers and Hammerstein for ''Oklahoma'' than it was offering him for ''Annie Get Your Gun,'' Joseph M. Schenk, the studio head, tried to reason with him.


Correction
LEAD: An article on gardens in New York City and surrounding areas on April 24 in The World of New York, part 2 of The Times Magazine, misstated the admission fee for the Planting Fields Arboretum, Oyster Bay, L.I.
It is $1.50 a person through Labor Day.


In Defense Of Zola Budd
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Sabatini vs.
Kelesi in Final: Second-seeded Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina and 14th-seeded Helen Kelesi of Canada advanced to the final of the Italian Open yesterday with straight-set victories in 86-degree heat in Rome.
Sabatini, the heavy favorite after the withdrawal of top-seeded Chris Evert because of a heel injury, staved off a set point and needed nearly two hours to beat 13th-seeded Judith Wiesner of Austria, 7-6, 6-3.


SLICES OF LIFE
LEAD: DEFINING A SANDWICH IS ALMOST impossible.
Two slices of bread surrounding a filling doesn't do it, since a sandwich can be open-faced, or triple-faced.
A sandwich can be humble, as in a slice of meat loaf on toasted white bread; grand, such as a sliver of velvety smoked salmon with cucumbers and beluga caviar, or grandiose, as in a listing tower of meat, cheese, lettuce and vegetables.


Pro Racing Starts in the Fast, Unruly Ultimate 30
LEAD: The recent marriage between yachting and professional sports has produced its first offspring: an unruly child called the Ultimate 30.
One of these racing boats was christened late last month in Noank, Conn., and it already has a mind of its own.


Use of Temporary Profesionals is Rising
LEAD: A COMPANY in White Plains in the throes of reorganization recently needed a controller.
Rather than spend several weeks interviewing for the position, which pays a salary of $60,000 to $80,000 plus benefits, the company hired a temporary employee.


Harley's Hogs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Skiing
LEAD: To the Editor: I read with great interest the article ''On Trail and Meadow'' by Linda Buchanan Allen (Travel, Feb. 28).
Although the article was quite informative, I was disappointed to see that except for one small reference in the ''Tips for Skiers Headed for the Woods and Fields,'' there was no attention given to what is perhaps the greatest back-country cross-country skiing area in the Eastern United States, the Adirondack Mountains of northern New York


Spring, Suspended
LEAD: The cool, wet weather that hung on for so long had its constructive side.
It has slowed spring down.


Winning Colors Is the Winning Ticket
LEAD: Winning Colors today became only the third filly ever to win the Kentucky Derby, stealing away to an easy, early lead and then holding off Forty Niner by just a neck at the Churchill Downs finish line.


Poverty Prevention
LEAD: To the Editor:


Headliners; In the Stars
LEAD: Nancy Reagan needed no soothsayer to anticipate that a memoir by Donald T. Regan, President Reagan's former chief of staff, might embarrass the First Family.


Nancy Friedman Marries R. J. Gross, Fellow Lawyer
LEAD: Nancy Ellen Friedman and Robert Jonas Gross, trial lawyers in the torts branch of the Justice Department in Washington, were married last evening at the Annapolis (Md.) Hilton Hotel.
Rabbi Stuart G. Weinblatt officiated.


Athletics Extend Streak to 12
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics extended their winning streak to 12 games today as Carney Lansford and Ron Hassey had four hits each to pace a 19-hit attack and lead the Athletics past Cleveland, 14-3.


ARE WOMEN BETTER DOCTORS?
LEAD: Since our daughter Victoria was born in March 1987, with major heart defects, we have had ample opportunity to observe both male and female doctors (''Are Women Better Doctors?'' by Perri Klass, April 10).
We were overwhelmingly impressed by the quality of her medical care -by women and men doctors.


RICHARD FORD'S WORKSHOP
LEAD: I was a student in Richard Ford's writing workshop at Princeton in 1981 (''Richard Ford's Uncommon Characters,'' by Bruce Weber, April 10).
At the first meeting, he told us that he wasn't going to read anything that wasn't important, that we shouldn't write anything that wasn't important and that we shouldn't waste the time of our classmates with anything that wasn't important.


WORDS THE CHINESE WERE WAITING TO HEAR
LEAD: IN 1967, factions of zealous Red Guards fashioned a monstrous statue of their idol, Mao Zedong, and mounted it on a pedestal in front of the Beijing University library.
Last month, in the dark of the night, the statue was toppled and carted off by workmen.


U.S. Says Polish Crackdown Jeopardizes Help
LEAD: The Polish Government's violent crackdown on recent labor protests has jeopardized American support for the country's economic recovery plan, the State Department's second-ranking official said today.


Aunt Jemima
LEAD: To the Editor:


Computer Helper: Software That Writes Software
LEAD: THE basic idea is simple enough to have attracted both computer industry giants and entrepreneurs in recent years: If computers can help design and make everything from shoes to automobiles, even other computers, why not use them to automate the painstaking, error-prone process of writing computer programs?


It Wouldn't Be Spring Without Baseball
LEAD: EVEN though I am a woman of considerable age, in spring my fancy always turns to baseball.


Caroleigh Ritz Will Marry Edwin Evarts in September
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick W. Ritz of Bridgehampton, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Caroleigh Ritz, to Edwin Denison Morgan Evarts, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jasper M. Evarts of Landgrove, Vt.
The couple plan to marry in September.


'Mothers Must Find a Support Network'
LEAD: SUSAN HURLEY HEALY, 38 years old, of Milford is the Young Mother of the Year in Connecticut.


Skating for Funds
LEAD: THE list of figure-skating champions scheduled to attend would suggest a special off-season Olympic competition.
But the Playland Ice Casino is the setting for Saturday's ''Evening of Skating,'' featuring the Olympic champions Peggy Fleming and Robin Cousins as well as the United States pairs champions Jojo Starbuck and Ken


Beneath Hawthorne's Gables, Tourism Aids Needy
LEAD: Nearly 150,000 people visit the House of Seven Gables in Salem every year, but few who tour the 17th-century house overlooking Salem Harbor, the house made famous as Nathaniel Hawthorne's ''House of Seven Gables,'' know their visits support a neighborhood settlement house that began in 1908.


MOTHERHOOD: VARIATIONS ON A THEME; 'There's Still a Girl Inside Me'
LEAD: HOW can my first-born be 45 years old today when I am still in my 20's?
How could she have changed so quickly from the cute little red-faced baby who was born on that icy day in January 45 years ago, when I am still the same young woman?
And as I kiss her and wish her a happy birthday, I wonder if she is asking herself how that graying lady with the wrinkles here and there could have changed so soon from the dark-haired, round-faced person she remembered from her childhood.


Japan May Join Air Venture
LEAD: Japan and the United States are expected to explore the possibility of jointly developing a supersonic airliner that could fly between Tokyo and New York in two and a half hours, a Japanese Government spokesman said.


Wendy Schack, a Lawyer, Is Wed to Alan M. Forrest
LEAD: The marriage of Wendy Gail Schack, a corporate counsel for Group Health Inc. in New York, to Alan Michael Forrest, a lawyer for the Clark Boardman Company, a publisher of law books in New York, took place yesterday at the Old Westbury (L.I.) Hebrew Congregation.
Rabbi Israel Miller, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony.


Chinese 'Silicon Valleys'
LEAD: China is planning to develop high-technology industries by setting up six ''silicon valleys,'' the official New China News Agency said Friday.
The zones will be in Beijing, Shanghai, Canton, Tienjin, Wuhan and the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone, near Hong Kong.
They will concentrate on such businesses as computers, robots, microelectronics, optical-fiber communications and lasers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  The Fed is under increasing pressure to raise interest rates, the latest squeeze coming from the release of April employment data.
Some analysts took heart from the fact that payroll employment increased by only 174,000 jobs, but others were concerned about inflation because unemployment had fallen to its lowest level in 14 years and the total number of hours worked had risen sharply.


Repeal of New York City Mayoral Primary Runoff Falters in Albany
LEAD: With many leading New York City Democrats favoring the present system of mayoral primary runoffs, a politically significant bill to repeal it appeared to be in serious trouble over the weekend.


U.S. Bond Sales Fell in April
LEAD: Sales of United States savings bonds dropped in April for the first time in eight months, falling 6.4 percent, to $661 million.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; In Stormy Markets, Safe Havens Sell
LEAD: If it weren't for the stock market collapse last fall, Robert N. Gordon might still be struggling to earn his first $10 million before he turns 40.
But Mr.
Gordon has handsomely profited from the turmoil on Wall Street as investors have sought a money manager who can earn a double-digit rate of return without the heartburn caused by the dramatic fluctuations in the market.


After Rebellious Youth, MTV Tries the System
LEAD: From the moment it arrived on Aug. 1, 1981, the cable-television music network MTV was everything the rest of television was not.
It was fast, it was loud, it was scary to parents and, mostly, it was hip.
Even the time it went on the air - one minute past midnight - was a kind of anti-television statement.


Ruth Lebovitz, Professor, Weds Robert L. Markovits
LEAD: Dr.
Ruth Myra Lebovitz, an assistant professor of psychology at La Guardia Community College of the City University of New York, was married yesterday to Robert L. Markovits, a lawyer in Middletown, N.Y.
Rabbi Frederic Margulies officiated at the St.
Regis-Sheraton in New York.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TRACK AND FIELD  Two American Records Broken: Tom McCants and Jerome Carter set an American high jump record and Ramona Pagel set an American mark in the shot-put at the sixth annual Jesse Owens Classic in Columbus, Ohio.
McCants and Carter, who train together, each cleared the bar at 7 feet 9 1/4 inches.


Review/Music; Mixing Opera and Pop in 'Regina'
LEAD: Today's proponents of a fusion between opera and Broadway are hardly pioneers.
One of the most notable early instances of the movement was Marc Blitzstein's ''Regina,'' which opened on Broadway in 1949, enjoyed respectful but somewhat puzzled reviews, and closed after 56 performances.
It was subsequently taken up by the New York City Opera and other opera companies, but tonight it was revived for a run through June 12 by the Long Wharf


Ex-Aide Cleared In Scalping Case
LEAD: A former University of North Dakota assistant men's basketball coach was acquitted of a charge that he tried to scalp tickets for the National Collegiate Athletic Association Final Four tournament, authorities said.


Mini-marathon Inspires Big Dreams
LEAD: Youngsters 3 and 4 years old preparing for the start of a mini-marathon race yesterday in Central Park.
The race, which was sponsored by L'Eggs, covered a quarter-mile and was part of festivities celebrating Mother's Day. (NYT/Dith Pran)


Horse Racing; Filly and Forty Niner Set for Rematch
LEAD: ''It looks like it's going to be the Woody and Wayne Show again,'' was D. Wayne Lukas's prediction last month about the Kentucky Derby.
It turns out he called it just right, and that the show is far from over.


Pistons Win Series On Tough Defense
LEAD: The Detroit Piston defense smothered the high-scoring Jeff Malone and led Detroit to a 99-78 victory over the Washington Bullets today in the fifth and deciding game of their first-round playoff series.


For Children Home Alone, A Word From the Sponsor
LEAD: SOME of the nation's largest consumer-products companies have begun to pursue one of the youngest markets: ''latchkey children,'' the perhaps seven million boys and girls between the ages of 5 and 13 who are routinely left unsupervised before or after school.


Review/Theater; New York in the 1870's, From Wharton Novella
LEAD: Edith Wharton endured a lonely childhood, an unhappy marriage and occasional shortsightedness on the part of critics.
But nothing she suffered in her lifetime is comparable to the misfortune inflicted on her by Donald T. Sanders at the Public Theater.


Gauchos vs. Russians: Revenge in the Bronx
LEAD: The Russians took revenge on the Americans Saturday night in a crowded gymnasium in the heart of the South Bronx.


Revlon Work Expands For Young &amp; Rubicam
LEAD: Young &amp; Rubicam, which is rarely satisfied with just one bite, has gotten another mouthful of the Revlon business.
This time it is adding to last month's nibble with agency-of-record status for all spot television and print buying, some $30 million worth that was formerly handled by Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp;


The Complete Bechet
LEAD: Even for many people who are not jazz aficionados, names like Louis Armstrong and Bix Beiderbecke are familiar.
But Sidney Bechet, who is usually ranked with Armstrong and Beiderbecke as an innovator and soloist in the early years of jazz, has, for a number of reasons, been much less well-known.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bishop Inc., which is engaged in the marketing and distribution of engineering and design products, appointed Kenneth J. Kay executive vice president and chief operating officer and Dennis K. Tsuyuki controller and principal accounting officer.


Buyout May Mean Raises for I.C.M. Talent Agents
LEAD: Tom Wolfe, Meryl Streep and Willie Nelson will not be directly affected if a proposal to take International Creative Management private receives Government approval.
But their agents, and those representing 2,600 other agency clients, could be.
They stand to be paid much more if the proposed leveraged buyout of I.C.M.


Far Afield
LEAD: Ivy League schools rarely venture outside of the Northeast in booking opponents.
In recent years, though, a number of the Ivies have scheduled exhibition games abroad during the summer.
But no school has done so on a grander scale than Yale is doing this year.
Indeed, before the fall semester begins, Yale teams will have played this summer in Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Korea, Ireland, Canada, England and perhaps


Gilsdorf Again Working With a Tarlow Agency
LEAD: Russell P. Gilsdorf is rejoining a former associate, Dick Tarlow, as executive vice president, director of marketing services and the media, at the new Tarlow Advertising.


Michael J. Shaara, 58; Pulitzer Prize Winner
LEAD: Michael J. Shaara Jr., whose book on the Civil War, ''The Killer Angels,'' won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction in 1975, died of a heart attack Thursday at his home in Tallahassee, Fla.
He was 58 years old.


A Court of Last Resort for Golfers
LEAD: THE phone rang late on a Friday afternoon at Golf House, the headquarters of the United States Golf Association in Far Hills, N.J.
It was a rules question from a tournament in Georgia, but all the rules experts had gone home.
The call was put through to Frank Hannigan, the U.S.G.A.'s senior executive director.


Annual Ballet Awards Presented in Denmark
LEAD: The first Hans Christian Andersen Ballet Performance Awards were presented during an international performance at the Danish Royal Theater on Saturday, with the top awards going to Sylvie Guillem of the Paris Opera Ballet and Irek Mukhamedov of the Bolshoi Ballet.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about unhappiness among Bolivian priests about the number of foreign bishops misstated the background of the Aymara Indians.
They were conquered by the Incas in the 15th century.


Designer Names Arnell For International Task
LEAD: Arnell/Bickford, an agency that is extremely conscious of style, has been named the agency for Christian Lacroix, the French designer noted for his romantic and fanciful clothing.


Chapter Two: Revenge of the Russians
LEAD: Kenny Anderson of the New York Gauchos, left, being elbowed by Gennady Uspensky of the Soviet national junior team during basketball game Saturday night in the South Bronx.
The Gauchos won the first meeting between the teams.
Page B3. (NYT/G. Paul Burnett)


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-13


Steinberg Companion Willing to Testify in Girl's Death
LEAD: Hedda Nussbaum is willing to end her silence and testify against Joel B. Steinberg in the death of Lisa, the 6-year-old child they had raised, the woman's lawyer says.


Merciless Athletics Are on a Rampage
LEAD: MARK McGWIRE wears his feelings across his chest these days, beneath the white, green and gold uniform of the Oakland Athletics.
He cannot wear those feelings on his sleeve.
That space is occupied, for the first time in more than two decades, by the playful elephant that has followed the franchise from Philadelphia to Kansas City, and finally, 20 years after the team's arrival on the West Coast, to the East


Critic's Notebook; Appraising Ballet Music
LEAD: Hearing more than 40 American composers being danced to by the New York City Ballet these last two weeks has been a provoking, sometimes puzzling, experience for a music critic.
With a generosity and optimism so agreeably American, the company has been celebrating its own in grandly hectic style - mounting ballet after ballet, night after night, all to music from this country.


Devils Top Off a Hectic Night With Crucial Victory
LEAD: On a hectic night that involved litigation, the Devils evened their Stanley Cup semifinal series against the Bruins at two games apiece with a 3-1 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Market Place; Blue Skies Seen In Steel Industry
LEAD: THE Bethlehem Steel Corporation's announcement last week of a public offering of 10 million of its common shares at $19 each is viewed as a sign not only of the attractiveness of steel stocks but also of the relative prosperity of basic industry.


Patrick Hogan, Artist In California, Is Dead
LEAD: Patrick Hogan, an artist who achieved renown as a painter in Los Angeles despite a handicap that allowed him only the use of his mouth to hold a paintbrush, died of respiratory failure on Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 41 years old, and had moved to New York two years ago to pursue his painting career.


USG Seeks to Settle Suits
LEAD: USG Corp. said Friday it had proposed a settlement of shareholders' lawsuits objecting to parts of the company's plan to recapitalize in the face of a hostile takeover bid.
The suits were filed in Delaware Chancery Court last week after USG disclosed details of its $2.2 billion recapitalization plan on


Valerie Rosenson Wed To Russell D. Robbins
LEAD: At Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I., Valerie Tina Rosenson, an associate at the Manhattan law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson, was married yesterday to Russell Dana Robbins, a fourth-year medical student at New York University.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Jerome K. Davidson and two cousins of the bridegroom, Rabbi Donald Gluckman and Cantor Ellen


Railroad Boom Brings a Parking Crunch
LEAD: A surge in rail ridership across the metropolitan region has created a new obstacle for a growing number of commuters: no place to leave their cars at the station.


British Group Buys Retailer
LEAD: The British retailer, Sears P.L.C., sold its Lewis's Stores unit to a group for $137.6 million, Midland Montagu Ventures Ltd. said on Sunday.


Canada Jobless Rate Dip
LEAD: Canada's unemployment rate dipped to 7.7 percent in April from 7.8 percent in March, Statistics Canada reported Friday.
The Government agency said the jobless rolls declined by only 10,000 in the month and remained over the one million mark.


Bridge
LEAD: A strong international field continued play yesterday in the annual Invitational Charity Pairs at the Cavendish Club, at 105 East 73d Street in Manhattan.


Casio Delays Its Recorders For Digital Audio Tapes
LEAD: Casio Computer Ltd., which was expected to become the first company to sell digital audio tape recorders in the United States, has put its plans on hold, indicating that the American introduction of the controversial product will be delayed yet again.


Jane Whitney and Lindsey Gruson Wed
LEAD: Jane Whitney, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo C. Balzereit of Jupiter Island, Fla., and Jenkintown, Pa., and Lindsey Gruson, the son of Flora Lewis Gruson of Paris and Sydney Gruson of New York, were married yesterday at the Horticulture Center in Philadelphia.
Representative Bob Edgar, a Democrat from Pennsylvania who is a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony.


Suspension of Devils' Coach Causes Uproar, Delays Game
LEAD: It was the Stanley Cup playoff game that almost wasn't.
When it finally began, just over an hour late, it featured impromptu and ill-dressed substitute officials, over-anxious players, and a sheet of overheated ice.


Coast-to-Coast Runner Not the Retiring Type
LEAD: SAM FREEMAN can tell you a great deal about Central Park.
He can give you an exact number of lampposts on the east side of a reservoir, recount the total of park benches in a six-mile stretch and rattle off a precise figure of garbage cans situated in a designated area.


Fred Knapp, Private Eye, Scourge of Illegal Tenants
LEAD: Sam Spade, he's not.
Fred D. Knapp is a modern private investigator, skilled in the use of the computer modem and the art of searching public records.
Because he operates in New York City in the late 1980's, his prey is a particular local species: the illegal rent-regulated tenant.


Buyer of Johns Painting
LEAD: The buyer of Jasper Johns's fiercely compelling ''Diver,'' from 1962, which brought $4.2 million last Tuesday at Christie's, was Jeffrey Deitsch, a Citibank vice president, who represented an unidentified buyer.
The price was an auction record for a work by any living artist.


Metro Matters; A Rotting Bridge And Who Takes The Blame for It
LEAD: The headline told the whole story: ''Say Williamsburg Bridge Is Unsafe.''


Heublein Acts On Charges
LEAD: Heublein Inc. has agreed to pay $300,000 to settle Federal charges of unfair trade practices, an official of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms said.


Ouster Tied To Declines At Equitable
LEAD: Concern about poor earnings and growing financial difficulties led some outside board members to force Leo M. Walsh Jr. to resign last week as chief operating officer of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, financial industry officials familiar with the situation said.


Cholesterol Control Is Only One Step to Health
LEAD: WHERE fitness is concerned, we live in an age of numbers.
We measure our weight, the resting and exercising pulse rates, the caloric intake at meals and even blood pressure.
But in terms of preventing heart disease and possibly living longer through regular exercise, such numbers pale in importance when compared with the four values that reflect the fats found in our blood.


Cathay Pacific Financing
LEAD: Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd. has asked Paine Webber Asia Ltd. to arrange $100 million in financing for aircraft leasing, The Hong Kong Economic Journal quoted the bank as saying.
It said the money will be used to finance a Boeing 747-300 jumbo jet to be delivered in July.
Terms were not disclosed.


Manhattan,inc. Sees a Future Beyond Manhattan
LEAD: There was Joe Jamail, the tough-talking Texas lawyer who ''stomped'' Texaco, on the March cover of Manhattan,inc.
One might wonder what a Texan was doing on the cover of a local New York business magazine.
But Clay Felker, Manhattan,inc.'s new editor, is determined to give the monthly a range beyond New


New Agency for Booth
LEAD: North Castle Partners in Greenwich, Conn., had a good haul last week.
Its new client, with $4 million in billings, is Booth Food Products of Portsmouth, N.H., a division of National Sea Products.
The brands to be promoted are Booth and Fisher Boy.
The previous agency was the Leo Burnett Company of Toronto.


Penta Hotel's Agency
LEAD: Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond has been named the agency for the New York Penta Hotel, which older New Yorkers may remember as the Pennsylvania or Statler Hilton, at Seventh Avenue and 33d Street.
According to the agency, the hotel is part of a 16-unit chain operated out of West Germany as a joint venture by Lufthansa, Swissair and British Airways.


Review/Architecture; Grand Designs of Paris, At the Custom House
LEAD: Is it mere happenstance that an exhibition about major new architecture in Paris has made a stop in its world tour to touch down in one of New York's greatest Beaux-Arts structures, the old United States Custom House in lower Manhattan?


Public TV Smorgasbord
LEAD: During five days of screening last week, nearly 700 public television professionals viewed an international smorgasbord of some 80 programs representing 60 broadcasting companies from 30 countries.
It was the llth annual International Public Television Screening Conference, which is held in the United States every four years.


The Bruins Lament Officiating and Loss
LEAD: The night didn't begin routinely, and someplace between a dream and a nightmare, two teams with the Stanley Cup on their minds had to cope with a game that threatened to disintegrate before it ever began.


Lorimar Officer Quits To Avoid Move West
LEAD: Michael Garin, the Harvard philosophy graduate who co-founded a television syndication company a decade ago, has resigned from the Lorimar Telepictures Corporation, where he had been a member of the office of the president and a director.


Books of The Times; Memoirs of a 'Chamberlain' in the White House
LEAD:  For the Record  From Wall Street to Washington  By Donald T. Regan  397 pages.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $21.95.


Review/Rock; The Fall's Mixed Messages
LEAD: Some of the best 1980's rock blares out thoroughly mixed messages -pleasure melded with irritation, bad news delivered with a joyous kick, orderly songs proclaiming chaos and desperation.
Beyond their volume level, the Fall and Soul Asylum have little in common, but both bands forged 1980's ambivalence into fierce rock when they shared a bill Friday night at the


International Multifoods Names New President
LEAD: Anthony Luiso, who spent 15 years as an executive at Beatrice Foods, has been named president and chief operating officer of the International Multifoods Corporation, effective July 1.


Police Killing in Queens : Search for a Mastermind
LEAD: More than two months after a police officer was slain in Queens, detectives report no breakthroughs in the hunt for evidence that would permit charges against someone for having ordered the murder.


Shaping Up
LEAD: It shouldn't surprise anyone that the United States ski team's major emphasis for the next year will be on physical fitness.
Last season, no fewer than 15 of the women and 5 of the men on the team suffered injuries that kept them out of competition.


John J. McNamara, an Architect And Theater Designer, Dies at 90
LEAD: John J. McNamara, an architect who designed and renovated some of the best-known theaters in New York City, died April 26 in Raleigh, N.C., his home in recent years.
He was 90 years old.


Quarterly Refunding Begins Tomorrow
LEAD: The first part of the Treasury's quarterly refunding will begin tomorrow, just a part of the heavy schedule of Treasury financings set for this week.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Israeli Ouster Appealed  A Palestinian-American advocate of nonviolence appealed Israel's order expelling him, and an Israeli judge gave the Government three days to prove its case.
Page A3.
Aircraft Retirement Age  A jet's accident over Hawaii has drawn attention to the issue of how to prevent the aging of aircraft from leading to crashes.


Varig Survives in Difficult Region
LEAD: Given the troubles of airlines across Latin America, Helio Smidt seems remarkably confident that Varig will emerge unscathed from the inflation, recession and labor unrest buffeting the region.


Mojo Office In New York Wins 2 Jobs
LEAD: MOJO NEW YORK, a recently established outpost of a major Australian ad agency network, has won the international trade advertising account of the mighty Reader's Digest even though it was a latecomer to the competition.


Review/Concert; Lark Quartet Plays Bach (P.D.Q. Variety)
LEAD: Pity Peter Schickele!
There is an authentic compositional talent there, but we will never know just what its true merit is, because nobody living today can listen to this music with wholly uncluttered judgment.
For 23 years Mr.
Schickele has been ''finding'' music by P.D.Q.
Bach (he can't stop, and behavioral therapists can't cure him).


Irving Offer Extended
LEAD: The Bank of New York Company said yesterday that it had again extended its $1.16 billion offer for shares of the Irving Bank Corporation.
The offer is now scheduled to expire Friday at 5 P.M., Eastern daylight time.


Watch for Safety
LEAD: It looks like a wristwatch, but it doesn't fell time.
Trip the yellow lever on the wristband, and out pops an inflated pillow designed to help keep a person afloat.


Corrections
LEAD: A Company Briefs listing in Business Day on Saturday incorrectly described the status of the proposed acquisition of Farmers Group of Los Angeles by B.A.T.
Industries of London.
The Arizona Insurance Department has not acted on the issue yet.


New Jersey Mob Figure Is Missing From Home
LEAD: John DiGilio, a reputed leader of the Genovese crime family in New Jersey, was reported missing by his wife from their apartment in Holmdel, N.J., officials said early this morning.


Brewers Climb With 9 Victories in Row
LEAD: Mike Felder drove in two runs as the Milwaukee Brewers scored four times in the 10th inning today, beating the Kansas City Royals, 6-2, for their ninth straight victory.


Improvisation Lies at the Heart of Arena Football
LEAD: ''ANYBODY here who thinks he can kick?''


Review/TV; A View of Thailand From a Balloon
LEAD: ''The Great Sky Elephant'' won't hurt you.
It is a big balloon that gets deflated and inflated and occasionally drifts in free flight.
Malcolm Forbes, the publisher of Forbes magazine, took it to Thailand in 1985; the documentary, on Channel 13 at midnight tonight, memorializes his adventure.


'Had to Be Some Horsemanship'
LEAD: WHEN his alarm clock buzzed at 3:30 yesterday morning, D. Wayne Lukas's first thought upon waking was not that one of his horses, the filly Winning Colors, had finally won the Kentucky Derby.


Mother Is Held in Death Of Battered Infant Boy
LEAD: A 26-day-old boy was found dead in his family's Bronx apartment Saturday night and his mother was charged with second-degree murder yesterday, the police said.


Pressure Builds for Rate Rise
LEAD: Conditions in the fixed-income markets are putting further pressure on the Federal Reserve Board to raise interest rates, market participants said.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Retail Sales April  Friday  Producer Price Index April  Inventory-Sales Ratio


Jordan and Bulls in 2d Round
LEAD: For all of the praise, it has been a source of irritation for Michael Jordan that the Bulls have never survived the first round of National Basketball Association playoffs.
The irritation has not been so much the losing, but in suggestions that for all of his talent - a 35.5 points a game playoff scoring average, a memorable 65-point outburst against Boston in 1985 - Chicago couldn't win with


Outdoors: The Attractions of Making Lures at Home
LEAD: PROMPTED in the main by frugality, I have been turning out striped bass and bluefish surf-casting lures, both jigs and popping plugs, in my home workshop.


Politicians Count on Computers
LEAD: There were dozens of typewriters and three computers in the campaign office when Michael S. Dukakis ran for governor of Massachussetts in 1982.
His 1988 Presidential campaign headquarters has dozens of computers and three typewriters.


New York City and Police Reach Pact
LEAD: New York City officials and the police officers' union nnounced yesterday a tentative agreement on a contract that would provide a 6 percent pay increase in each of the next three years, for a total cost of $394.5 million to the city.


Dome Buyout Delay Sought
LEAD: Two Dome Petroleum Ltd. shareholders who oppose terms of a takeover by the Amoco Canada Petroleum Company will appear in an Alberta court on Monday in an effort to delay the transaction.


April Output By OPEC Up
LEAD: Oil production by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries rose to 18.2 million barrels a day in April from 17.7 million barrels in March, the International Energy Agency said Friday.


Japan-Europe Trade
LEAD: Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita of Japan today urged an expansion of trade between the European Community and Japan. ''The importance of increased economic cooperation between Japan and Europe cannot be underestimated,'' the Prime Minister told reporters after meeting with West German officials as part of an 11-day European tour.


Koch Increases Earnings, Drastically
LEAD: Gary Koch, who lost his exempt status on the PGA Tour last year because he was 175th on the 1987 money list, today won the $250,000 first prize in the sixth Panasonic Las Vegas Invitational.
This is the second largest winning payoff on the tour behind the $360,000 at the Nabisco Championship.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''At one point, I kept a color-coded calendar on my desk (numerals highlighted in green ink for 'good' days, red for 'bad' days, yellow for 'iffy' days) as an aid to remembering when it was propitious to move the President of the United States from one place to another, or schedule him to speak in public, or commence negotiations with a foreign power.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about an operation in South Africa to separate twin girls joined at the head translated the name of one girl incorrectly.


The More Feet, the Merrier
LEAD: The Examer Bay to Breakers road race in San Francisco May 15 is a populist's fitness fantasy.
Now in its 77th running, the 7.5-mile race throught he streets of San Francisco attracts 100,000 entrants and has been designated the largest footrace in the world by the Guinness Book of World Records.


Art and Dance to Benefit From Painter's Will
LEAD: The wife of the painter and collagist Romare Bearden plans to set up a foundation named for her husband that will aid art students and art institutions.


Speed Limit
LEAD: One of the more persistent beliefs in sport is that the thoroughbred, while indisputably the fastest of horses, is also the fastest possible horse.


New Silver Association Picks Margeotes Shop
LEAD: Silver International, founded Jan. 1 by six North American silver mining companies to promote silver products to consumers, has chosen an agency: Margeotes/Fertitta &amp; Weiss.


Shop Hours In Germany
LEAD: After a long and heated debate, West Germany is planning to alter shopping hours in an attempt to raise consumer demand and bolster economic growth.


Review/Concert; A Symphony Of Greek Music And Greek Voice
LEAD: Musical expression is related to personality and character, but not in a direct correspondence.
Moving embodiment of the highest moral aspirations can spring from the pens of people whose lives are depressing studies in expediency, and witty people can write music that is earnest and bland.


The Martin Affair: Questions Emerge
LEAD: A number of significant discrepancies surfaced today between Billy Martin's public version of an incident at a local nightspot early Saturday morning and the report Martin filed with the police.
However, the Arlington police said they were convinced the Yankee manager was blameless in the incident.


A Floral Craft Booms in Thailand
LEAD: In a country where supermarkets sell orchids in bunches and no public occasion is complete without cascades of blooms, Thais were bound sooner or later to turn their love of flowers into something exportable.


Review/Music; In Queens, a Tribute to Louis Armstrong
LEAD: The first half of Friday's tribute to Louis Armstrong at the Louis Armstrong High School in Elmhurst, Queens, was graced with Mr.
Armstrong's sense of economy.
The show started with a recording of Mr.
Armstrong singing and soloing through ''Dream a Little Dream of Me,'' moved into a film clip of Mr.


Review/Dance; New Works for City Ballet Music Festival
LEAD: It was Hit Parade night at the New York City Ballet's American Music Festival on Saturday when Peter Martins presented the premiere of ''Black and White'' and William Forsythe, the American director of the Frankfurt Ballet in West Germany, offered his own premiere, ''Behind the China Dogs.'' Set to pop-influenced commissioned scores, both are New


TV Notes
LEAD:  Biting for the Camera


Approval of Canada Trade Pact Seen
LEAD: The clash between the White House and Congress over broad trade legislation has failed to derail a free-trade agreement with Canada.


Budget Chief's Baptism by Shortfall
LEAD: It was a short honeymoon.
Two weeks ago Thursday, Dall W. Forsythe, head of the Governor's Office of Management and Productivity, received a call from Governor Cuomo asking him to be his next state budget director.
He said yes.
On Monday, the departing director, R. Wayne Diesel, called to tell him that the state was looking at a $300 million shortfall in income tax receipts.


Tax Watch; Many Need to File W-4 Forms Again
LEAD: IT may seem a cruel imposition in view of last year's anguish, but millions of Americans will have to fill out new W-4 wage withholding forms this year.


Upturn Seen in Norway
LEAD: Norway's economy, plagued by high costs, inflation and trade imbalances, is on the road to recovery, Finance Minister Gunnar Berge said Friday.
He said the gross national product would grow by just five-tenths of a percent this year, virtually half the 1987 growth rate, but added that an agreement with labor unions to limit wages had helped cut costs.


Yanks Lose Third Straight
LEAD: If the Yankees wore the mask of a beaten and weary team this weekend, it was not because of events that transpired off the field.
Don Mattingly, their first baseman, said they simply failed to capitalize on opportunities, that the eight runs they totaled today should have been enough to stop any team.


Weighing Four Seasons as Landmark
LEAD: Answering a request from the owners of the Four Seasons, the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission may grant landmark status to that cool and hushed modernist restaurant on East 52d Street.


Ascendant Agassi Wins Tournament
LEAD: The young man in a hurry would have to be brief in his postmatch interview.
There was a plane to catch to Rome, site of the Italian Open, where word of Andre Agassi's latest exploits will doubtlessly precede him.
By the time he plays his first-round match there, he will have moved up a place or two in the ranking and probably stolen the headlines from the established order.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Carbide Plea to India Judge
LEAD: Lawyers for the Union Carbide Corporation have asked District Court Judge M. W. Deo to remove himself from hearing India's $3 billion suit against the company.
The suit charges negligence in the 1984 Bhopal gas leak disaster.


At an East Side Bank Branch, A Pianist Soothes the Thrifty
LEAD: Dorothy Denny Scardino has been playing the piano for 18 years. In a bank.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: In the National Hockey League semifinals, if Detroit eliminates Edmonton and Boston eliminates the Devils, then the Red Wings and Bruins, two of the six pre-expansion teams in the N.H.L., would meet for the Stanley Cup.
When was the last time the final round did not include an expansion team?


Stewart Goes to 8-0; A's Streak Hits 13
LEAD: There is a sense of inevitability about the Oakland Athletics.
Not the type that takes success for granted and turns winning teams into October disappointments.
It is a day-by-day inevitability, the sense that sooner or later, an opponent will commit a mistake and soon that mistake will become costly.


Federal Panel Pushes Cuomo On Shoreham
LEAD: A Federal nuclear licensing board has told Governor Cuomo and the Suffolk County Executive that they must either prepare their own emergency evacuation plan for the Shoreham nuclear power plant or say how they would cooperate with the Long Island Lighting Company in any crisis.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of May 8, 1988:
MONDAY
Pitney-Bowes Inc
TUESDAY
Chicago Pacific
Lockheed Corp
Enserch Corp
Russ Berrie &amp; Co
Gallagher &amp; Co
United Industrial
Greyhound Corp
WEDNESDAY
Alco Standard Corp
Newell Co
Baltimore Bancorp
Sysco Corp
CBS Inc
USG Corp
Current Income Shs
USLife Inc Fd
Household Intl Inc
Wynn's International
THURSDAY
Arco Chemical
Louisiana Genl Svcs
Carpenter Technology
Mapco Inc
Champion Intl
Maytag Corp
General Nutrition
Pacific Amer Inc Shs
Guardsman Products


Alison Fraser Reflects On 'Romance Romance'
LEAD: Barefoot and surrounded by Teddy bears, Alison Fraser sat in her dressing room at the Helen Hayes Theater, effervescent over the success of her first Broadway starring role.


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Argentina's cost-of-living index rose 17.2 percent in April after a gain of 14.7 percent in March, the national statistics institute said.
The index showed a rise in the year to April of 247.8 percent, compared with 206.9 percent in the year to March.
Inflation in the first four months of the year was 62 percent.


3-Hitter by Darling Lifts Mets Over Reds
LEAD: On the first hit, Tim Teufel just couldn't get the ball out of his glove.
On the second, a sprinting Darryl Strawberry couldn't quite grab the ball.
On the third, everyone stood and watched as a bunted ball refused to come up off the infield grass.


Drabek Prevails On Near No-Hitter
LEAD: Doug Drabek pitched eight hitless innings today before a pinch-hitter, Randy Ready, led off the ninth with an infield single as the Pittsburgh Pirates beat the San Diego Padres, 6-2.


Soviet Change vs. the Worker's Scrutiny
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev's new economic reality visited this Black Sea port city last year, passing like an unexpected tremor through the rock-stable lives of longshoremen, crane operators, mechanics and clerks.


Senate Primary Race Divides G.O.P. in Nebraska
LEAD: Hand outstretched, head thrust forward, a determined smile on his face, Representative Harold J. Daub bounced from table to table, greeting the mostly Republican members of the Norfolk Rotary Club in the mostly Republican northeastern part of this predominantly Republican state.
Again and again, he was greeted with restrained smiles.


S.E.C. Official Is Nominated
LEAD: The White House announced today that it would nominate Charles C. Cox to a second five-year term as a commissioner of the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Workers Don't Have 'Parachutes,' Mr. President
LEAD:  To the Editor: The legitimacy of a government depends to a large extent on its ability to appear fair and evenhanded.
A nation will accept a great deal of suffering if its citizens perceive that this suffering is both necessary and evenly distributed.
When, however, an administration violates this rule of legitimacy, when it becomes the captive of a small, privileged interest group, its days are surely numbered.


Taro Vit reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Taro Vit (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,448,000
1,736,000
Net inc
6,200
b49,000
b-Net loss  U.S. dollar figures for both periods have been translated at the rate of $1 to 1.56 new Israeli shekels.


3 Sizable Accounts For Symon &amp; Hilliard
LEAD: Symon &amp; Hilliard has popped up with three new $1 million accounts.
The General Electric Company, a client for eight years, has assigned it the GE Automotive business, which serves the auto industry.
GE Automotive previously had no agency.


A Soviet Day To Remember Past Victories
LEAD: When he left Moscow to fight in Germany more than 45 years ago, Vasily Bakumenko knew why he, then just 16 years old, was going to war. ''For Stalin, for Stalin,'' said the veteran, now 61 years old. ''We were so sure.
We wrote it on our tanks and our helmets.
For Stalin.''


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. Why is it that spiders don't get caught in their own webs?
A.
Nobody knows, because nobody has investigated it thoroughly, according to Dr.
Herbert Levi, professor of zoology at Harvard University. ''I don't know of anybody who has worked on this,'' agreed Dr.
William Mitchell Masters, assistant professor of zoology at Ohio State University, who has studied how fast spiders can run across their webs and how well they detect vibrations through the web.


People
LEAD: *
JoAnn Fraser has been elected senior vice president, management supervisor at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/ San Francisco.


Tecogen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tecogen Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,642,000
3,728,000
Net inc
63,000
24,000
Share earns
.01
-


Officials Doubt Arson Caused Skyscraper Fire
LEAD: Investigators have virtually ruled out arson as the cause of the fire that ravaged the tallest building in California last week.
The investigators said today that they might never know what started the blaze.


Unusually Large Output
LEAD: The current issue of Books in Print, a catalogue of authors and titles, credits 64 books to Robert A. Heinlein, one of the country's most successful science-fiction writers.
An in-print listing of 64 books is unusual, although some books are represented on the list more than once.


The Pound Is Up Sharply; Dollar Steady as Gold Gains
LEAD: The British pound rose sharply yesterday on unfounded rumors that the Government's key advocate of currency weakness was preparing to quit.
The rumors reinforced predictions of a $2 exchange rate for sterling in the near future.


Publishing Schedules Speeded on Regan Book
LEAD: The disclosure in Donald T. Regan's new book that Nancy Reagan regularly consulted an astrologer about the scheduling of major Presidential activities would likely have created headlines whenever the news broke.
But when Newsweek reported it last week, it not only generated headlines but caused considerable scrambling at Time and Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.


Federal Aid for Destitute Reaching Just Half of Those Eligible
LEAD: A Federal program for the destitute is reaching only about half the elderly, blind or disabled people who are eligible, according to lawmakers who have studied it.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on the Consumer's World page on Saturday about Raffoler Ltd., a mail-order house, misstated the number of packages the Lillian Vernon company sends by mail.
The company sent 3.6 million packages in its last fiscal year, 200,000 of them by parcel post.


Telxon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telxon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
38,240,000
28,505,000
Net inc
b4,132,000
c3,787,000
Share earns
.32
.28
Yr rev
123,860,000
100,819,000
Net inc
b14,012,000
c12,730,000
Share earns
1.05
.94


Western Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Waste Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
28,448,000
24,692,000
Net inc
1,596,000
1,318,000
Share earns
.32
.27
9mo rev
82,279,000
72,071,000
Net inc
4,486,000
3,461,000
Share earns
.90
.70


Labor Official at Eastern Faces Troubled Times
LEAD: When Thomas J. Matthews took over as vice president of human resources for Eastern Airlines last June, he moved quickly to bring a more congenial atmosphere to labor relations.


Consolidated-Tomoka Land Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated-Tomoka Land Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,934,262
7,357,464
Net inc
1,039,874
939,744
Share earns
.33
.30


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  Tax-exempt organizations face new taxes on some commercial activities under Congressional proposals endorsed by the Administration.
Advocates of change say the issue is fairness, not revenue, and complain that small businesses are at a competitive disadvantage in competing with not-for-profit groups.


Rutgers Players Mourn a Teammate
LEAD: Doug Kokoskie looks for answers in his dormitory room at Rutgers University, but they are not there.
He peers out the window, stares at the ceiling and finds nothing.
He is not alone.
It is difficult, if not impossible, to explain the death of a young person.


I.B.M. Produces Half-Micron Chip
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it had produced the first fully functioning computer chips measuring only a half micron.
The compact chips were made for the Defense Department and will be used for such things as capturing and processing radar and sonar signals.
Compact chips run faster because the electricity travels less distance.


A Trading Halt Won't Calm the Market
LEAD:  To the Editor:  The New York Stock Exchange is now considering a halt to all trading any time the market declines a specific amount, still to be determined.
This will almost guarantee declines of the set amount as sellers rush to get out before the shutdown when there appears to be a major sell-off.


Calvin Klein Is in Treatment For Alcohol and Drug Abuse
LEAD: Calvin Klein, one of the most celebrated and successful American fashion designers, recently checked into a leading drug and alcohol rehabilitation center and will remain there until the end of the month, according to a spokesman.


Cosmetic &amp; Fragrance Conepts reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cosmetic &amp; Fragrance Conepts
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,089,000
8,367,000
Net inc
239,000
160,000
Share earns
.07
.05
6mo sales
29,206,000
22,635,000
Net inc
783,000
493,000
Share earns
.25
.16


Maxtor Offers Erasable Drives
LEAD: The Maxtor Corporation, a leading manufacturer of computer hard disks, today introduced two erasable optical disk drives that it said offer the highest capacity and performance available.
Scheduled to be shipped in September, the drives are priced in quantity at $1,000 for the 3 1/2-inch model and $2,500 for the 5 1/4-inch model, both industry-standard sizes for hard disks.


U.S. Labor's Lost Power: 5-Year Decline of Strength Shows as Wages Barely Rise Despite a Falling Jobless Rate
LEAD: In years gone by, an announcement that the civilian unemployment rate had fallen to 5.4 percent would have signaled the coming of big wage increases - sparked by growing competition among employers for a dwindling supply of workers.
But clearly times have changed: despite some shortages, wages are barely rising and there are no signs that they will begin to soar.


Metro Datelines; Livery Driver Killed In Robbery in Bronx
LEAD: A livery taxicab driver was shot to death in the Bronx yesterday in an apparent robbery, the authorities said.


News Summary
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-19  The new missile accord on medium- and short-range weapons will not be brought to the Senate floor until differences are resolved with Moscow about monitoring compliance, Senate leaders said.
Page A1 The Soviet tradition of job security has not been shaken by Mikhail Gorbachev's new economic policies.


Echo Bay Mines Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Echo Bay Mines Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
60,000,000
43,400,000
Net inc
10,900,000
8,100,000
Share earns
.11
.09
Results are in U.S. dollars.
Corrected from Thursday, May 5, editions.


Sentence in Freeway Killing
LEAD: A motorist who fired on a pickup truck in one of several highway shootings in the Los Angeles area last summer was sentenced today to serve up to life in prison for murder.
The man, Ronald Elam, 28 years old, was sentenced by Superior Court Judge Madge Watai in connection with the death of Debbie Ann Scott, a 26-year-old mother of three, who was a passenger in the pickup.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Nuclear Support Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nuclear Support Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,986,324
6,247,854
Net loss
482,271
c545,260
Share earns
-
.27
6mo rev
29,554,355
14,44,872
Net inc
b208,369
1,109,195
Share earns
.10
.54


United Healthcare Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Healthcare Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
117,205,000
104,192,000
Net inc
684,000
588,000
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
17,042,000
15,799,000


U.S. Oil Rig Count Up
LEAD: The number of working domestic oil and gas rigs rose by 17 last week, to a total of 897, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
The rig count, the widely watched industry index of drilling activity, totaled 767 a year ago, Baker Hughes said.


House Leaders Call for Swift Passage of a Bill to Fight Illegal Drugs
LEAD: Democratic and Republican leaders of the House of Representatives said today that they would try to win passage this year of a bill to combat the spread of illegal drugs in the United States.


Syria Issues Warning on Beirut Strife
LEAD: A Lebanese family fleeing the fighting that has raged for four days between rival Moslem Shiite forces.
A Syrian military leader warned that his country is determined to stop the Beirut fighting.
Page A7.(Agence France-Presse)


Property Trust Of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Property Trust Of America (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,470,000
2,300,000
Net inc
771,000
760,000
Share earns
.15
.15


Jackson Looks Back at Insults Endured
LEAD: It was shortly before 6 A.M. today, and slivers of sunlight seeped across the valley.
An unemployed coal miner, Junior Cook, and his wife, Rebecca, had just completed breakfast in their frame house with an overnight guest.


Senators Want U.S. To Fight 'Crisis' of Drunken Driving
LEAD: Ninety-nine senators asked Surgeon General C. Everett Koop today to declare drunken driving a ''national crisis,'' but Dr.
Koop said he believed the problem was most effectively handled locally.


Steel Production Down
LEAD: Steel production fell to 2.03 million tons in the week ended Saturday, a decrease of nine-tenths of 1 percent from the previous week's 2.05 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute reported yesterday.
The industry's production amounted to 94.6 percent of capacity for the week, compared with 95.5 percent in the previous week.


Careplus Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Careplus Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,809,000
5,083,000
Net inc
b301,000
147,000
Share earns
.06
.04
Shares outst
5,001,000
3,449,000
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $111,000.


Shrinking Companion For Very Fast Pulsar
LEAD: A VERY rapid pulsar, a pulsating star that spins 622 times a second, has a companion that regularly eclipses the pulsar and itself appears to be ''evaporating,'' Princeton University scientists have found.


Home Owners Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Owners Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
6,250,000
10,450,000
Share earns
.64
1.33
6mo net inc
b14,715,000
19,999,000
Share earns
1.64
2.70
b-After an extraordinary gain of $2,742,000 from the early extinguishment of debt.


Pittsburgh Mayor Honored
LEAD: Pittsburghers filing past the coffin of Mayor Richard S. Caliguiri as his body lay in state yesterday at City Hall.
Mr.
Caliguiri, who was in his third term as Mayor, died Friday of heart failure. (AP)


Transtech Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transtech Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
390,753
2,736,094
Net inc
b16,910,414
b187,135
Share earns
3.43
.04
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $17,925,042 and $970,413 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Norway Cuts Key Rate
LEAD: Norway's central bank cut its major interest rate by half a percentage point today amid signs that the country's trade and inflation difficulties could be receding.
The central bank cut its overnight lending rate to commercial banks to 13.3 percent from 13.8 percent and said it expected the banks to pass on the lower rate of borrowing to customers.


Ex-Illinois Governor Stricken
LEAD: Former Gov.
Richard Ogilvie apparently suffered a heart attack today and was in critical condition at Northwestern Memorial Hospital, officials said.


Modern Controls Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Modern Controls Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
380,000
262,000
Share earns
.18
.12


Alfa Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alfa Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b5,132,521
b2,891,844
Share earns
.30
.17
b-Includes investment gains of $588,058 for the latest quarter and $357,359 for the year-earlier period.


Biospherics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biospherics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,662,568
2,131,934
Net loss
99,937
b27,445
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Financial Aides See '88 Growth
LEAD: Corporate financial managers expect continued economic growth for at least 12 months, but many foresee a mild recession after that, according to a poll by a trade group.


Fire Causes Airport Delays
LEAD: A weekend fire at an Illinois Bell switching station kept telephones idle for 35,000 customers in Chicago's western suburbs today and caused delays at major airports.Crews at the Federal Aviation Administration's control center in Aurora were using a backup phone system, but the lack of full service meant controllers had to stagger the arrival of flights by 20 miles.


Advantage Companies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advantage Companies Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,368,000
2,622,000
Net inc
b302,000
b53,000
Share earns
.07
.02
b-Includes tax benefits of $138,000 for the latest quarter and $21,000 for the year-earlier period.


Mem Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mem Co Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,937,700
6,616,800
Net loss
796,800
805,000


Housing Crisis, Housing Emergency
LEAD: Anyone who thinks the shortage of affordable housing is bad now need only look forward. ''Homeless'' does not simply describe thousands of low- and moderate-income families that have no suitable place to live today.
Under existing law, thousands of homes occupied by poor families will soon soar in price, driving ever more people to the streets.


In Lizards, Eggs' Heat Linked to Behavior
LEAD: ZOOLOGISTS have known for several years that the sex of certain reptiles is determined by the temperature at which they are incubated in the egg.
But in a new development, University of Texas scientists have found that incubation temperatures can profoundly influence adult behavior as well.


Immunex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Immunex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,155,000
3,572,000
Net inc
596,000
b311,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


Harper Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harper Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
64,292,000
46,182,000
Net inc
2,524,000
1,649,000
Share earns
.27
.18


France Faces the Center
LEAD: What a difference from Francois Mitterrand's first presidential victory seven years ago.
Then, a specter of Communism alarmed France's allies; some prominent businessmen left the country.
But yesterday, the French stock market celebrated the Socialist president's overwhelming re-election by registering a solid gain.


Beazer Clarifies Koppers Offer
LEAD: In an effort to decrease opposition to its proposed takeover of the Koppers Company, Beazer P.L.C. yesterday provided details of its job-guarantee offer.
It said last week that it would protect the job of every employee of the Pittsburgh-based company except senior management if Koppers agreed to a quick merger.


Just the Right Touch
LEAD: COMPUTER keyboards, more than any other computer components, are subject to the Goldilocks syndrome.
The user goes from one to the next trying to find the one that is just right.
This one is too hard, that one is too soft.
This one is too crisp, that one is too mushy.
This one is too loud, that one is too quiet.


EQK Green Acres LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EQK Green Acres LP (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,930,000
3,490,000
Net inc
1,090,000
740,000
Share earns
.11
.07


New York Utility to Freeze Its Rates
LEAD: The Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation, upstate New York's largest utility, has agreed to freeze electric rates until 1990 and to refund $14 million to its customers, the Cuomo administration said today.


Newport Pharmaceuticals International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newport Pharmaceuticals International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,530,000
4,141,000
Net loss
190,000
801,000


Planned Merger to Cut Costs For Two Private Day Schools
LEAD: Two of Manhattan's private schools, the Walden School and the New Lincoln School, plan to merge to cope with rising costs and shrinking enrollments.


Israeli Court to Hear Arab-American's Appeal
LEAD: Israel's High Court turned down prosecution and defense requests today and ordered that Mubarak E. Awad, a Palestinian-American advocate of nonviolence, be kept in jail for two weeks until a hearing can be held on his expulsion.


Vestar Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vestar Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
810,000
335,000
Net loss
1,213,000
888,000


Staley Says It Has Begun Sale Talks
LEAD: Staley Continental Inc. said yesterday that it had begun negotiating with one or more parties to sell all or part of the company.
In addition, a Federal court issued an important ruling in the company's favor on Delaware's takeover law.


Review/Dance; Life Through A Glass, Darkly
LEAD: Watching the changing images of ''Arrivals and Departures'' was like dreaming, or remembering.
And dreams and memories were among the subjects of the enigmatic and often beautiful mixed-media event presented Friday night at La Mama.


By Design; The Return of the Hat
LEAD: It's true.
The hat is back.
For several seasons fashion oracles have been telling us that hats would return to high style.
Now it seems to be happening.
Stores like Bergdorf Goodman and Barneys New York have been steadily enlarging their millinery areas and report increased sales to women of all ages.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, is offering $400 million of short-term floating-rate notes due on Nov. 10 at a price of par through various securities dealers.
The size of the financing was increased from the original $350 million because of good investor demand.


13 Hostages Are Freed By Rebels in Colombia
LEAD: Leftist guerrillas today released 13 of the 15 foreigners and journalists they kidnapped last week.
The rest were expected to be freed soon.


Sparton Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sparton Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
47,007,007
54,075,704
Net inc
756,592
1,853,024
Share earns
.10
.24
9mo rev
151,131,980
165,832,266
Net inc
5,048,597
6,938,632
Share earns
.64
.88


Graphic Packaging Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Graphic Packaging Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
13,918,000
13,835,000
Net inc
453,000
208,000
Share earns
.20
.13
Shares outst
2,301,300
1,542,600


Banque Nationale Offers 9 7/8% Notes
LEAD: The New York branch of Banque Nationale de Paris is offering $225 million of 9 7/8 percent subordinated notes due in 1995 at 99.719 to yield 9.92 percent through a group of underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.


Riverdale Loves a Villa, But Not as Corporate HQ
LEAD: A Bronx mansion, perched in a sylvan setting along the Hudson River in Riverdale, has been on the market for almost three years.
Now a prospective buyer has emerged, setting off a wave of local concern by announcing plans to turn the 28-room, tile-roofed villa into a corporate headquarters.


Checkrobot Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Checkrobot Inc
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Net loss
1,146,500
813,400
9mo net loss
3,168,700
2,119,700
Checkrobot is a development stage company.


Sierra Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sierra Health Services (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
35,217,000
34,625,000
Net inc
b202,000
b585,000
Share earns
.04
.10
b-Includes gains of $69,000 and $199,000 from tax credits for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Music Noted in Brief; A Sylvan Anniversary
LEAD: The Sylvan Winds were founded in 1976, but on Friday evening at Town Hall the ensemble offered what it called its 10th-anniversary gala - apparently counting its age from the first time it offered a formal subscription series rather than from its birth.
The group's playing, fortunately, is more precise than its math, and about as creative.


15 Prime Minutes
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Panama Banks Reopen Under New Constraints
LEAD: Banks here opened under close restrictions today in an effort by the military Government to make enough cash available to the public to permit a limited return to normal of economic activity.


Profits Up Strongly at Major Banks
LEAD: In commercial banking, if the first quarter is any indication, this should be a very good year.


France's Financial Markets Now Unfazed by Mitterrand
LEAD: When Socialist candidates win big in Europe, stock markets usually nose-dive, but the Paris Bourse bucked that historical tide and rose strongly today, the day after France's Socialist President, Francois Mitterrand, won election to a new seven-year term.


New Top Editor at The Post Is Said to Have Been Chosen
LEAD: Jane Amsterdam, founding editor of Manhattan,inc. and a senior editor at Alfred A. Knopf since January, will be named editor of The New York Post today, people at the newspaper said.


Legal Abortion Under Fierce Attack 15 Years After Roe v. Wade Ruling
LEAD: Fifteen years after the United States Supreme Court ruled that women have a constitutional right to abortion, groups on both sides of the issue say that right is increasingly vulnerable to attack.


Two Agencies Work Together In Water Rescue
LEAD: A week after the New York City Police and Fire Departments erupted into a bitter dispute over their roles in a water rescue operation, the two departments worked together, with the Coast Guard, Sunday night to save a man who had thrown himself into the East River.


Pistons: All Eyes on Jordan
LEAD: There was a lot of film-watching yesterday in the Detroit Piston offices, and Michael Jordan was the center of attention.


Budd Taking Rest
LEAD: Zola Budd, the center of an international track controversy, said last night in London that she would follow medical advice and not participate in international competition ''for a substantial period'' while she recovers from nervous exhaustion.
Budd said in a statement to the British domestic news agency Press Association that she needs a ''substantial period of recuperation along with the support of my family and friends to regain my health.


Aspen Ribbons Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aspen Ribbons Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,978,768
3,608,234
Net inc
424,789
215,687
Share earns
.12
.06
9mo rev
13,433,049
9,585,707
Net inc
933,661
579,107
Share earns
.27
.17


General Development Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*General Development Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
116,320,000
105,767,000
Net inc
b18,462,000
c5,777,000
Share earns
2.15
.65
b-After an extraordinary charge of $3,341,000 from early retirement of bank debt and a gain of $18,315,000 from an accounting change.


Patterns
LEAD:  Charvet at Saks The house of Charvet, the grand old Parisian shirt maker, has reached an agreement with Saks Fifth Avenue to carry its line of men's shirts, ties and robes in New York and later in most Saks branches.
The deal has been especially quiet and has surprised the fashion industry, because for many years the house has had an exclusive arrangement with Bergdorf Goodman, which will continue to carry


Mitterrand At Center: President Is Able To Redraw Politics
LEAD: Handsomely re-elected, President Francois Mitterrand now faces the hazardous challenge of anchoring France's politics at the center-left, softening the confrontation between his Socialist Party and a right that has been sundered in defeat.


Books of The Times; Stalin's Evil Shadow in a Long-Suppressed Novel
LEAD:  Children of the Arbat  By Anatoly Rybakov  Translated by Harold Shukman. 685 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


United Insurance Cos reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Insurance Cos (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b1,775,000
b1,768,000
Share earns
.46
.45
b-Includes realized investment gains of $123,000 and $195,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Astronomers Peer Deeper Into Cosmos
LEAD: PEERING deeper into space and time, astronomers are detecting galaxies and hints of galaxies at distances where, in theory, they should not be, raising troubling questions about a concept that seemed to explain so much about the early universe.


Alternative to Bus Terminal: Food and a Place to Relax
LEAD: It took a couple of hours for the word to get out on the street that a new drop-in center for the homeless had opened in the red-brick storefront across the street from the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Manhattan.


General Devices Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Devices Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,629,709
12,785,594
Net loss
383,616
168,393


Oak Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oak Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
50,979,000
42,783,000
Net inc
3,371,000
b248,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Included a gain of $1,282,000 from a change in accounting principle and also included an $838,000 gain from discontinued operations.


Capital Southwest Corp reports earnings for As of March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Southwest Corp (OTC)
As of March 31
1988
1987
Assets
78,375,510
66,366,878
Share earns
22.00
17.58
Assets represent net assets.
Year-ago results are restated for cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Fonar Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fonar Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,577,000
11,670,000
Net inc
b1,284,000
c887,000
Share earns
.06
.04
9mo rev
43,284,000
31,065,000
Net inc
b3,178,000
c1,791,000
Share earns
.15
.09


Israeli Makes Surprise Visit to Hungary
LEAD: Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel today ended an unexpected overnight visit to Hungary, the first visit by such a senior Israeli leader to any of the Communist countries that broke relations after the 1967 Middle East war.


Incomnet Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Incomnet Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
348,895
308,808
Net loss
115,825
b472,152
Shares outst
9,682,877
8,032,526
b-Included an $87,450 gain from discontinued operations in fees from Pacific Bell.


Eldec Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldec Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Sales
27,000,000
25,301,000
Net inc
b2,671,000
1,357,000
Share earns
.50
.26
Yr sales
104,079,000
99,380,000
Net inc
b5,877,000
5,528,000
Share earns
1.10
1.07


Review/Music; Seattle Grabs Spotlight: New Play, Renewed Musical
LEAD: Why should a New York theatergoer travel clear across the continent to see plays about the travails of being young, gifted and spoiled in chi-chi Manhattan?
The answers are plentiful on Seattle's stages, where both the young playwright Richard Greenberg and the long-time musical-theater collaborators Stephen Sondheim and George Furth are on the verge of bringing their respectively stinging views of New York strivers, ''Eastern Standard'' and ''Merrily We Roll


South Africa Suspends Another Publication
LEAD: South Africa today suspended an anti-apartheid newspaper for a month under censorship laws.


Duriron Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duriron Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
52,942,000
37,804,000
Net inc
3,064,000
816,000
Share earns
.43
.12


Corrections
LEAD: An article in the Westchester Weekly on Sunday about summer activities for vacationing children gave an incorrect telephone number for Pace University's ''Gateway to Journalism'' program.
The number is (914) 681-4134.


CR-PL Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CR-PL Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
20,805,249
20,445,796
Net loss
572,140
108,483
9mo sales
63,914,552
67,195,389
Net loss
1,156,200
b566,411
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


Review/Dance; Washington Ballet Adapts French Film Classic
LEAD: The Washington Ballet has just presented an unusual work at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
The ballet is Michael Smuin's ''Hearts,'' inspired by the great French film classic ''Les Enfants du Paradis'' and set to music that consists mainly of songs associated with Edith Piaf.


13,667 at Garden: Arena Foothold?
LEAD: Madison Square Garden was two-thirds filled last night as a boisterous crowd of 13,667 spectators greeted Arena Football, played there for the first time.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Airlines Inc., Dallas, named Richard A. Lempert senior vice president, international.


Wiser Oil Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wiser Oil Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,912,000
8,582,000
Net inc
1,143,000
b3,865,000
Share earns
.13
.43
b-Includes a gain from a change in accounting of $2,543,000.


Mets' Mistakes Prove Costly
LEAD: Gary Carter looked over in the direction of Sid Fernandez's locker and, politely as he could, confessed that he didn't have a clue as to what was going on in the young pitcher's mind lately.
The look of concern on Carter's face, though, made it clear that he suspected what was going on in Fernandez's mind was probably a lot like what had taken place on the mound in recent weeks.


WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING Subway Advertising
LEAD: And, speaking of White House books: just as interest in Donald Regan's revelations is peaking, an eye-catching advertisement for the unflattering book about the Reagan family by Michael Reagan, the President's adopted son, is appearing on more than 500,000 of the fare cards used by passengers on Washington's


Desert Partners Drops a Request
LEAD: At a hearing today in Federal District Court here, Desert Partners L.P. withdrew a request to delay the USG Corporation's annual meeting on Wednesday.


Anticipating a Cabinet May Hurt a Candidate
LEAD:  To the Editor: I appreciate A. M. Rosenthal's suggestion (''One More Question,'' column, April 19) that Presidential candidates indicate what sort of people, or even name some specific people, they would want to head up important cabinet posts should they be elected.
For a voter this would be important information about the candidate and could conceivably affect his voting decision.


Reagan View on Pardons Related
LEAD: A newspaper columnist says President Reagan told him he had ruled out the possibility of pardons before trial for any of the defendants in the Iran-contra case.


U.S. Forest Service Ordered to Promote California Women
LEAD: A Federal district judge today found the Secretary of Agriculture, Richard E. Lyng, in civil contempt for failing to carry out a plan for promoting women in the United States Forest Service in California.


Eye-Care Concern May Receive a Bid
LEAD: Three members of the Sturman family who hold a combined 9.5 percent stake in the Cooper Companies said they were considering a proxy fight for control of the eye-care concern based in Palo Alto, Calif.


Beneficial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beneficial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
27,000,000
b38,300,000
Share earns
1.08
1.52
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $1,100,000 and a tax credit of $12,100,000.


Conmed Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conmed Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 25
1988
1987
Sales
3,606,000
2,830,000
Net inc
296,000
242,000
Share earns
.10
.12
Shares outst
2,992,177
2,000,000


Murray Ohio's Chief In Another Struggle
LEAD: John L. Duncan, president and chief executive of the Murray Ohio Manufacturing Company, had finally solidified his position last year as the company's leader only to see the bicycle and lawn mower manufacturer put into play last week by a bid from A.B.
Electrolux.


Decades Later, Theories Still Hold
LEAD: IN 1893, Santiago Ramon y Cajal, the Spanish neuroanatomist, outlined a general theory of memory that, in its essence, is almost identical to the one emerging today.
Learning, he suggested, leaves its mark by making connections between neurons.


Dentsu Remains on Top Of Worldwide Rankings
LEAD: Advertising Age yesterday published the rankings of the world's ad agencies for 1987, and Japan's Dentsu was again on top with $884.5 million in gross income and $6.78 billion in billings.
Both figures were up more than 25 percent from 1986.


Barris Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barris Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
12,524,000
7,220,000
Net inc
b25,817,000
1,640,000
Share earns
2.62
.18
9mo rev
29,699,000
56,722,000
Net inc
7,285,000
14,970,000
Share earns
.84
1.68


The U.N. Today
LEAD: Economic and Social Council  Meets at 10 A.M.
SECOND COMMITTEE (SOCIAL) - 3 P.M.
TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL - 10:30 A.M.


Robert A. Heinlein Is Dead at 80; Renowned Science-Fiction Writer
LEAD: Robert A. Heinlein, a former aviation engineer whose clever interweaving of imagination and technical expertise helped make him one of the country's most successful writers of science fiction, died Sunday morning at his home in Carmel, Calif.
He was 80 years old and had been in ill health for some time.


Education Secretary to Depart in Mid-September
LEAD: William J. Bennett, the Secretary of Education, a frequent critic of low standards in the nation's schools and colleges, announced today that he would leave the Cabinet in mid-September.


Sales Exceed $4 Billion at Top 100 Black-Owned Concerns
LEAD: Bolstered by the results of a large New York investment concern, sales of the nation's leading black-owned industrial and service businesses rose to a record $4.1 billion last year, according to an annual survey being released today by Black Enterprise magazine.


Gdansk Workers Reject Polish Offer to End Strike
LEAD: Striking shipyard workers rejected a management compromise offer today, delivering a severe setback to Government efforts to peacefully end the week-old strike at the Lenin shipyard here.


Lucky Stores Gives Data to American
LEAD: Lucky Stores Inc. said it had provided confidential information to American Stores Inc. in exchange for an agreement that American would sweeten or end its hostile takeover bid by May 17.


Chess
LEAD: Murray Chandler, now based in London, made a rare return to his native New Zealand and tied for first place with his fellow grandmasters, Boris Spassky of France and Eduard Gufeld of the Soviet Union, in the Plaza International Tournament in Wellington.
They each scored 7 1/2-2 1/2.


Automated Language Proessing Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automated Language Proessing Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,200,000
1,100,000
Net loss
539,000
b181,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income  The company said the increase in revenue came primarily from acquisitions of Translation Service Companies, including Interlingua-TTI, a British provider of Technical Translation Services with 14 U.K.


Fitness Account Moves
LEAD: Muller, Jordan, Weiss, on its way to becoming Madison Avenue's healthiest practitioner, has landed the account of Cardio-Fitness Centers, an expanding enterprise recently acquired by the H. J. Heinz Company.
Cardio-Fitness, whose former agency was Paula Green Inc., will soon open its sixth New York location at 9 West 57th Street.


Civilization And Billy Martin
LEAD: IT'S like feeling the earth tremble beneath your feet, and wondering if the entire sphere is about to crumble and swallow up all of civilized man, and some of the rest of us, too.


Beware of Evangelists, Pope Warns in Bolivia
LEAD: Pope John Paul II warned Roman Catholic bishops here tonight to protect their congregations from evangelical preachers.


Envoy Offers No New Data On Bush Briefing and Noriega
LEAD: Everett Ellis Briggs, the former American Ambassador to Panama, today declined to elaborate on his assertion that at a 1985 meeting he did not brief Vice President George Bush on evidence of drug involvement by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the Panamanian leader.


Music Noted in Brief; Works by Sierra
LEAD: Roberto Sierra's music has earned attention in competitions and worthwhile commissions have come his way, but his cause was not ideally served by the Bronx Arts Ensemble concert of his works Sunday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
The bulk of the program was devoted to the chamber opera ''El Mensajero de Plata'' (''The Silver Messenger''), first performed two years ago by the Opera de Camara of Puerto


Sandata Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandata Inc
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
2,163,361
2,044,415
Net inc
15,115
86,804
Share earns
.01
.04
9mo rev
6,452,519
5,309,276
Net inc
191,546
256,316
Share earns
.08
.10


Harvey Mansfield, 83; Taught at Columbia
LEAD: Harvey C. Mansfield, the Ruggles Professor Emeritus of Public Law and Government at Columbia University, died of stomach cancer last Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.


Atico Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atico Financial Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
311,000
935,000
Share earns
.05
.25
The company said the results of operations for the latest quarter included the July 31, 1987 acquisition of 100 percent of Pan American Mortgage Corp.


Patriots Cut Collins
LEAD: Tony Collins, the veteran running back, was waived yesterday by the New England Patriots.
No reason was given for the release of Collins, still the Patriots' best all-round running back.
Collins was a patient in a drug rehabilitation clinic last year and was in one again last month, according to The Boston Globe.


Redeem New York's Bottle Bill for Litter Control and Recycling
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Campaign Trail
LEAD:  Protection for Dukakis


Metro Datelines; Judge Is to Decide Today on Davis Jury
LEAD: The judge in the trial of Larry Davis, who is charged with the attempted murder of nine police officers, said yesterday that he would rule today on how jury selection is to proceed.


Sikhs Battle Indian Soldiers In Temple and 5 Are Killed
LEAD: Security forces fought a four-and-a-half-hour gun battle today with Sikh militants inside the Golden Temple here and more than 2,500 Government troops surrounded the 400-year-old Sikh shrine, the police reported.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allied-Signal Inc., Morristown, N.J., a holding company engaged in oil and gas, chemicals and fibers, said it had begun operating a pilot plant to make substitutes for chlorofluorocarbons that do not deplete the ozone.


Atlantic Financial Federal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Financial Federal (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b4,069,000
c5,896,000
Share earns
.77
1.19
6mo net inc
b10,857,000
c11,517,000
Share earns
2.17
2.32
b-Includes gains from repurchase of convertible debentures of $672,000 and $1,191,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, and tax credits of $2,813,000 for the quarter and $7,280,000 for the 6 months.


Modern Bridge Design Attacked As Too Vulnerable to Corrosion
LEAD: A FUROR has erupted in the world of bridge engineering over the long-term reliability of an innovative design that has come to dominate the modern generation of great bridges, all but replacing the traditional suspension bridge.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.00
6.88
6.84
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.33
6.29
5.74
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.54
6.51
5.97
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.80
8.77
8.46
30-YR.


Dorsett Encouraged
LEAD: Tony Dorsett, the Dallas Cowboys' running back, said he was encouraged he would be traded to the Denver Broncos as team officials continue negotiating a deal to free the veteran player from financial obligations. ''There are a lot of conversations going on right now between my people and the front office of the Denver Broncos,'' Dorsett said.


Verit Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Verit Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b606,000
64,000
9mo sales
8,144,000
22,326,000
Net loss
b726,000
c381,000
Share earns
-
.50
b-Includes a charge of $583,000 and $554,000 from a litigation settlement and provision for possible losses regarding a dispute over the value of merchandise for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Chemical Fabrics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Fabrics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Sales
8,843,000
7,435,000
Net inc
b894,000
135,000
Share earns
.19
.03
9mo sales
25,180,000
20,299,000
Net inc
b1,938,000
c216,000
Share earns
.42
-


Corrosion on the Williamsburg Is Mainly on Approach Roads
LEAD: The corrosion on the Williamsburg Bridge, while serious enough to keep the bridge closed after four weeks of inspections and repairs, is concentrated in an area that many people may not consider part of the bridge at all: the approach roadways.


Guilty in Shooting of Officer
LEAD: A man was convicted in the Bronx yesterday of shooting a police officer in the leg.
A State Supreme Court jury found the defendant, Raymond Casiano, guilty of assaulting a police officer and criminal sale and criminal possession of a controlled substance.
He faces up to 32 years in prison.
Sentencing was scheduled for May 31.


For Geoffrey Beene, 25 Years at the Top
LEAD: Geoffrey Beene is the quiet one.
He speaks slowly, in the mellifluous tones of his native Louisiana.
Of medium height, with a shock of white hair, he fits nobody's image of the typical fashion designer.
He has a tendency to fleshiness, intensified by his love for good food.
He could be a professor at an obscure university or the doctor he once planned to be.


First Fidelity
LEAD: The First Fidelity Bancorp is offering $150 million of 9 3/4 percent subordinated notes due in 1995 at a price of 99.925 to yield 9.765 percent through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Noncallable, the notes yield about 96-hundredths of a percentage point more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Lilco Seeks Albany's Help In Effort to Block Takeover
LEAD: The chairman of the Long Island Lighting Company met limited success here today as he sought support for a negotiated settlement that would allow Lilco to remain a private, investor-owned utility in return for abandoning its $5.3 billion Shoreham nuclear power plant.


Eldorado Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldorado Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,501,000
5,091,000
Net inc
644,000
568,000
Share earns
.30
.27
The company said share earnings reflect the 10 percent stock dividend paid Dec. 4, 1987.


Heist, C H Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heist, C H Corp
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Sales
9,217,000
8,578,000
Net loss
3,000
81,000
9mo sales
34,060,000
30,509,000
Net inc
1,120,000
339,000
Share earns
.79
.22


North Hills Electronics Inc reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Hills Electronics Inc (OTC)
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,337,027
4,101,998
Net loss
b477,787
b1,278,546
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $124,206 and $153,497 for the latest and prior years, respectively; the latest year also includes a gain on disposal of discontinued operations of $83,281.





Publisher of Glasnost Magazine Is Arrested in a Soviet Crackdown
LEAD: The publisher of an independent magazine was arrested today and sentenced to a week in jail, as the police moved to break up a dissident group that declared itself an opposition political party, according to members of the group.


The Candid Way to Defeat a Deficit
LEAD: Mayor Koch, who won negative national notice for bombastic extravagance in the New York primary campaign, now serves himself and his city far better with fiscal frugality.
The austere $25.2 billion 1989 New York City budget he proposed yesterday shows the outspoken Mayor at his candid best.


Georgia Bonded Fibers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia Bonded Fibers
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,677,000
9,039,000
Net loss
110,000
b155,000
Share earns
-
.11
9mo sales
23,732,000
24,393,000
Net loss
266,000
b402,000
Share earns
-
.28
b


Fibronics International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fibronics International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,836,000
8,765,000
Net loss
879,000
b164,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


To-Fitness Inc reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* To-Fitness Inc
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,776,132
1,519,360
Net loss
3,396,653
2,978,902


Europe Sees Market Gain
LEAD: Abolishing trade barriers within the European Community could bring a short-term increase in unemployment but more jobs, higher growth and lower prices thereafter, according to a study published today by the community's executive commission.


Edward A. Kelley, Consultant, 54
LEAD: Edward A. Kelley, a pharmaceutical marketing consultant, died of lung cancer Sunday at his home in Doylestown, Pa.
He was 54 years old.


Advanced Polymer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Polymer Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
891,000
278,000
Net loss
543,000
808,000


Reece Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reece Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Revenue
14,993,000
13,208,000
Net inc
307,000
273,000
Share earns
.12
.11


Kentucky Central Life Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kentucky Central Life Insurance (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b6,920,712
c6,739,078
Share earns
.51
.55
Shares outst
13,520,025
12,308,591
b-After capital gains of $545,334.
c-After capital gains of $767,491 and a tax credit of $954,176.


New Whooping Cough Vaccines: Promise Dims
LEAD: LONG-AWAITED tests of two relatively new vaccines against pertussis, or whooping cough, have shown that they are quite safe but not as effective as experts had hoped.


Hornbeck Offshore Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hornbeck Offshore Services
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
654,000
377,000
Net inc
139,000
b166,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


Senate Hopeful Greets Leaders Of Republicans
LEAD: Hoping to avoid a debacle in the New York Senate race that could affect the Presidential contest, Vice President Bush's brother backed a little-known lawyer when the hopeful was introduced today to Republican leaders as their likely United States Senate candidate.


NONPROFIT GROUPS FACE BROADER TAX ON SOME VENTURES
LEAD: Despite protests from museums, hospitals and hundreds of other not-for-profit groups and institutions, the Reagan Administration today endorsed Congressional proposals to tax more income-producing activities carried on by tax-exempt organizations.


Smithsonian Accepts Indian Museum's Move to Custom House in New York
LEAD: The Smithsonian Institution today appeared to have accepted a shift of the Museum of the American Indian from the Washington Heights section of Manhattan to the Custom House at the Battery.
The Smithsonian had hoped to establish a new museum site on the Mall in Washington.


Brinkmann Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brinkmann Instruments (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,807,000
15,103,000
Net inc
936,000
404,000
Share earns
.25
.11


Japan Growth Outlook
LEAD: Japan's gross national product is expected to grow at a rate of 4.1 percent in the fiscal year ending March 31, 1989, compared with the official target of 3.8 percent, the Bank of Tokyo Ltd. said in a statement.


ABC Tries to Tap Magic of 'Roots' a Second Time
LEAD: At a time when television viewing is declining, producers are understandably searching for sure-fire hits.
To many of them, the safest approach is to find a way to recycle the most successful programs of the past.


National Health Enhancement reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Health Enhancement
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
551,352
155,792
Net loss
90,182
187,653
Yr rev
1,392,032
565,136
Net loss
668,455
371,219


American Bankers Insurance Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bankers Insurance Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b4,751,000
c6,141,000
Share earns
.37
.48
b-Includes net realized investment gains of $162,000.
c-Includes net realized invesstment gains of $508,000.


Foyt's Ban Lifted
LEAD: A six-month suspension imposed on A. J. Foyt was lifted by Nascar yesterday, eight days after the penalty was leveled following a fender-banging incident in the Winston 500.
Les Richter, Nascar's vice president for competition, announced the decision following a review of an incident late in the race at Talladega, Ala.


Security Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Financial Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
348,000
327,000
Per share
.45
-
6mo net inc
778,000
604,000
Per share
1.00
-
There are no share earnings for the year-ago periods because the company went public in June 1987.


Post-Traumatic Stress: Biological Clues Found
LEAD: Vietnam veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder were less sensitive to pain after seeing scenes from a war movie, according to a new study that gives a glimpse into the complex biology of the disorder.
The finding may also be a step toward new treatments, scientists said.


A.T.&amp;T. Displays Midsize Computer
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company introduced a new mid-range computer as well as some enhancements to its Starlan computer communications network.
A.T.&amp;T.'s new 3B2/700 mid-range computer could support up to 80 users at once and it could process up to nine million instructions a second, company officials said at a news conference.


Gasoline Evaporation Termed a Pollution Factor
LEAD: Evaporation of gasoline from fuel systems while cars are running may be making cities significantly smoggier than previously predicted, but new regulations could clear up the problem, according to several analysts.


Korea Alters Cigarette Rule
LEAD: The United States trade representative, Clayton K. Yeutter, said today that an agreement to liberalize South Korea's cigarette market could result in several hundred million dollars in new sales for United States tobacco companies.


Walshire Assurance reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walshire Assurance
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b434,718
b513,383
Share earns
.22
.19
Shares outst
1,980,000
2,703,104
b-Includes capital gains of $27,490 and $23,459 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Baker Views Debt Crisis
LEAD: The only way to resolve the debt crisis in the developing world and relieve the crushing burden on fragile economies is for the countries themselves to lure more foreign investment, Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d said tdoay.


HMSS Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HMSS Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,831,000
3,706,000
Net inc
616,000
b277,000
Share earns
.17
.11
Shares outst
3,693,000
2,612,000
b-After a tax credit of $127,000.


Forgiveness Becomes a Strategy in Hockey Imbroglio's Aftermath
LEAD: The misadventures of Jim Schoenfeld, the New Jersey Devils' coach, and the National Hockey League continued yesterday afternoon.
The league rescinded the suspension that Schoenfeld, with help from a New Jersey judge, was able to ignore the night before.


Associated Hosts Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Associated Hosts Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,018,000
17,872,000
Net inc
715,000
631,000
Share earns
.16
.14
6mo rev
35,401,000
35,773,000
Net inc
1,358,000
1,094,000
Share earns
.30
.24


Madison Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Madison Gas &amp; Electric Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
69,740,000
60,791,000
Net inc
6,064,000
5,042,000
Share earns
.89
.75


Grand Met Optician Deal
LEAD: Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. of Britain said today that it was buying a chain of optician superstores in the United States for $32 million.
The 38 Eye and Tech superstores, in the Southwest and West, will be part of its Pearle Health Services unit, which is a retailer of eye-care products worldwide.
Grand Met, a diversified company whose interests include hotels and beverages, said the purchase would complement its acquisition earlier this month of Vision Express, which runs 27 superstores in the Middle West.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing Clean as a Whistle
LEAD: Attention, whistle blowers!
Somebody out there appreciates you -somebody named Michael Cavallo, a money manager who lives in Cambridge, Mass.
He has created a foundation to reward people who report wrongdoing in government and business with $10,000 prizes.


Party Urged to Pick Women
LEAD: The National Organization for Women today released a list of prominent Democratic women and said the Democratic Party should consider them for key convention roles as well as for the Vice Presidential nomination.


Checkpoint Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Checkpoint Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Revenue
8,125,000
6,602,000
Net loss
1,258,000
330,000


American Western Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Western Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,800,000
12,400,000
Net inc
618,000
505,000
Share earns
.14
.11


N.Y.U. Gets Town House for Italian Studies
LEAD: Dr.
John Brademas, president of New York University, with Baroness Mariuccia Zerilli-Marimo at news conference, right, to announce the Baroness's $4 million gift to the university.
The gift is to be used for the creation of Casa Italiana Zerilli-Marimo in the historic Winfield Scott House at 24 West 12th Street in Greenwich Village.


Trimedyne Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trimedyne Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,006,000
2,291,000
Net inc
1,237,000
b117,000
Share earns
.19
-
6mo sales
12,313,000
4,323,000
Net inc
2,262,000
116,000
Share earns
.36
.02
b


BHA Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BHA Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,412,000
9,346,000
Net inc
585,000
387,000
Share earns
.26
.18
6mo sales
20,713,000
18,429,000
Net inc
1,040,000
734,000
Share earns
.47
.36
Shares outst
2,207,924
2,051,648


Action Staffing reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Action Staffing
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
17,570,494
8,224,945
Net inc
b39,362
c81,153
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
13,803,336
8,166,294
6mo rev
32,929,701
15,032,290
Net inc
b154,346
c159,991
Share earns
.01
.02
Shares outst
11,102,815
8,048,794


LEADERS OF SENATE POSTPONE DEBATE ON MISSILE TREATY
LEAD: Senate Democratic and Republican leaders said today that the new missile accord will not be brought to the Senate floor until the United States and the Soviet Union resolve important differences over monitoring compliance with the pact.


Cooper Agrees To Buy RTE
LEAD: Cooper Industries, a diversified manufacturer of electric and electronic products and consumer tools, has agreed to buy the RTE Corporation of Brookfield, Wis., for $45 a share, or about $371 million, the two companies said today.


Outlet Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Outlet Communications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,746,000
13,035,000
Net loss
9,285,000
7,879,000


Dow Ends Day Below 2,000 Level
LEAD: Stock prices fell broadly for the fourth session in a row yesterday in continued lethargic trading and the Dow Jones industrial average fell below the important 2,000 level.


DST Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DST Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
33,841,000
31,889,000
Net inc
b4,954,000
b4,298,000
Share earns
.25
.22
b-Includes equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates of $1,060,000 in the latest quarter, compared with $850,000 a year-ago.


A Fairly Safe Bet
LEAD: The National Basketball Association has called a news conference for today to announce its rookie of the year.
Among the guests invited to Tavern on the Green are Dick Evans, president of Madison Square Garden; Jack Diller, the Garden's vice president; Al Bianchi, the Knicks' general manager, Coach Rick Pitino and several


Reputed New Jersey Mob Figure Is Reported Missing by His Wife
LEAD: The wife of the reputed mob boss John DiGilio has reported him missing, and the authorities said today that his possible disappearance could be a result of organized-crime strife, punishment for his outspokenness or a ploy in connection with his approaching sentencing for a loan-sharking conviction.


Rowntree Holders Urged to Spurn Bid
LEAD: The chairman of the British candy company Rowntree P.L.C. urged shareholders today to reject a bid of $:2.1 billion (about $3.9 billion) by the Swiss giant Nestle S.A. ''Nestle is offering an inadequate price,'' Rowntree's chairman, Kenneth Dixon, said in a letter to shareholders.


Pioneer Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Financial Services (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b2001,000
b1,073,000
Per share
.31
.23
b-Includes capital gains of $51,000 and $31,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Precious Metals Advance; South African Move Feared
LEAD: Prices of precious metals futures rallied yesterday on fears that South Africa would react to further United States economic sanctions by reducing its exports of platinum and gold, analysts said.


When the Baby Is Late: Obstetricians Search for the Safest Approach
LEAD: DESPITE dramatic advances in obstetrics, doctors still have no idea what strategy is safest for the late, or postmature baby.
When should birth be induced artificially, and when is it best just to wait?


Indentix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Indentix Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
45,000
503,000
Net loss
824,000
432,000
9mo sales
945,000
1,220,000
Net loss
1,782,000
1,554,000


Indoor Football Opens in New York
LEAD: Jim Crocicchia of the New York Knights passing against the Detroit Drive in the Knights' home opener last night at the Garden.
The Knights lost, 54-48.
Page D29. (NYT/G. Paul Burnett)


Three Reputed Mob Figures Are Being Tried Again
LEAD: In opening statements at the second trial of Gene Gotti and two co-defendants, Federal prosecutors charged yesterday that the defendants were major figures in a racketeering and drug-trafficking operation.
They were accused of supervising, managing and controlling heroin and cocaine distribution and sharing in the profits.


Reverberations Felt as Regan Book Hits Market
LEAD: Donald T. Regan's explosive book has lent a whole new meaning to the term ''Star Wars,'' and the sounds of battle continue to echo through the capital.


N.H.L. Playoffs; Oilers Top Wings For 3-1 Series Lead
LEAD: Jari Kurri's second goal of the game, his playoff-leading 12th, at 11 minutes 2 seconds of overtime tonight gave Edmonton a 4-3 victory over the Detroit Red Wings.
The victory put the Oilers one game away from the Stanley Cup final.


Shultz Plans New Middle East Peace Effort
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz is going back to the Middle East in another effort to promote peace talks between Israel and its Arab neighbors, the State Department said today.


Champion Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion Enterprises Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 26
1988
1987
Sales
65,619,000
66,535,000
Net loss
b4,455,000
2,282,000
Yr sales
320,183,000
302,571,000
Net loss
b4,887,000
1,439,000
b-After charges of $829,000 and $2,973,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, from a writeoff of prepaid income tax benefits.


Kleinwort in U.S.
LEAD: Kleinwort Benson Ltd. said today that it had been negotiating with the Fuji Bank Ltd. for several months to sell a 24.9 percent stake in Kleinwort Benson Government Securities Inc., its Chicago-based primary dealership.
A United States primary dealership is a government securities firm with which the Federal Reserve trades directly.


Saudis Reportedly Map Changes for Aramco
LEAD: Saudi Arabia is drafting a new charter for the Arabian American Oil Company, cutting its legal ties to the United States but seeking joint ventures with the four American oil companies that formerly owned the oil giant, an oil newsletter reported today.


Refinery Worker Identified
LEAD: Forensic specialists identified another body today from the Shell Oil Company refinery explosion, and emergency crews searched for a final missing person, company officials said.
The dead man was identified as Roland Satterlee, 35 year old, of LaPlace, said Sarah Colletti, a Shell spokeswoman.
Six Shell employees are known dead and 42 were injured when the gasoline-refining unit blew up here and caught fire before dawn Thursday.


Farr Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Farr Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,975,000
15,186,000
Net inc
b757,000
20,000
Share earns
.27
.01
b-Includes a net gain of $338,000 from sale of property.


Mesa Airlines Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mesa Airlines Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,736,125
3,447,659
Net inc
187,217
294,350
Share earns
.11
.26
6mo rev
8,942,093
6,437,777
Net inc
288,826
562,373
Share earns
.17
.54


Chicks Don Glasses for Vision Study
LEAD: IF baby chickens wear ''defocusing'' eyeglasses, their eyes change shape as they grow to correct for the lenses' distorting effects, Cornell researchers have found.


Metro Datelines; Baby M's Mother Gives Birth to Boy
LEAD: Mary Beth Whitehead Gould, who lost the custody battle for Baby M, gave birth yesterday to a boy, hospital officials said.


Geonex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geonex Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,972,000
4,588,000
Net inc
55,000
242,000
Share earns
.02
.07
6mo rev
8,862,000
9,017,000
Net loss
193,000
b675,000
Share earns
-
.21
b-Net income


Porta Systems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Porta Systems Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,192,000
11,056,000
Net inc
888,000
707,000
Share earns
.16
.13


Crop Genetics International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crop Genetics International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
542,100
497,500
Net loss
1,036,100
751,800
Yr rev
3,242,600
2,484,100
Net loss
3,045,300
3,472,700


Three Musicals Share 30 Tony Nominations
LEAD: ''Into the Woods,'' ''The Phantom of the Opera'' and ''Anything Goes'' received 10 Tony nominations each yesterday to lead the race for this year's awards.
Among plays, ''M.
Butterfly'' garnered seven nominations and ''Joe Turner's Come and Gone'' six.


Wespercorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wespercorp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,191,000
2,114,000
Net loss
b408,000
348,000
9mo rev
3,154,000
6,744,000
Net loss
134,000
c1,216,000
b-Includes a loss of $60,000 for settlement of lawsuits.


Professional Care Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Professional Care Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,542,000
9,924,000
Net inc
120,000
b660,000
Share earns
.04
-
6mo rev
16,858,000
19,872,000
Net loss
245,000
b1,258,000
b-Net loss and includes a loss of $116,000 and $97,000 from discontinued operations for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING Loss of a Library
LEAD: Journals are being thrown out and two of seven employees have been transferred at the Department of Health and Human Services' Library and Information Center.


Techanalysis Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Techanalysis Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,187,774
3,564,292
Net inc
364,093
278,896
Share earns
.22
.17


Woman Convicted of Killing 2 in Drug Tampering
LEAD: A Seattle-area woman was found guilty today of killing her husband and another person by lacing Excedrin capsules with cyanide.
It was the first time anyone in this country has been convicted of causing a death by drug tampering.


Suffolk Legislators Set to Vote on Video-Terminal Bill
LEAD: Suffolk County legislators, facing stiff opposition from business leaders who fear companies may flee Long Island, are expected to vote on a bill Tuesday that would regulate the use of video-display terminals in the work place.


MDT Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MDT Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
23,806,000
3,100,000
Net inc
b1,181,000
c269,000
Share earns
.23
.11
Yr sales
70,393,000
11,944,000
Net inc
b3,796,000
c919,000
Share earns
.86
.47


Constitutional Law Is Full of 'Contradictions'
LEAD: To the Editor:


G.O.P. Senate Hopeful Urges Meese To Resign
LEAD: Pete Dawkins, the Republican candidate for the United States Senate from New Jersey, called today for the resignation of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d.


Saul B. Ackerman, Lawyer, 100
LEAD: Saul B. Ackerman, a lawyer and one of the oldest practicing alumni of the Columbia University Law School, died of a heart attack Saturday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 100 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Jack Henry &amp; Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jack Henry &amp; Associates
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,635,000
4,542,000
Net inc
647,000
133,000
Share earns
.18
.03
9mo rev
12,925,000
11,788,000
Net inc
468,000
414,000
Share earns
.13
.12


Kirschner Medical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kirschner Medical
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,845,000
2,293,000
Net inc
353,000
63,000
Share earns
.16
.05
Shares outst
2,240,000
1,263,000


Jury Weighs Charges Against Nine in Mob Killing
LEAD: A jury today began deliberating the fate of Nicodemo Scarfo, a reputed underworld figure who is accused, along with eight associates, of killing a mob rival in 1984.


Steinem Gets A Random House Post
LEAD: Gloria Steinem, the feminist writer who was a founder of Ms. magazine, was named a contributing editor of Random House Inc. yesterday.


Gateway Federal Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Federal Savings &amp; Loan
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b1,746,000
1,282,000
Share earns
.89
-
b-After a gain of $439,000 from an accounting change.
The company went public in June 1987.


Man in the News; Ecuadorean With Elan: Rodrigo Borja Cevallos
LEAD: When support seemed to grow for his noisy and charismatic challenger in the days preceding Sunday's runoff election here, it suddenly became fashionable to describe Rodrigo Borja Cevallos as a perennial political loser.
After all, the 52-year-old


'Pink Sheet' Listing Plan
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers said today that it plans to request Government approval to publish an electronic ''bulletin board'' listing quotations of thinly traded stocks often referred to as ''pink sheet'' issues.


Review/Television; Dividing Up the Friends During a Divorce Ordeal
LEAD: There's enough biting humor left in ''Who Gets the Friends?'' to indicate that still another made-for-television movie has been mangled in the network homogenization mills.
This particular exercise in prime-time diversion, on CBS at 9 o'clock this evening, was made for CBS Entertainment Productions.


Moody's Reduces Its Rating Of Georgia-Pacific's Debt
LEAD: The Georgia-Pacific Corporation's $1.275 billion of outstanding long-term debt has been downgraded by Moody's Investors Service.


Study Finds Obstacles Exist For Immigrant Schoolchildren
LEAD: Immigrant schoolchildren are hampered by rigid placement practices, lack of bilingual education, cultural insensitivity, harassment from other students and fear of deportation, according to a study.


Moderate Quake in Alaska
LEAD: A moderate earthquake struck parts of south-central Alaska early today, but there were no immediate reports of damage or injuries, the Alaska Tsunami Warning Center reported.
The temblor, which occurred at 8:33 A.M., measured 4.7 on the Richter scale of ground motion, the center reported, and was centered 20 miles northeast of Valdez.


Media General Suitor Lifts Bid to $70 a Share
LEAD: Burt Sugarman, the Hollywood producer who seems to relish a good fight, has raised his bid for Media General Inc. to $70 a share from $61.50 a share.
The total value of the bid, he said, in a letter to the company, would be about $2 billion.


Gdansk Strikers Reject an Offer
LEAD: Striking workers at the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk, Poland, rejected a management compromise offer yesterday, delivering a severe setback to Government efforts to end the week-old shipyard strike peacefully.


Hinderliter Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hinderliter Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,505,000
7,148,000
Net inc
b201,000
c1,099,000
Share earns
.01
.32
Shares outst
3,619,000
2,887,000
9mo sales
26,574,000
14,811,000
Net inc
b355,000
c6,984,000
Share earns
-
2.25
Shares outst
3,388,000
2,882,000


Santa Cruz Journal: Surfing Museum Far East of Hawaii
LEAD: Long before the Beach Boys sang about it and Gidget nearly drowned trying to do it, this seaside town of 47,000 residents about 70 miles south of San Francisco had already established itself as one of the most important centers of surfing outside Hawaii.


Thrifty Rent-A-Car Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thrifty Rent-A-Car Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,515,521
14,133,978
Net inc
1,392,330
809,914
Share earns
.23
.16
Shares outst
6,150,000
5,000,000
9mo rev
56,390,273
42,964,018
Net inc
5,981,727
3,068,419
Share earns
1.00
.61
Shares outst
6,000,000
5,000,000


Koch Asks Smaller Cut In Arts Agency Budget
LEAD: After meeting with his new Commissioner of Cultural Affairs, Mayor Koch reduced by a million dollars the $7 million cut he had earlier requested of the arts agency's budget for fiscal 1989, but the Commissioner, Dr.
Mary Schmidt Campbell, said today that she still finds the results ''exceedingly distressing.


A JEW IS ELECTED AT UNION SEMINARY
LEAD: Union Theological Seminary yesterday named Peggy Tishman, a leader in Jewish philanthropic work, as the first non-Christian trustee since it was founded in 1836 as a Presbyterian school.


Construction Inquiry Rescued in Koch Budget
LEAD: Mayor Koch yesterday revived an expanded investigation of racketeering in the New York construction industry, providing $1.7 million in his budget.


Calgon Carbon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calgon Carbon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
45,640,000
-
Net inc
6,430,000
-
Share earns
.64
-
The company made an initial public offering on June 2, 1987.


Archive Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Archive Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 25
1988
1987
Sales
27,900,000
20,267,000
Net inc
b2,174,000
1,185,000
Share earns
.17
.11
Shares outst
13,087,000
11,144,000
6mo sales
54,422,000
39,300,000
Net inc
b4,502,000
1,792,000
Share earns
.34
.16


The Captive Nation
LEAD: The essence of what is going on in Poland, the root reality, is plain to see and known to every Pole.
But outside Poland, in the stories and analyses and political dissections, it is almost never mentioned anymore.
Why is that?
Poland is a captive nation.
Once, not long ago, that was not only known to


Radiation Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radiation Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,216,000
9,984,000
Net inc
1,532,000
627,000
Share earns
.31
.11
Shares outst
4,916,000
5,564,000
9mo sales
29,038,000
29,997,000
Net inc
3,207,000
2,502,000
Share earns
.62
.45


Clear Channel Communicaions reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clear Channel Communicaions (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,011,000
7,134,000
Net inc
25,000
108,000
Share earns
.01
.03


Rebel Kurds Reportedly Kill 25 Turkish Villagers
LEAD: In a dramatic resurgence of violence, Kurdish separatist guerrillas were reported today to have killed at least 25 civilians in two remote southeastern villages over the last three days.


John Calhoun, 88; A Longtime Fighter For Rights in South
LEAD: John H. Calhoun, a civil rights leader in the South whose activism dated to the 1940's, died of respiratory failure in his sleep Friday at his home in Atlanta.
He was 88 years old.
Mr.
Calhoun, who was an Atlanta City Councilman from 1974 until 1978, devoted most of his political energies to grass-roots organization among black people.


Bridge
LEAD: The massed ranks of North American experts have always beaten back foreign invaders at the Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs, but did not do so this year.


Bond Trading Quiet on Eve Of Note Sale
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were mixed in sluggish trading yesterday as market participants prepared for the start of the Treasury's $26 billion quarterly refunding, which begins today with the $8.75 billion sale of new three-year notes.


India-Penney Sales Drive Set
LEAD: India, seeking to increase its share of the garment market in the United States, will soon begin its biggest American sales promotion drive ever, an Indian official said today.
The executive director of the


Bilingual Plan Backed in Los Angeles
LEAD: The Los Angeles School Board has approved a master plan for bilingual education that is expected to tilt the national debate strongly toward teaching non-English-speaking students in their own language.


Ronson Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ronson Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,991,000
7,274,000
Net inc
145,000
b22,000
Share earns
.10
.01
b-Includes income of $100,000, or 7 cents a share, related to a 1986 grant by the company of a non-exclusive licensing agreement for neodymium technology.


Viatech Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Viatech Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,417,140
15,136,720
Net inc
172,446
150,888
Share earns
.14
.13


Kaneb Energy Partners Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaneb Energy Partners Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,266,000
12,686,000
Net inc
727,000
2,383,000
Share earns
.04
.14


American Capital Manageent &amp; Research reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital Manageent &amp; Research (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
22,800,000
30,700,000
Net inc
5,800,000
10,400,000
Share earns
.24
.43


Drug Addict Guilty in Fatal Stabbing of Nun
LEAD: A crack addict was convicted yesterday of fatally stabbing a nun when she refused to give him money for drugs, the Bronx District Attorney announced.


U.S. Planning to Send Food Money to the Contras
LEAD: Thwarted in its effort to deliver food and other aid to most of the Nicaraguan rebels, the Reagan Administration said today that it was planning to send cash to the contras inside Nicaragua.


Market Place; Soybean Supply Draws Attention
LEAD: SOYBEANS have long been termed the ''invisible commodity,'' which consumers hardly ever see but which they use every day.


Soy Ink for Newspaper
LEAD: The Champaign-Urbana News-Gazette will be printed with ink made from soybean oil, starting June 1, the newspaper announced today.
Its editor, John Foreman, said a ''commitment to the farm economy'' was a major reason for becoming the first Illinois newspaper to do so.


Chrysler Incentives
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said it would extend its buyer incentive program with several revisions.
It includes about two dozen models and offers cash rebates ranging from $400 for the Plymouth Reliant and Dodge Aries to $1,500 for the Dodge Daytona Pacifica and the Chrysler Conquest.
Most vehicles carry rebates between the two extremes.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There was a moment, a mood, when I felt we were broken.
But the mood is changing; people are coming back.
Wives are listening to the radio, and telling their husbands: 'You cannot leave them alone.
Go back, go back.' ''  Lech Walesa, addressing strikers in Gdansk.  [ A10:1. ]


Ford's New Hiring Is First Since 70's
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it was hiring new hourly workers at several United States plants for the first time in a decade.
A spokesman, Tom Foote, said Ford had a ''smattering of new hires'' at plants in Plymouth, Wixom and Milan, Mich., and in St.
Paul.
He said the auto maker was running out of laid-off workers who have first rights to any jobs that become available.


Fetisov Gets a Go-Ahead
LEAD: Vyacheslav Fetisov, perhaps the world's best hockey defenseman, has reportedly received permission from the Soviet national hockey coach, Viktor Tikhonov, to play in the National Hockey League.


Flamemaster Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flamemaster Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,401,179
1,423,643
Net inc
91,507
117,200
Share earns
.06
.08
6mo rev
2,454,979
2,745,333
Net inc
116,370
191,522
Share earns
.07
.12


Final Test Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Final Test Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
807,510
1,133,410
Net loss
182,612
b123,840
Yr rev
4,413,231
4,618,231
Net loss
205,011
c124,872
Share earns
-
.06
b-After a loss on a reversal of tax credit of $54,081.


Metro Mobile reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Mobile (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,695,000
3,764,000
Net loss
b3,712,000
4,405,000
6mo rev
20,918,000
7,077,000
Net loss
11,059,000
10,037,000
b-Includes a gain of $2,734,000 from the reversal of unrealized losses on marketable securities recorded in the quarter ended Dec.


Ferrofluidics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ferrofluidics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,896,000
9,776,000
Net inc
1,039,000
675,000
Share earns
.07
.05
9mo sales
20,023,000
27,900,000
Net inc
2,711,000
b1,184,000
Share earns
.19
.09


Defending Champion
LEAD: Mats Wilander of Sweden in his match yesterday against Francesco Cancellotti of Italy in the first round of the Italian Open.
Wilander, the defending champion, won, 7-6, 6-1.
Martin Jaite of Argentina, last year's runner-up, lost to Thomas Muster of Austria, 6-2, 6-1. (Reuters)


West Virginia Contests Put Presidential Bids in Shadow
LEAD: There is no mistaking the season in Boone County, a coal-mining community just south of here where politics is practiced with gusto.


RJR Nabisco Trims List Of Agencies
LEAD: RJR NABISCO, one of the nation's leading advertisers, has consolidated its accounts at five agencies, from seven, with most of the cookie, confection and food business going to its tobacco agencies.


Treasury Chief Presses Bush Themes
LEAD: Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d, a close but informal adviser to Vice President Bush, urged serious consideration today of proposals to prolong the school year and to let people work as long as they like before retiring.


INSIDE
LEAD:  White House Stars Cross  Nancy Reagan will continue to consult her astrologer, but no one has to read the stars to know why the White House is angry at Donald T. Regan.


Continuing Care Associates Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continuing Care Associates Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,283,000
3,124,000
Net loss
3,452,000
b60,000
Share earns
-
.04
Yr rev
18,390,000
9,802,000
Net loss
3,630,000
b94,000
Share earns
-
.06


General American Investors Co reports earnings for As of March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General American Investors Co (NYSE)
As of March 31
1988
1987
Assets
307,309,269
369,789,926
Share earns
18.04
22.75
Assets represent net assets.
The figure for March 31 is after capital gains distributions of $1.33 a share paid in December and 21 cents a share paid in February, and after income dividends of 34 cents a share paid in December and 1 cent a share paid in February.


Ashton-Tate Account To Foote, Cone Office
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Company, an eight-year-old software concern based in Torrance, Calif., has tapped Foote, Cone &amp; Belding/Los Angeles to handle its advertising, budgeted at $8 million.


Badger Meter Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Badger Meter Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,147,000
16,579,000
Net inc
476,000
448,000
Share earns
.32
.30


Laurentian Capital Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laurentian Capital Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b1,174,000
c510,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-After a capital gain of $461,000.
c-Net income and after a capital gain of $784,000.


Computer Task Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Task Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
50,390,000
39,328,000
Net inc
1,657,000
1,443,000
Share earns
.21
.19


Cyberoptics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyberoptics Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
430,941
348,605
Net inc
34,370
37,369
Share earns
.01
.02


Yanks May Hire A Guard for Martin
LEAD: George Steinbrenner said yesterday that he was giving thought to providing Billy Martin with a full-time bodyguard on road trips, although he said his first concern was Martin's judgment.
Steinbrenner questioned Martin's decision to patronize a topless bar, where the Yankee manager reported being beaten last weekend in Arlington,


Talking Business with Vasey of Merrill Lynch; New Creativity In Underwriting
LEAD: After the stock market collapse in October, financing flowing from Wall Street to American corporations began to dry up.
Although the underwriting business had a sharp rebound in the first quarter of this year - jumping 58 percent from the previous quarter - the results still lagged behind the heady days before the market collapse.


Carver Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carver Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,322,000
5,111,000
Net loss
287,000
b264,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


Callahan Mining Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Callahan Mining Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,377,000
9,187,000
Net loss
399,000
b646,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income


General Mills To Pick Bids For 2 Units
LEAD: Within the next week, General Mills Inc. will select the successful bidder or bidders for its two retailing divisions and concentrate its attention, for the first time in years, on its basic businesses of manufacturing cereal and operating restaurants.


Our Towns; Policing Odors With Fervor In 3,000 Malls
LEAD: Whoever is in charge is making a mess of this spring, but Sure Air Ltd. is doing its best to keep weather condtions inside the malls lovely.
Seven days a week, 24 hours a day, the company's 50 employees work the phones here, analyzing heating, air-conditioning, plumbing and electrical emergencies for 25,000 stores in 3,000 malls across this great nation.


Philip Morris Offers 9% Issue
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies is offering $350 million of 9 percent notes due in 1998 at a price of 99.50 to yield 9.11 percent through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


U.S. JURY CONVICTS 4 IN A FATAL SIEGE
LEAD: A Federal jury today found four members of a polygamist clan guilty of 21 of 23 counts stemming from the bombing of a Mormon chapel and a 13-day standoff with the police that left an officer dead.


High Plains Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* High Plains Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,222,221
2,975,737
Net inc
b541,278
c990,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo sales
13,725,095
8,452,167
Net inc
b7,087,420
c3,404,321
Share earns
.58
-
b-After extraordinary gains of $202,400 for the quarter and $2,650,700 for the 9 months from tax loss carryforwards; the 9 months also included an extraordinary gain of $3,515,489 from debt restructuring.


Cup Challenge Rejected
LEAD: Michael Fay of New Zealand has refused to accept an Australian bid to compete in a sail-off to decide the challenger for the America's Cup.
Fay maintained that a boat planned by Iain Murray of Sydney, a former cup helmsman, was of a completely different type than his boat.


Uniforce Temporary Personel reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Uniforce Temporary Personel
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
20,063,848
16,047,146
Net inc
638,414
518,153
Share earns
.14
.11


Joule Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Joule Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 25
1988
1987
Revenue
8,918,000
8,245,000
Net inc
120,000
558,000
Share earns
.03
.15
6mo rev
17,849,000
16,045,000
Net inc
b1,218,000
933,000
Share earns
.33
.25
b-After a gain of $700,000 from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle.


Owen Epstein, Lawyer, 36
LEAD: Owen Epstein, a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Meibach &amp; Epstein, died of a brain tumor Saturday at New York University Medical Center, said Martha Katz, a spokeswoman for the firm.
He was 36 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Review/Concert; Chamber Group and Cello
LEAD: Gerard Schwarz and the New York Chamber Symphony began Sunday afternoon's concert at the 92d Street Y by doing a service for a work most of us have underestimated, Aaron Copland's ''Dance Panels'' of 1959 (revised 1962).
One thing about Mr.
Copland's music: you can always recognize it.
The man has a true style and a true voice, and this ''abstract'' ballet score - produced at a time when interest in the composer was distinctly waning and largely neglected -speaks authentically.


Review/Cabaret; A Torch for Harold Arlen
LEAD: Jill Corey is a singer who stretches songs to their emotional breaking point but stops just short of turning heartbreak into histrionics.
Miss Corey, who opened a two-week engagement singing an all-Harold Arlen program at Danny's Skylight Lounge (346 West 46th Street) last Thursday, is nothing at all like the perky ingenue who arrived on the pop scene in the mid-1950's chirping trivial novelties like ''I Love My Baby (My Baby Loves Me).


Restroom Inequity: Evidence and Solution
LEAD: AS any woman who has tried to use restrooms in airports, movie houses and theaters knows all too well, men's and women's lavatories are not allocated according to need and use patterns.
Now, a Cornell engineering student has carefully documented this inequity and developed a computer program to help future designers prevent the lines outside women's rooms.


Olympic Notebook; Korean-American Worries About Site
LEAD: Insook Bhushan, America's best female table tennis player, is uncomfortable about competing in the Seoul Olympics this year.
But unlike other athletes, who have expressed concern about North Korea and terrorism, she is worried about South Korea and nationalism.


Susan Steele Brown, Volunteer Worker, 68
LEAD: Susan Steele Brown, who did volunteer work for the Junior League of Bronxville, N.Y., for more than 25 years and was the wife of Robert U. Brown, president and editor of Editor &amp; Publisher magazine, died of cardiac arrest May 2 at the couple's Manhattan apartment.
She was 68 years old and also lived in Greenwich,


Fairmount Chemical Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fairmount Chemical Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,985,400
1,797,600
Net loss
153,700
260,600


Big Board System Cited
LEAD: A senior executive of Salomon Brothers Inc. said today that the New York Stock Exchange should close its computer system that permits rapid arbitrage between stock and futures markets.


Darman Foresees No Return of Fixed Exchange Rates
LEAD: Richard G. Darman, the former Deputy Treasury Secretary who shaped much of the Administration's current dollar policy, said today that he sees little likelihood that countries will return to the old system of rigidly fixed exchange rates.


Workers Don't Have 'Parachutes,' Mr. President; What Trade Reform?
LEAD:  To the Editor: A news story on the trade bill (April 29) concludes that ''the United States has signed on to the notion of defending fledgling and foundering industries.''


Music Noted in Brief; Sevgi Tekin on Piano
LEAD: Sevgi Tekin found her stride part way through the first movement of Schumann's big G minor piano sonata Saturday afternoon at Weill Recital Hall, and what had begun as a well-schooled reading took on some momentum and inner rhythmic life.
Miss Tekin, a native of Turkey who came to America following her graduation from the State Conservatory in Ankara five years ago, has a crisp, precise technique; she does not employ much variety of touch or color, but the mechanical challenges of Ravel's '


Astrotech International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astrotech International (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b22,000
c1,547,000
6mo net inc
1,679,000
c2,250,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Included a tax credit of $360,000.
c-Net loss  Preferred dividend requirements exceeded net income in the latest second quarter.


Grubb &amp; Ellis Realty Income Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grubb &amp; Ellis Realty Income Trust (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
536,000
540,000
Share earns
.19
.20


Green Mountain Power Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Green Mountain Power Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
37,043,000
35,262,000
Net inc
4,325,000
3,988,000
Share earns
1.15
1.01


Mohasco Accepts Bid Valued at $507 Million
LEAD: The Mohasco Corporation, a manufacturer and distributor of carpeting and furniture, announced yesterday that it had agreed to a takeover by the MHS Holdings Corporation in a deal valued at more than $507 million.


Pancretec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pancretec Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,667,955
769,228
Net inc
141,647
b223,424
Share earns
.06
-
9mo sales
4,035,649
2,018,834
Net inc
52,630
b677,380
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Puerto Rican Cement Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puerto Rican Cement Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,211,000
18,086,000
Net inc
3,718,000
1,998,000
Share earns
1.90
1.01
Shares outst
1,958,400
1,981,400
Corrected from Thursday, May 5, editions.


Cyprus Unit's Sale
LEAD: English China Clays P.L.C. said a conditional agreement had been reached for the $74.25 million purchase of the calcium carbonate business of the Cyprus Mines Corporation, a subsidiary of the Cyprus Mineral Company, which is based in Englewood, Colo.
Cyprus produces a range of fine-ground marble products.


U.S. Hostage Is Said to Fear a Rescue Effort
LEAD: The greatest fear felt by Terry A. Anderson, one of nine Americans held hostage in Lebanon, is that commandos will attack his captors, an action that would lead to his death, a Frenchman who shared a cell with Mr.
Anderson said today.


New Theories on Early Europe Cite Migration, not Conquest
LEAD: WORKING independently and using analytical techniques that challenge widely accepted methods, scholars in Britain and the Soviet Union are suggesting a new starting time and place for one of the most mysterious and important events of antiquity: the spread of Indo-European language and culture across a vast area from the Ganges to


Identifying Crime Suspects
LEAD: False identifications in police lineups could be reduced by as much as 50 percent if witnesses viewed the possible suspects one at a time instead of all at once, according to a new study.


Unigene Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unigene Laboratories
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
169,000
311,000
Net loss
369,000
320,000


Reagan Endorsement of Bush Expected
LEAD: Having adhered to his vow to remain neutral in the Republican Presidential campaign as long as the nominee was in doubt, President Reagan is expected to endorse Vice President Bush on Wednesday.


Soviet Bloc Writers Clash at a Conference
LEAD: A dramatic confrontation between writers from Central and Eastern Europe and those from the Soviet Union startled an international literary conference that ended here today.


United Savings &amp; Loan Association reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Savings &amp; Loan Association
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
770,000
452,000
Per share
.38
-
Yr net inc
3,480,000
2,708,000
Per share
1.71
-
Comparable fourth quarter and year share earnings are not available; the company went public April 2, 1987.


Devils' Coach Finds Support
LEAD: Coach Jim Schoenfeld of the Devils did not feel exonerated today when the National Hockey League rescinded his suspension.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  HORSE RACING  Catch the Moon Captures Kingston: Catch the Moon came from far back in the field of 14 to gain a half-length victory yesterday in Aqueduct's closing day feature, the $128,600 Kingston Handicap for New York-breds 3 years old and up.
Wanderkin, the favorite, led in midstretch, but failed to last.


A Trading Halt Won't Calm the Market
LEAD:  To the Editor: Closing down the New York Stock Exchange to ''calm the market'' after a threshold of turbulent trading is crossed would be like restoring depositors' confidence by closing down the banks.
Anyone who does not find it immediately obvious that such actions would make both investors and depositors rush for their cash need only recall Stephen


Charles Pollock, Abstract Painter And Brother of Jackson, Dies at 86
LEAD: Charles Pollock, a distinguished painter and teacher and the oldest brother of Jackson Pollock, died of complications following a stroke Sunday in Paris.
He was 86 years old.


Yankee Cos reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Yankee Cos (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,752,000
4,202,000
Net inc
b13,545,000
c17,637,000
Share earns
1.37
-
9mo rev
14,495,000
12,413,000
Net inc
b8,099,000
c24,153,000
Share earns
1.46
-


Scientists Identify 'Gate' in Brain as Crucial to Memory
LEAD: ABOUT 10 years ago, in the early morning hours after a coronary bypass operation, a retired California postal worker suffered a sudden loss of blood to his brain.
Although he survived with most of his faculties intact, the patient - known in the annals of neurology as R. B. - lost his ability to form memories.


Koch Plans Cuts For Sanitation, Fire and Police
LEAD: In a budget that could have implications for the mayoral election next year, Mayor Koch proposed a spending plan yesterday that would reduce the number of police officers, firefighters and sanitation workers but increase the number of employees in social services and education.


Old Burial Site to Remain Intact Under a New Federal Policy
LEAD: An 18th-century graveyard on the grounds of a new United States Forest Service campground will be left intact because of a trial policy adopted this year to recognize the religious views of American Indians.


Academy Insurance Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Academy Insurance Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
28,811,000
29,363,000
Net inc
b2,030,000
b1,421,000
Share earns
.03
.02
Shares outst
71,861,000
69,934,000
b-Includes tax loss carryforwards of $642,000 for the latest quarter and $568,000 for the year-earlier period.


Cheever's Widow Suing to Stop Publication of Story Collection
LEAD: Mary W. Cheever, the widow of John Cheever and the executor of his estate, said she would file suit this week in both Federal District Court and State Supreme Court in Manhattan to keep a small Chicago publishing house from bringing out ''The Uncollected Short Stories of John Cheever'' in September.


Cadnetix Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cadnetix Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,749,000
12,050,000
Net inc
1,753,000
1,715,000
Share earns
.13
.12
9mo sales
45,893,000
32,771,000
Net inc
b6,345,000
4,379,000
Share earns
.46
.32


American Fructose Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Fructose Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
31,076,000
27,753,000
Net inc
1,096,000
1,454,000
Share earns
.11
.14


Ventrex Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ventrex Laboratories Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,195,000
2,739,000
Net inc
197,000
b972,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
6,316,000
5,840,000
Net inc
250,000
b1,425,000
Share earns
.02
-


Children's Discovery Centers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Children's Discovery Centers
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,450,000
2,789,000
Net inc
104,000
32,000
Share earns
.03
.01
Shares outst
4,162,000
2,783,000


Saztec International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Saztec International
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,664,326
1,742,818
Net inc
101,857
142,359
Share earns
.03
.05
9mo rev
5,797,249
3,981,213
Net loss
938,777
b18,238
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


Confusion Reigns In Hockey Fiasco
LEAD: IN the confusion of a Stanley Cup playoff game where the National Hockey League's own president could not be reached and the fill-in linesmen were wearing yellow warm-up jerseys, SportsChannel worked hard Sunday night to bring sanity to the craziness.
At the end, though, the overall effect was that their announcers mirrored the confusion.


Technology Development Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technology Development Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,029,000
4,417,000
Net inc
180,000
152,000
Share earns
.09
.09


Clemens Strikes Again
LEAD: Roger Clemens pitched a three-hitter tonight, striking out 16 and retiring 24 in a row at one point, as the Boston Red Sox beat Mark Gubicza and the Kansas City Royals, 2-0.


G.M. and Toyota Join in Australia
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation and the Toyota Motor Corporation have signed agreements to join forces in Australia.
The Australian divisions of the Japanese and United States giants will share several models to be sold under their brands - a move forced by the Government's decision to restructure the country's auto industry.


Tennis Notebook; European Swing A Break for Agassi
LEAD: From the Italian Open this week through the men's singles final at Wimbledon on July 3, the focus of tennis will be in Europe.
And that may be the best thing that could happen to Andre Agassi.
There will undoubtedly be many more Americans jumping on the 18-year-old's bandwagon after he followed his victory in the United States clay-court championships with one in the Eagle Tournament of Champions at Forest Hills on


Corrections
LEAD: Articles on Sunday and in some editions on Monday about a 1985 meeting between Vice President Bush and the Ambassador to Panama gave part of the Ambassador's name incorrectly.


Music Noted in Brief; Sounds of South Africa
LEAD: Malombo, a South African trio led by Philip Tabane on guitar, finds worlds of music within the simplest structures.
Most of the pieces Malombo played Friday night at Greenwich House would set a handful of chords and a melodic phrase or two over quasi-traditional rhythms from the Venda people of northern South Africa; Oupa Monareng played a set of standing drums and Raymond Phale added rattles, bells and other percussion.


Diversco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversco Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,409,121
8,471,461
Net inc
259,109
b163,040
Share earns
.18
.21
Shares outst
1,379,402
768,672
Yr rev
34,268,678
32,431,816
Net inc
1,005,410
b761,905
Share earns
.73
.99


Talks on Park End
LEAD: Owners of the Chicago White Sox and representatives of the Illinois Sports Facilities Authority broke off negotiations yesterday without reaching agreement on a new stadium for the team.
Vincent Petrini, a spokesman for deputy Gov.
James Reilly, said the state had asked the White Sox owners, Jerry Reinsdorf and Eddie Einhorn, to put their negotiations with St.


Typing for Adults
LEAD: IF you've ever wondered why the names of so many computer products use nonstandard capitalization or punctuation, like WordStar, Compute! and dBASE, now we have an answer.
It's a conspiracy to improve our typing skills.


Phone Services To Tromson
LEAD: Tromson Monroe Advertising, a longtime specialist in travel advertising, has become the agency for Calaber Communications' Calaber Telecommunications Network.


Diamond-Star Output
LEAD: Diamond-Star Motors will begin production of its new sports coupe in the first week of September, two months ahead of schedule, officials said today.
Construction at the new $650 million Diamond-Star plant - a joint venture of the Chrysler Corporation and Mitsubishi Motors - was completed several months early, the company said.


Quake Looms Off Alaska
LEAD: Within 20 years a very large earthquake, rated magnitude 8.3 to 8.5 on the Richter scale of energy release, is likely to occur in a zone 125 to 150 miles long in the Shumagin Islands south of the Alaska Peninsula, according to scientists at Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory.


Review/Music; San Francisco Virtuosi's French Flavor
LEAD: Merkin Concert Hall became a curious geographical crossroads on Sunday afternoon - two Soviet emigres from San Francisco joining a New Yorker in music of late 19th- and 20th-century France.
Those worrying whether Igor Shochetman (piano) and Leo Igudesman (violin) would bury French style under dour Soviet determination had only intermittent cause.


Rolls-Royce U.S. Sales
LEAD: Rolls-Royce P.L.C. said today that United States sales of its Rolls-Royce and Bentley luxury cars jumped 6.4 percent in the first four months of the year.
The British company's American subsidiary said it had sold 349 cars in the United States, up from 328 in the corresponding period a year ago.


Pantasote Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pantasote Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
40,320,000
-
Net inc
1,291,000
-
Share earns
.32
-
Year-ago results are not comparable since the company changed in 1988 from 13 reporting periods to 12 month- end periods.


Flow General Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flow General Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
61,675,000
52,246,000
Net inc
1,734,000
b799,000
Share earns
.20
-
9mo rev
174,423,000
149,012,000
Net inc
3,275,000
b699,000
Share earns
.37
-


Picturetel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Picturetel Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,196,077
844,402
Net loss
1,460,907
1,017,035


U.S. Cigarette Makers Gain in Asia
LEAD: The Marlboro cowboy in his white hat, cigarette dangling from his mouth, has come to town.
His picture adorns kiosks and mom-and-pop stores throughout this city, next to posters of a man wearing jeans, playing a guitar and smoking a Winston.


Rayonier Timberlands reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rayonier Timberlands (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
23,457,000
21,216,000
Net inc
17,237,000
14,649,000
Share earns
.85
.66


U.S. Banks' Global Role
LEAD: Robert Heller, a Federal Reserve Board governor, is urging United States banks to reverse a trend of shrinking their activities in international markets.


China to Issue 100-Yuan Bills
LEAD: China will issue larger denomination bank notes, overcoming an eight-year fear of fueling inflation.


Maputo Journal: In Marx's Garden: Atheism Wilts, Faith Blooms
LEAD: At the corner of Vladimir Lenin and Mao Zedong Avenues, hundreds of Mozambican students swarmed noisily out of classes, happy to be out in the sunshine after an afternoon spent memorizing a universal doctrine.


Athletics Capture Their 14th Straight
LEAD: Jose Canseco hit his league-leading ninth home run and Bob Welch allowed four hits in eight-plus innings tonight as the Oakland Athletics beat the Detroit Tigers, 3-1, to extend their winning streak to 14 games, the longest in the major leagues in 11 years.


General Employment Enterrises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Employment Enterrises Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,718,500
3,245,275
Net loss
76,992
188,443
6mo rev
7,211,788
6,828,472
Net loss
148,388
113,751


Syria Warns That It Will Act to Quell Beirut Strife
LEAD: A Syrian military leader warned today that his country is determined to stop the fighting as battles in Beirut's southern suburbs entered a fourth day.


Western Publishing's Talks With G.&amp;W. Have Ended
LEAD: Gulf and Western Inc. and Western Publishing Group Inc. said yesterday that they had ended talks about a possible takeover of Western Publishing, a children's book publisher and commercial printer.


Anti-Apartheid Paper Fights Government for Its Right to Fight
LEAD: A liberal weekly newspaper that has consistently challenged the white-run South African Government is fighting for its life.


Land of Lincoln Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Land of Lincoln Savings &amp; Loan (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,506,000
1,778,000
Share earns
.45
.54
9mo net inc
2,991,000
6,714,000
Share earns
.90
2.05


La Quinta Realty reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* La Quinta Realty
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,516,000
8,329,000
Net loss
369,000
b207,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income  Year-ago share earnings are in cents a unit.


XL-Datacomp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* XL-Datacomp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
53,238,000
39,284,000
Net inc
2,530,000
1,439,000
Share earns
.36
.21
6mo rev
101,811,000
72,512,000
Net inc
5,007,000
1,246,000
Share earns
.71
.18


Edward van Westerborg, Publisher, 88
LEAD: Edward van Westerborg, the founding publisher of Facts on File, died Saturday at his home in Walnut Creek, Calif., after suffering from cancer.
He was 88 years old.


Careers; High Grades A Corporate Fetish, Still
LEAD: ''WE want only the best and the brightest.'' This has become a cliche whenever corporate personnel directors look for new graduates with a bachelor's or master's degree.


Warner in Deal to Acquire Lorimar
LEAD: After several months of on-again, off-again negotiations, Warner Communications Inc. yesterday agreed to acquire the Lorimar-Telepictures Corporation, the movie and television studio, in a stock transaction valued at $1.2 billion.


Placer Dome reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Placer Dome (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
217,500,000
201,900,000
Net inc
b39,600,000
b40,400,000
Share earns
.18
.19
b-Includes special gains of $500,000 and $17,800,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


Image of a Senator: D'Amato Sticks to Local Interests
LEAD: Two years into his second term, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, confident, brash and popular, appears to be redefining what it means to be a New York Senator.


Consolidated Oil &amp; Gas Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Oil &amp; Gas Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
4,208,000
4,558,000
Net inc
b4,926,000
c1,508,000
Share earns
.65
-
b-Includes a gain of $8,922,000 from a judgment awarded in a 1985 lawsuit.


Official New York Stands in the Way of Upgrading 42d Street
LEAD: To the Editor:


Consolidated Capital Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Capital Realty (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Net inc
b4,224,00
c1,826,000
Share earns
.71
.31
b-Included a gain of $4,906,000 on the sale of property.
c-Included an extraordinary loss of $579,000 and a gain of $1,336,000 on the sale of property.


Sentence in Freeway Killing
LEAD: A motorist convicted of firing on a pickup truck in one of several highway shootings in the Los Angeles area last summer was sentenced Monday to serve up to life in prison for murder.
The man, Ronald Elam, 28 years old, was sentenced by Superior Court Judge Madge Watai in connection with the death of Debbie Ann Scott.


Impresario Is Back in Moscow, for Now
LEAD: One of the most prominent Soviet cultural figures forced into exile for challenging artistic orthodoxy has returned to Moscow this week to help stage a play at the theater he founded.


Old Novel Returns to Haunt a Current Musical
LEAD: It began as the case of the ''Phantom'' author and the phantom author; it has become a battle of words over the words ''inspired by'' and ''based on'' - over which ones are appropriate to describe the novelist Gaston Leroux's contribution to the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical version of Mr.
Leroux's ''Phantom of the Opera.


Irving Berlin, Still on the Charts
LEAD: ''Blue Skies'' was a show-stopper when Belle Baker first sang it in the musical ''Betsy'' in 1926.
Al Jolson kept it going in ''The Jazz Singer.'' In 1941, a Tommy Dorsey recording made it No. 1 on the Hit Parade.
Fritz Kreisler, the concert violinist, recorded it.
The comedienne Beatrice Lillie did, too.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  BALTIMORE (AL) - Activated Don Aase, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Released Tito Landrum, outfielder.
SEATTLE (AL) - Called up Edgar Martinez, infielder, from Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
Placed Mario Diaz, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
PHOENIX (PCL) - Announced the retirement of Ed Lynch, pitcher.


CRIMINAL INQUIRY IS SOUGHT ON DRUG
LEAD: A Congressman said today that he would ask the Justice Department to investigate whether a drug company delayed giving the Government information about a sedative linked to at least 36 deaths.


Mercury General Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercury General Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b5,345,000
b4,002,000
Share earns
.40
.30
b-Includes realized investment gains of $84,000 and $18,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


U S West Loses Case On Pricing
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that U S West Inc., the Denver-based regional telephone company, had engaged in discriminatory pricing to win contracts to provide the Government with computerized switching service for the Federal phone system.


Police Evidence Counters Martin's Story; Yankees 17 White Sox 3
LEAD: At 8:36 P.M., in the third inning of the Yankees' 32d game, on the third pitch of his 125th time at bat, Don Mattingly hit a home run last night.
Finally.
Ordinarily, a Mattingly home run would be nothing unusual.
He had, after all, hit 123 home runs in his first five seasons, including 96 in the last three.


The I.N.F. Treaty: Moscow's Move
LEAD: A thicket of problems suddenly threatens the U.S.-Soviet pact to withdraw medium-range nuclear missiles from Europe.
The pact, a centerpiece of Reagan Administration diplomacy, may die in the Senate if the latest dispute cannot be resolved by Secretary of State Shultz and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze in


Bruins Stand Out as Lamoriello Stands In for Devils
LEAD: With Coach Jim Schoenfeld, their spiritual leader, missing from his customary position behind the bench, the Devils didn't have a prayer against the Bruins.


Chester Schwimmer, Ex-G.O.P. Leader, 75
LEAD: Chester Schwimmer, a former leader of the Queens Republican Party, died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease, today at Deepdale Hospital in Queens.
He was 75 years old and lived in Freeport, L.I.


Among Records, A Record Holder
LEAD: IT was a sweltering day in the Peruvian jungle last year when Ashrita Furman jumped into the Amazon River with his pogo stick and made history.
Unperturbed by reports of piranhas nearby, for 3 hours and 40 minutes he bounced from the river's clay bottom to its surface, eight feet above, setting a world record in aqua pogo.


Lear Petroleum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lear Petroleum Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
44,221,206
62,732,678
Net loss
5,989,579
b1,135,564
b-After an extraordinary loss of $1.1 million attributable to the early extinguishment of debt.


The Fine Art of Hollywood Fund Raising
LEAD: In Hollywood, fund-raising dinners are incessant and interminable.
There are at least 40 chances a year to honor some worthy actor, producer or studio head and to raise money for some worthy charity or solemn organization usually referred to by its initials.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 6
April 29
May 8
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
7.2
6.8
Distillate production, daily
2.7
2.9
2.4
Gasoline stocks
226.6
229.6
238.3
Distillate stocks
93.9
94.6
97.6
Crude imports, daily
5.3
4.2
4.2
Product imports, daily
1.4
2.1
1.3
Crude stocks
359.7
356.2
329.3
Crude production, daily
8.2
8.2
8.4
Refinery utilization (%)
84.4
83.8
79.0


Beverly Sills to Retire
LEAD: The general director of the New York City Opera is retiring to become president of the board.
Page C17. (NYT/John Sotomayor)


Edgcomb Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Edgcomb Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
157,330,000
140,270,000
Net inc
3,522,000
b2,211,000
Share earns
.27
.16
b-Includes a gain of $1,637,000 from an accounting change.
The company said the latest first- quarter earnings improvement was because of improved selling prices in all major product groupings and resultant improved gross profit margins, which increased to 25.3 percent after a LIFO charge of $1,500,000 from 23.6 percent in the year-ago first quarter.


Burger King Investors reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burger King Investors (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,299,162
2,320,983
Net inc
1,265,613
1,247,093
Share earns
.27
.27
Share earnings are in cents a unit.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Secret Law?
LEAD: Writing laws is something that Congressional committees almost always do in open session.
An exception is occurring this month as the House Ways and Means and Senate Finance committees are meeting with Reagan Administration officials to draft legislation to carry out the Canadian Free Trade Agreement, which both governments signed last January.


Do Real Women Ride Motorcycles? 440,000 Say Yes
LEAD: THEY'VE heard it before from mothers, friends, brothers and opinionated others: ''Proper ladies don't ride on the backs of motorcycles.''


Levitt Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Levitt Corporation (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,624,000
18,992,000
Net inc
203,000
283,000
Share earns
.06
.08


Dollar Falls as Gold Rises; Pound Continues to Climb
LEAD: The dollar weakened in relation to other major foreign currencies in quiet trading yesterday as the British pound continued to climb.


Douglas &amp; Lomason Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Douglas &amp; Lomason Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
84,557,539
75,550,537
Net inc
b1,896,266
1,599,330
Share earns
.92
.83
b-After an accounting change that increased net earnings by $660,000, or 32 cents a share.


Bhopal Issue Of Sabotage
LEAD: A report from a consulting firm hired by the Union Carbide Corporation said today that sabotage by a disgruntled employee, not negligence, had caused the deadly gas leak at a subsidiary's plant in Bhopal, India.


Ford's Probe Gets Fast Start
LEAD: The sporty 1989 Ford Probe, built for the Ford Motor Company by its Japanese partner, the Mazda Motor Company, will make its debut this week with enough advance orders to fill production schedules until October, Ford officials said today.


Sharpton Arrested in Queens on Warrant Stemming From Court Walkout Last Week
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton, a minister active in racial issues, was arrested in a Queens courthouse yesterday for having walked out of a Brooklyn courthouse last week during a hearing on charges stemming from a civil-disobedience demonstration.


The Taking of Car No. 4776: Homeless Men Find a Haven
LEAD: The Grand Street Shuttle pulled into the station at its last stop late yesterday morning, but none of the passengers in subway car No. 4776 got off.
Nine men lay sprawled on the seats on this particular five-minute trip from West Fourth Street, and nine went back, slumped and ragged, in postures of exhaustion or intoxication.


Latest Israeli Weapon: Bureaucracy
LEAD: Thousands of Palestinians grumbled and sweated, but most seemed resigned as they stood in long, slow-moving lines today to comply with the Israeli Army's order that they obtain new identity cards.


Elusive Liver-Disease Virus Is Isolated, Researchers Say
LEAD: Scientists at a California biotechnology company said today that they had isolated an elusive virus that causes liver disease in thousands of people who undergo blood transfusions each year.


Havana Journal; The Castro Report Card: 'Shows Improvement'
LEAD: A little more than a year and a half ago, when Elizardo Sanchez made the mistake of talking to two foreign journalists about human rights in Cuba, he was taken off to jail.
The reporters were expelled.


Data Measurement Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Measurement Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,536,361
2,308,108
Net inc
100,522
169,930
Share earns
.08
.20
Shares outst
1,233,437
859,868


First Boston In Talks on Swiss Unit
LEAD: First Boston Inc. announced yesterday that it is holding talks with Credit Suisse about a restructuring of the ownership of their jointly held European unit, Financiere Credit Suisse-First Boston.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Imagine if you didn't see your family for years.
Imagine your love for them, for the streets, the house you grew up in, the place you were born in and grew up in.
That's exactly what I feel and it's always painful to talk about it.''  - Yuri Lyubimov, the exiled Soviet director, on returning to Moscow.


Budd Goes Back To South Africa
LEAD: Zola Budd, the South African-born runner who had jeopardized Britain's participation in the Seoul Olympics, returned to South Africa suddenly today, effectively ending her chances for participation in the 1988 Games and possibly ending her career.


BLACKS HOLD SIT-IN ON HARVARD HIRING
LEAD: About 50 black students at the Harvard Law School occupied the dean's outer office today, demanding increased efforts to recruit faculty members who are women or from minority groups.


Another Suspension For Devils Coach, This Time for Real
LEAD: Jim Schoenfeld, the embattled New Jersey Devils coach whose on-again, off-again suspension after an altercation with a referee last Friday has overshadowed his team's pursuit of the Stanley Cup, finally had his say this afternoon.


Gorbachev Asks Editors to End Perestroika Debate
LEAD: Warning of confusion and divisiveness reaching into the highest levels of the Communist Party, Mikhail S. Gorbachev has called on Soviet editors to temper the bitter crossfire in the press over his program of political and social change.


Endevco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Endevco Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
659,000
163,000
Share earns
.09
.03


Citicorp Rates At an '88 High
LEAD: Interest rates rose moderately yesterday at Citicorp's weekly auction of commercial paper.
It marked the second consecutive rise in rates in as many weeks and produced the highest average rates thus far this year.


FHP International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FHP International Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
135,805,000
94,177,000
Net inc
4,164,000
2,840,000
Share earns
.41
.23
Shares outst
10,280,000
12,618,000
9mo rev
358,382,000
269,757,000
Net inc
10,398,000
8,685,000
Share earns
.88
.70
Shares outst
11,790,000
12,471,000


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Allied-Signal Inc., Morris Township, N.J., the aerospace, electronics and engineering company, appointed John W. Barter senior vice president for planning and finance.
He will succeed Donald R. Kayser as chief financial officer when Mr.
Kayser takes early retirement on July 1.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Becker Upset in Rome: Thierry Tulasne of France, ranked 67th in the world, defeated third-seeded Boris Becker of West Germany, 6-4, 7-6, yesterday in a first-round match of the Italian Open.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly


INSIDE
LEAD:  New Premier for France


Advance Reported in Superconducting Fibers
LEAD: Stanford University scientists have developed tiny superconducting fibers that can carry fairly large electrical currents, a development that is another small step toward the commercialization of the new materials that conduct electricity with no loss to resistance.


Finevest Foods reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Finevest Foods
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
159,335,000
121,405,000
Net inc
1,143,000
472,000
Share earns
.17
.07


Handy &amp; Harman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Handy &amp; Harman Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
165,462,000
141,519,000
Net inc
2,683,000
b4,265,000
Share earns
.19
.31
b-After a $2.8 million gain from adoption of FASB No. 96, which is accounting for income taxes.


ABOUT EDUCATION
LEAD: Speech is the basic skill overlooked by many who urge a return to the Three R's.
The ability to speak clearly and persuasively, and to think on one's feet, can be as vital to success as reading and writing.
Beginning with the job interview, speech classifies a person.


Swift Energy Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Swift Energy Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,449,782
2,358,810
Net inc
801,980
772,334
Share earns
.20
.20
Shares outst
4,031,000
3,949,000


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Comunications Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Comunications Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
91,823,000
71,875,000
Net inc
2,390,000
2,042,000
Share earns
.28
.24


Tanning Debate: Heavy vs. 'Healthy'
LEAD: DEEP, dark suntans are fading from fashionability because of the threat of skin cancer and the fear of wrinkles, according to a survey sponsored by a dermatologists' group.
But members of the suntan industry say that the bronze look is alive and well.


Official Says Arafat Ordered Attacks Against U.S.
LEAD: The United States has received reports that Yasir Arafat approved terrorist attacks on American targets in retaliation for the assassination of his top aide, a senior State Department official said today.
Mr.
Arafat denies the charge.
The official, Richard W. Murphy, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, said the United States sent messages through several Arab governments, including Saudi Arabia and Jordan, warning Mr.


Anthropologist, Retracing Steps After 3 Decades, Is Shocked by Change
LEAD: Clifford Geertz, the anthropologist, tells the story of visiting a family in a Javanese town in Indonesia recently when his hosts, remembering that a young American had attended the wedding of their daughter three decades before, showed him a photograph of that event.


St Ives Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St Ives Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
24,710,000
19,190,000
Net inc
1,306,000
1,188,000
Share earns
.19
.20
Shares outst
6,962,000
6,050,000


Democrats Prepare to Turn Attention to Jersey Primary
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson will begin campaigning in earnest for New Jersey's support at the state Democratic convention in South Orange on Sunday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Wednesday about the selection process for Vice Presidential nominees misstated a 1968 election result.
In that year Senator Edmund S. Muskie of Maine was the Democratic Vice Presidential candidate and the Democratic ticket indeed carried Maine.


Review/Dance; Ralph Lemon's Stories
LEAD: The idiotically entitled ''3-D'' series opened last night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street) with a performance by the Ralph Lemon Dance Company that suggested this two-week series, featuring 11 other companies, may be a serious contender in the current dance fray.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Public Service Electric and Gas Company, a unit of Public Service Enterprise Group Inc., is offering $200 million of first and refunding mortgage bonds with a four-year maturity through a group of underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, which won the account in competitive bidding yesterday.


Landmarks May Get New Rules
LEAD: Sweeping changes in the way New York City designates landmarks will be proposed today by the Koch administration, which says that its new system would increase protection of potential landmarks and give owners a more certain idea of their properties' status.


Mitterrand Selects Moderate Socialist as Prime Minister of France
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand today designated Michel Rocard, a moderate Socialist, as France's next Prime Minister, giving him the difficult mission of forming the first minority Government in the 30 years of the Fifth Republic.


Pre-Paid Legal Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pre-Paid Legal Services (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,984,000
11,822,000
Net inc
522,000
336,000
Share earns
.05
.04
Shares outst
10,732,000
9,442,000


Tylan Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tylan Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,473,000
5,231,000
Net inc
118,000
c3,121,000
Share earns
.06
-
9mo sales
18,368,000
18,120,000
Net inc
b860,000
cb7,977,000
Share earns
.42
-
b-Includes $476,000 of equity in income of joint venture, compared with a similar loss of $1,771,000 a year ago.


Zygo Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zygo Corporation
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,012,000
5,436,000
Net loss
384,000
315,000
9mo sales
15,340,000
14,659,000
Net loss
731,000
1,261,000


After Acclaim, The Controversy
LEAD: Zola Budd burst into international prominence in 1982 more as a curiosity than a prominent runner.
Here was this wisp of a teen-ager, barely 5 feet 4 inches and 95 pounds, who ran barefoot.


NATO Foes Lead in Cloudy Danish Vote
LEAD: An election that focused on Denmark's full participation in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization failed to produce a definitive answer today, but Prime Minister Poul Schluter asserted that the anti-NATO forces had been weakened.


Prosecutors Allowed to Fight Ruling on Jurors in Davis Trial
LEAD: The trial of Larry Davis was adjourned yesterday until Monday to allow the prosecution to appeal a judge's decision on jury selection.


Economic Scene; Soviet Reforms: A Need for Time
LEAD: HAS Mikhail Gorbachev fallen victim to his own brand of voodoo economics?
Few Western analysts ever believed Mr.
Gorbachev could meet his self-imposed goals for perestroika, restructuring a failing economic system, without even a temporary reduction in living standards.
And the latest evidence bears out their skepticism.


Reviving the Art And Ritual of Tea
LEAD: AMERICANS were tea drinkers before the Revolution.


Audi's Goal For Japan Set
LEAD: Volkswagen A.G.'s luxury car subsidiary, Audi A.G., said today that it plans a campaign to increase its Japanese sales.


CMI Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CMI Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
25,850,000
33,331,000
Net inc
b7,014,000
c1,540,000
Share earns
.51
-
b-Includes a tax benefit of $5,075,000.
c-Net loss


Richard B. Ogilvie Is Dead at 65; Illinois Governor From '68 to '72
LEAD: Richard B. Ogilvie, who served as Governor of Illinois from 1968 to 1972, died yesterday a day after suffering a heart attack and undergoing emergency bypass surgery at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 65 years old.


Soybeans Advance Again On Specter of Dry Summer
LEAD: Prices of soybean futures bounded higher for the fourth straight session yesterday, and analysts said an Agriculture Department forecast of a steep drop in the nation's stockpile would keep the rally from faltering.


5 Wall St. Firms Move to Restrict Program Trades
LEAD: In a move intended to restore investor confidence in the stock market, five large Wall Street firms announced yesterday that they had suspended computerized program trading for their own accounts.


Wainoco Oil Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wainoco Oil Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,580,000
9,251,000
Net inc
1,761,000
b20,180,000
Share earns
.09
1.63
b-Includes a gain from an accounting change of $18.8 million.
Year-ago earnings are restated for the accounting change.


Damon Creations Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Damon Creations Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,540,000
10,368,000
Net loss
866,000
b543,000
Share earns
-
.49
Yr sales
33,712,000
38,936,000
Net loss
2,660,000
781,000
b-Net income


2 IN FINANCE CLUB GIVEN LIFE TERMS
LEAD: Two members of a former social and business club in Los Angeles, the Billionaire Boys Club, were sentenced here today to life in prison without parole for the kidnapping and murder of the father of one of the defendants.


Equicor's President Moves Into Top Post
LEAD: William T. Hjorth has been named chief executive of Equicor, a joint health-care venture of the Hospital Corporation of America and the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States.


Bridge
LEAD: Most of the players in the Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs last weekend had enough of the card tables after two days of intense competition.
But some persevered Monday night in the Cavendish Charity Teams.


Eastpark Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastpark Realty Trust
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
432,000
537,000
Net inc
99,000
190,000
Share earns
.12
.22


Age of Sail Relived in Queens Park
LEAD: Junior and senior high school students, above, tending their boats at the Sail-In at Bowne Park in Queens.
John Biliski,below, 4 years old, is not quite in high school yet, but he went with his father, Michael, to watch.
A shiny trophy waited at the end of the pond for the master sailors. (NYT/Vic D


Wilfred American Educational reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wilfred American Educational (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,893,000
20,738,000
Net inc
392,000
74,000
Share earns
.04
.01


KEY DEMAND UNMET
LEAD: Workers at the big Lenin Shipyard here ended a nine-day strike tonight and grimly marched out of the yard behind a wooden cross and a portrait of Pope John Paul II.


Elcor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elcor Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
28,897,000
26,604,000
Net loss
2,513,000
b1,483,000
Share earns
-
.21
9mo net loss
1,011,000
b7,827,000
Share earns
-
1.11
b-Net income and includes losses from discontinued operations of $208,000 for the quarter and $619,000 for the 9 months, and tax credits of $695,000 and $3,638,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Schoenfeld Upset By League Decision
LEAD: Jim Schoenfeld left his disciplinary hearing after three hours, still uncertain of his coaching status, hustled to the visitors' locker room at Boston Garden to give his team the usual pre-game call to action.


Mexican Inflation Slows
LEAD: Prices in Mexico rose 3.1 percent in April, which was less than the 5.1 percent increase in March, the Banco de Mexico reported today.
Inflation in the 12 months ended April 30 was 161.3 percent, the central bank added.


Wine Talk
LEAD: THE Bordeaux wine trade, faced with a backlog of wine and mounting price resistance from American consumers and importers, is dropping prices for the 1987 vintage an average of 30 percent below 1986 vintage levels.


Liggett Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liggett Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
112,373,000
121,713,000
Net inc
5,341,000
1,204,000
Share earns
.22
.05
Yr sales
531,891,000
538,840,000
Net inc
30,688,000
20,150,000
Share earns
1.40
.92


Washington National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington National Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b6,832,000
b12,059,000
Share earns
.61
1.06
b-Includes investment gains of $1,252,000 and $6,752,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Seaboard Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seaboard Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
84,148,000
90,842,000
Net inc
2,441,000
3,214,000
Share earns
1.64
2.16


Kirby Exploration Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kirby Exploration Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,895,094
9,906,330
Net inc
b2,949,429
c2,611,591
Share earns
.12
.11
b-After a gain of $220,267 from discontinued operations and a tax credit of $560,000.


Gandhi Under Pressure to Oust Sikhs From Temple
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's Government came under pressure today to oust dozens of armed Sikh militants from the Golden Temple of Amritsar after a shootout inside the shrine Monday between the Sikhs and the police.


Lessons
LEAD: There is no defending the Greek way, as college fraternity and sorority life might be called.
It is self-selecting and therefore discriminatory; it is exclusionary and therefore anti-democratic.
Those qualities of faculty and administrative life aside, colleges are supposed to be islands of virtue.


Police Dispute Martin Claim
LEAD: Billy Martin's claim that he was assaulted in a bar last weekend was discounted by the police.
Page B9.


Perini Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Perini Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
194,775,000
157,339,000
Net inc
3,549,000
1,633,000
Share earns
.96
.50


Topics of The Times; A Check on the Beer Slobs
LEAD: Disappointed by team owners' diffident response to rowdiness at ballparks, the New York Legislature is moving sensibly to curb stadium drinking.
A bill sponsored by Senator John Dunne and Assemblyman Richard Brodsky and approved by the Senate would set aside 6 percent of the seats in all sections as alcohol-free.


Trade Bill, Facing a Veto, Goes to White House Today
LEAD: A sweeping trade bill, cleared by both houses of Congress last month but delayed by procedural wrangling over Alaskan oil, will go to the White House Wednesday, the Congressional leadership agreed today.


Spell Out the Meese Case
LEAD: James McKay, the independent counsel investigating conflict of interest charges involving Attorney General Edwin Meese, has publicly stated he probably won't seek an indictment.
But he also must report to the court that appointed him, and much public speculation now focuses on the content of that report.


Beirut Captivity: A Frenchman's Story
LEAD: It might never have happened if Jean-Paul Kauffmann and Michel Seurat had not missed the bus at the airport on May 22, 1985, the day the two men arrived in Lebanon.
A few minutes later, a Mercedes-Benz blocked the way in front of their taxi on the road to Beirut.


American Physicians Service Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Physicians Service Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,275,000
1,701,000
Net inc
b2,716,000
b302,000
Share earns
.47
.05
b-Included gains from discontinued operations of $2,002,000 for the latest quarter and $156,000 for the year- earlier period.


Medical Care International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Care International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
22,897,000
17,392,000
Net inc
b2,237,000
b723,000
Share earns
.17
.06
b-Includes tax benefits of $922,000 and $382,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Air Wis Services Inc., Appleton, Wis., an airline holding company, said that a management group trying to acquire the company had agreed to take no action for three years unless a competing bid came along.


Conner Peripherals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conner Peripherals
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
42,600,000
10,000,000
Net inc
3,300,000
158,000
Share earns
.11
.01
The company went public in April.


Tootsie Roll Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tootsie Roll Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
19,470,000
19,801,000
Net inc
2,805,000
2,210,000
Share earns
.31
.24


Corrections
LEAD: A listing in Business Day on May 2, with a brief article about the week's major debt financings, incorrectly described a $64 million tax-exempt offering in Tennessee.
The financing was by the Nashville and Davidson Counties Metropolitan Government.


'Colonus' to Close
LEAD: ''The Gospel at Colonus,'' a musical by Lee Breuer based on Robert Fitzgerald's version of Sophocles' ''Oedipus at Colonus,'' will close after the matinee on Sunday at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater.
The show, directed by Mr.
Breuer, with music by Bob Telson, will have run for 15 previews and 61 regular performances.


U.S. Says Laos Government Is Deeply Involved in Drugs
LEAD: Federal officials in New York expressed concern yesterday about mounting evidence that the Government of Laos was heavily involved in the production and export of heroin, including highly pure Southeast Asian heroin that has been flooding the New York market for two years.


Plymouth Rubber Co reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plymouth Rubber Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 27
1988
1987
Sales
9,519,000
9,757,000
Net loss
925,000
b1,228,000
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $351,000.


Compaq-Digital Technology Deal
LEAD: The Compaq Computer Corporation and the Digital Equipment Corporation said they had reached a technology exchange agreement to insure the connectibility of their respective products.
The agreement, which follows a similar pact between Digital and Apple Computer Inc. in January, formalizes support for customers connecting Compaq personal computers in networks with


Conston Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conston Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 27
1988
1987
Revenue
47,309,000
43,385,000
Net loss
2,009,000
b390,000
Share earns
-
.05
Yr rev
186,792,000
171,565,000
Net inc
1,588,000
6,597,000
Share earns
.21
.92


What Line-Item Veto Power Can Do
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviet Loan From West
LEAD: Moscow has arranged a new loan for 3.5 billion marks, or $2.1 billion, from the West and is likely to make additional requests for help in modernizing its industries, the head of West Germany's largest commercial bank said today.


After 7 Weeks, Publisher of 7 Days Sees Success
LEAD: Leonard N. Stern, whose fledgling weekly 7 Days has now published its seventh issue, declared last week that he was certain of success for the publication, which is delivered free to 50,000 of Manhattan's most affluent households.


Scherer, RP Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scherer, RP Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
82,808,000
62,737,000
Net inc
b5,337,000
c2,523,000
Share earns
.50
.26
Yr sales
290,743,000
228,217,000
Net inc
b15,094,000
c8,946,000
Share earns
1.38
.95


How to Groom Your Children for College
LEAD: To the Editor:


CJI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CJI Industries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
381,201,000
46,290,000
Net loss
b3,502,000
c2,213,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-Includes an adjustment to valuation allowances reflecting a recovery in the market value of the marketable equity securities portfolio equal to $3,929,000 after tax.


Dow Chemical Sets Venture With BOC
LEAD: The Dow Chemical Company said it would form an equal joint venture with BOC Group P.L.C. of Britain to separate oxygen and nitrogen from air and supply the gases to industrial users around the world.
A spokeswoman for the company, based in Midland, Mich., said it would contribute its membrane filter technology to the venture, while BOC would offer both technology and its marketing network for industrial gases.


Circle Express reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circle Express (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
44,887,000
27,661,000
Net inc
b127,000
b837,000
Share earns
.03
.18
b-After losses of $31,000 and $13,000 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively, both from discontinued operations.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  A Sondheim Surge


Campeau Reportedly Seeks Cutbacks at Bloomingdale's
LEAD: Urging all Federated Department Stores divisions to streamline their operations, Robert Campeau has ordered Bloomingdale's to reduce its annual operating costs by $60 million through various economies, including staff cutbacks, executives in the retailing industry said yesterday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  MARKETS  Five large Wall Street firms suspended program trading for their own accounts, in a move intended to restore investor confidence in the stock market.
The firms involved are Morgan Stanley; Salomon; Bear, Stearns; Paine Webber, and Kidder, Peabody.
Index-arbitrage trading has come under intense criticism as a leading cause of volatility in stock prices.


Bell &amp; Howell Debentures Are Priced to Yield 12 7/8%
LEAD: The Bell &amp; Howell Group is offering $225 million of 8 1/4 percent senior subordinated debentures, due in 1998, at a price of 88.80 to yield 12 7/8 percent, through underwriters led by Drexel Burnham Lambert.
Originally the size of the debt issue was planned at $205 million, but it was increased because of good investor demand.


Boxing Notebook; Cayton and King: A Preliminary to Tyson-Spinks
LEAD: Don King spent some time with Mike Tyson in Los Angeles last week, which raises a couple of questions.
Was he protecting the interests of Tyson's manager, Bill Cayton, as he insisted he was doing last month when he visited with Tyson in Los Angeles?
Or, as the rumor that filtered back to Cayton had it, was he seeking to persuade


Allen Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allen Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
85,586,000
83,548,000
Net loss
b4,522,000
c383,000
b-Includes charges of about $2.2 million for employment termination costs.
c-Net income and after net of $12,000 from discontinued operations.


Price Pfister reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Price Pfister
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
33,561,000
26,761,000
Net inc
2,534,000
1,098,000
Share earns
.22
.11


Riverside Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Riverside Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
28,408,000
24,628,000
Net inc
1,747,000
1,399,000
Share earns
.31
.25


Market Place; Analysts Favor Big 3 Auto Stocks
LEAD: Despite surprisingly robust car and truck sales so far this year and some stronger-than-expected earnings, investors have largely been undervaluing the shares of the Big Three domestic automobile companies, according to a growing number of analysts who follow the industry.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.30
7.12
6.84
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.34
6.33
5.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.49
6.54
5.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.85
8.80
8.35
30-YR.


Garan Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Garan Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
37,436,000
27,448,000
Net inc
2,187,000
995,000
Share earns
.86
.35
6mo sales
66,266,000
48,705,000
Net inc
2,954,000
695,000
Share earns
1.15
.25
Shares outst
2,572,000
2,799,100


Global Natural President Quits
LEAD: Global Natural Resources Inc. said John R. Dempsey, its president and chief executive since 1985, had resigned from both posts on Monday after an internal investigation begun last week uncovered what the company called ''a misuse of assets.''


Eating Well
LEAD: GREAT ideas start from the simplest needs.
Joanne Guy of San Diego had trouble staying on the Weight Watchers diet because she worked and did not have time to buy the ingredients and prepare the dishes.
She looked for a service that would do the cooking for her, without success.


Afghan President Plans Visit To Arms Conference at U.N.
LEAD: The Afghan leader, Najibullah, will come to New York next month for a General Assembly session on disarmament, a United Nations official said today.


Reviews/Television; Lenny Bruce, on Stage Toward the End
LEAD: Lenny Bruce can be seen on public television this evening, on Channel 13 at 11 o'clock.
That simple fact is bursting with social and cultural reverberations.
Back in the 1960's, Mr.
Bruce was embroiled in - his fans would say hounded by - a series of widely publicized obscenity trials that effectively ruined his career.


Historic Tree Heads Home, Sort Of
LEAD: Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern, left, and Joana Battaglia, president of the Parks Council, with cuttings of a 141-year-old weeping beech tree, above, that they presented to Consul General Ferdinand De Wilde of Belgium.


Fabricland Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fabricland Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,481,000
13,471,000
Net inc
572,500
653,500
Share earns
.21
.25
9mo sales
47,771,000
39,161,000
Net inc
1,912,400
1,770,000
Share earns
.71
.66


GardenAmerica Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GardenAmerica Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,052,000
16,495,000
Net inc
1,759,000
1,175,000
Share earns
.60
.40
6mo sales
27,515,000
22,622,000
Net inc
b2,100,000
1,178,000
Share earns
.71
.40


Weigh-Tronix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weigh-Tronix Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,978,910
12,209,841
Net inc
1,340,617
477,950
Share earns
.52
.19
Yr sales
61,362,713
25,046,746
Net inc
4,382,377
1,662,979
Share earns
1.69
.65


Urban Dining: An Empire Built on Savvy And Intuition
LEAD: MICHAEL WEINSTEIN is showing off the rooftop cafe of one of his restaurants in New York, pointing to the crumbling wall of the adjoining building and gleefully recounting a story.
It seems that the neighbor, pleased by the gentrification signified by Mr.
Weinstein's restaurant, offered to fix up his property so it would fit in better with its glossy new neighbor.


Expeditors International of Washington reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Expeditors International of Washington (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
31,786,512
30,770,506
Net inc
1,309,497
1,076,568
Share earns
.23
.19


Two Views on a Schism in the Middle East
LEAD: The drama of Israeli-Arab relations is played out every day on American television.
Bits and pieces emerge in sound and color. ''Worldview,'' on the CUNY cable channel today and tonight at 11 A.M., 4 P.M. and 9 P.M., tries to make the bits and pieces fall in place.
It makes no concessions to viewers; some stretches are long and leaden.


Lacrosse Notebook; Deciding on Teams for the Tournaments
LEAD: After Middlebury beat Williams, 11-6, to win the New England small-college championship last Sunday, the Panthers' coach, Jim Grube, had no time to celebrate.


Safety Board Blames Pilots for Detroit Crash
LEAD: The failure of two Northwest Airlines pilots to follow required checklist procedures before takeoff led to the crash last August at Detroit Metropolitan Airport that killed 156 of the 157 people aboard, a Federal report concluded today.


Assembly Speaker Denounces Koch's Budget Plan
LEAD: The Assembly Speaker, Mel Miller, today denounced key elements of Mayor Koch's budget proposal, including the creation of a new authority to oversee bridge repairs.


Ex-Argentine General Faces Trial in 39 Political Killings
LEAD: A cashiered army general who was Argentina's most-wanted military fugitive has been brought home to face 39 murder charges in connection with the so-called dirty war that the military waged against leftists in the 1970's.


Ad Industry Faulted on Over-50's
LEAD: Advertising agencies and consumer products companies routinely underestimate the willingness of consumers over the age of 50 to try new products and overestimate the effectiveness of many marketing techniques, according to a survey released yesterday by Donnelly Marketing, a subsidiary of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet


Suffolk Approves Video-Terminal Bill
LEAD: Over objections from business leaders, a sweeping measure aimed at protecting workers who use video-display terminals was passed today by the Suffolk County Legislature.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Charles Shackleford, the 6-foot-10-inch, 225-pound junior center at North Carolina State, announced yesterday he would give up his final season of college eligibility to enter the National Basketball Association draft in June. . . .
In special ceremonies honoring the first class of inductees into the G.T.E.


Ensource Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ensource Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,060,000
8,481,000
Net loss
2,519,000
b1,822,000
Share earns
-
.54
b-Net income and includes a gain of $1,775,000 from an accounting change.


'Mail' to Close Saturday
LEAD: ''Mail,'' a musical with book and lyrics by Jerry Colker and music by Michael Rupert, will close after the evening performance on Saturday at the Music Box Theater, 239 West 45th Street.
The play, directed by Andrew Cadiff, will have run for 20 previews and 36 performances.


Nebraska and W. Virginia Pick Dukakis in Landslides
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis won sweeping victories over the Rev.
Jesse Jackson in Democratic Presidential primaries in West Virginia and Nebraska yesterday.


TV Campaign to Begin For California Magazine
LEAD: California magazine, based in Los Angeles, is about to break its first television campaign and its first advertising will come from Hal Riney &amp; Partners.


Greek Violinist Wins Competition at Carnegie
LEAD: Leonidas Kavakos, a 20-year-old resident of Greece, has been named winner of the Naumburg International Violin Competition.
The finals took place Monday at Carnegie Hall.


How to Groom Your Children for College; Striving for Credentials
LEAD: To the Editor:


City College Lacrosse Shock
LEAD: Hector Munoz squinted through the dust, searching for a yellow flag resting among the many rocks on the City College lacrosse field.
It had been nine years and 92 games since City had won a lacrosse match, and Munoz, the team's coach, just wanted to make sure he didn't celebrate prematurely.


Bedeviling an Arms Pact: The Details
LEAD: By any objective standard, the treaty on medium- and shorter-range nuclear missiles is one that should have made its way easily from the negotiating table to ratification.
The accord enjoys overwhelming official and public support in the United States, the Soviet Union and in Europe.
And in the grand scheme of superpower relations, arms control experts on both sides regard its primary significance as political rather than military.


Review/Performance Art; Beckley Runs in Place
LEAD: The Winter Garden is a vast new indoor public space that is part of the still uncompleted World Financial Center at Battery Park City.
Since March, the center's arts and events program has been sponsoring a series of free lunchtime and early evening performance events of various sorts there.
Yesterday at noon the composer, painter and performance artist Connie Beckley presented a piece that will be repeated this evening at 6 o'clock.


Romulus Journal; From Air Disaster, a Roadside Shrine
LEAD: There is a wooden cross on the hillside, covered now with spring dandelions, and a small circle of tattered floral arrangments: drooping plastic floral sprays, a pot with an Easter lily, a handful of red carnations tossed loosely in the grass.


VLSI and Hitachi In Technology Deal
LEAD: VLSI Technology Inc., the San Jose, Calif., semiconductor company, has formed a long-term technology exchange agreement with Hitachi Ltd. of Tokyo.
According to the agreement, VLSI will provide Hitachi with application-specific integrated circuit, or ASIC, technology, while Hitachi will make its process and manufacturing technology available.


Suns Pick Fitzsimmons
LEAD: The Phoenix Suns named Cotton Fitzsimmons yesterday to replace John Wetzel as coach.
Paul Westphal, 37 years old, a former All-Star guard for the Suns, was hired as Fitzsimmons's assistant until he is ready to take over the coaching reins.


Quantum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
42,173,000
31,903,000
Net loss
b8,410,000
c2,945,000
Share earns
-
.32
Yr sales
168,529,000
120,760,000
Net loss
b3,226,000
c8,806,000
Share earns
-
.95


Democrats Begin Debating Platform
LEAD: The Democratic Party set to work today on a 1988 platform but quickly ran into disagreement between the camps of its Presidential candidates on how detailed the document should be.


Corrections
LEAD: A report yesterday in the Campaign Trail column misidentified the Governor of Delaware, elected in 1984.
He is Michael N. Castle, a Republican.


Mike Shula Retires
LEAD: Like his father and his older brother, Mike Shula has announced his retirement as a professional football player at a young age in order to get started as a coach in the National Football League.
The 22-year-old reserve quarterback for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers said Monday he would make the switch to assistant coach, as an offensive aide to Ray Perkins, the Buccaneers' coach, who was also Shula's boss when he was a quarterback at Alabama.


Botrax Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Botrax Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,558,000
1,796,000
Net loss
298,000
b32,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
6,737,000
5,301,000
Net inc
107,000
81,000
Share earns
.03
.03
b-Net income


Penchina's Morale Gets a Lift
LEAD: PENCHINA, SELKOWITZ, a creative little agency in the $20 million class, has just finished a project for the mighty Unilever United States that has been very good for morale.


LeFrak Passage Out of Trump Book
LEAD: Following a protest from Samuel J. LeFrak, Random House has excised a two-sentence reference to the developer from future printings of ''Trump: The Art of the Deal'' by Donald J. Trump and Tony Schwartz.


PSE Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PSE Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
36,493,000
18,828,000
Net loss
1,628,000
b1,199,000
Share earns
-
.13
b-Net income  Year-ago first quarter results have been restated to reflect the adoption of FASB 96.


Fetisov Closer to Being a Devil
LEAD: The Devils reacted with delight today to a newspaper report that Vyacheslav Fetisov, one of the world's top defensemen, was a step closer to joining their team.


Hyde Athletic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hyde Athletic Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,131,000
18,599,000
Net inc
414,000
882,000
Share earns
.15
.31


Tejon Ranch Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tejon Ranch Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,363,000
11,177,000
Net inc
825,000
869,000
Share earns
.07
.07


North Refuses to Give Panel All of His Notes
LEAD: Oliver L. North invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination today in refusing to turn over to Congressional investigators nearly 3,000 pages of notes he made while he was a key White House operative in the Iran-contra affair.


Basix Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Basix Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
21,573,000
27,123,000
Net loss
b32,531,000
c768,000
Yr rev
101,666,000
102,260,000
Net loss
b43,287,000
c13,559,000
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $21,678,000 for the quarter and $30,282,000 for the year.


One Dies as Bomb Explodes At a U.S. Bank in New Delhi
LEAD: A time bomb hidden in a briefcase exploded in the foreign-exchange area of Citibank headquarters today, killing one person and wounding 14, the police said.


First Federal Savings &amp; Loan (East Hartford) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings &amp; Loan (East Hartford)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
487,000
676,000
Share earns
.21
-
The company went public in June 1987.


Stewart Sandwiches Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stewart Sandwiches Inc
Qtr to March 25
1988
1987
Sales
8,384,404
7,241,419
Net loss
489,082
640,892
9mo sales
27,773,526
23,867,261
Net loss
200,596
b713,099
b-Includes a $143,025 gain from unusual items.


Shultz to Press Soviet on Arms Pact
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz is taking his top arms control experts to Geneva for an intense effort to resolve verification issues blocking Senate approval of the new accord on medium-range nuclear weapons, Administration officials said today.


'STUFF AND NONSENSE!'
LEAD: IN the Lewis Carroll wonderland of the National Hockey League, things get curiouser and curiouser.


A New Owner For L.A. Style
LEAD: L.A.
Style, with 50,000 circulation among affluent Los Angeles households, has been acquired by the American Express Publishing Corporation, Thomas O. Ryder, president of the division said yesterday.


Dow Rises 6.30, to 2,003.65; Trading Slows
LEAD: Trading in stocks was slow yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average managing enough of a gain to put it barely back above the 2,000 level.


Man in the News; Free-Market Socialist; Michel Rocard
LEAD: When Michel Rocard alienated himself from most of France's Socialist Party a decade ago by calling Francois Mitterrand's left-wing economic policies ''archaic,'' he probably never dreamed that Mr.
Mitterrand would someday name him Prime Minister.


Entwistle Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Entwistle Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,496,000
11,629,000
Net inc
3,103,000
1,131,000
Share earns
3.48
1.26
6mo sales
19,232,000
20,472,000
Net inc
1,174,000
5,096,000
Share earns
1.32
5.65


Polaroid Displays Printer and Camera
LEAD: The Polaroid Corporation previewed new products that include a cigar-box-size printer that can create high-quality color photos in minutes from a television picture or any other digital source.
The new device, still in the prototype stage, is seen by the company as the forerunner of inexpensive, compact instant printers that work with a variety of cameras.


Everest &amp; Jennings International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Everest &amp; Jennings International (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
45,147,000
40,381,000
Net inc
b678,000
c422,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Includes a gain from discontinued operations of $283,000.
c-Net loss and includes a loss of $270,000 from discontinued operations.


About Real Estate; How to Add Office Space Amid Strict Rules in Rye
LEAD: Over the last three decades Rye, N.Y., a rural-looking city of 15,000 people on Long Island Sound, has remained predominantly residential.
Many of its municipal neighbors, in the same period, were allowing room for the sort of commercial development that has made Westchester County a major office center.


Chip Indicator Shows Gains
LEAD: The semiconductor industry's leading indicator continued to improve in April, as chip makers based in the United States, Europe and Japan reported orders in excess of $1.2 billion for the first time in four years.
The Semiconductor Industry


Uncertainty Over Astrologer
LEAD: The White House said today that it has been ''a couple of months'' since Nancy Reagan was last in touch with her astrologer, and that it was uncertain whether Mrs.
Reagan would be in touch with the astrologer again.


Incstar Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Incstar Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,847,900
2,216,000
Net inc
327,800
115,500
Share earns
.11
.04
Yr sales
13,378,800
8,384,500
Net inc
b830,500
733,100
Share earns
.27
.24
b-After an extraordinary gain of $27,000.


Tenney Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tenney Engineering (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,862,448
4,822,376
Net inc
27,174
38,285
Share earns
.01
.01


Yields Rise In Treasury Note Sale
LEAD: Bond prices rose and interest rates moved higher in the credit markets yesterday as the first part of the Treasury's three-part $26 billion mid-quarter refunding was met with less-than-enthusiastic demand.


'Outsider' Who Stirred Emotions at Dartmouth
LEAD: When James O. Freedman became president of Dartmouth College last July, he brought an outsider's perspective to this insular campus.


Diversified Investment Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Investment Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
367,302
700,817
Share earns
.21
.40


Double Standards
LEAD: To The Living Section:


5 Metro-North Workers in Crash Showed Drug Traces, U.S. Says
LEAD: Tests on five employees involved in the fatal crash of a commuter train in Mount Vernon last month - the engineer, three tower operators and the dispatcher in Manhattan - showed traces of drugs after the accident, the Federal Railroad Administration said today.


Investor Enters Battle Over Allegheny
LEAD: Bennett S. LeBow, the chairman of the Western Union Corporation, announced yesterday that he had agreed to cooperate with a brokerage firm in a hard-fought battle to take over Allegheny International Inc.


Dublin's Theater: Lively Enough to Export
LEAD: Alas, there have been no theater riots thus far this season by ungrateful customers to signal fresh Irish drama classics of the sort that once stirred William Butler Yeats to rebuke philistinism from stage center.
But still, much of this year's make-believe beyond the footlights seems lively as Dublin theaters enjoy what Joe Dowling, one of their more exacting creative artists, terms a ''quite healthy season.


Rugged Route for Pistons
LEAD: During their first quarter-century representing the Motor City in pro basketball, the Detroit Pistons evoked bad jokes about flat tires, stalled engines and lemons from the assembly line.


Pepitone Term Set
LEAD: Joe Pepitone, the former Yankee first baseman, will report to court Monday to begin a six-month sentence for his conviction on two misdemeanor drug charges, his lawyer, John Kelly, said yesterday.


A Degas Sets Price Record: $10.2 Million
LEAD: Edgar Degas's ''Little Dancer at 14 Years of Age,'' a bronze of the artist's 1881 wax sculpture of a bold young dancer in a relaxed pose, was sold last night for $10.12 million, a record at auction for the artist and for any sculpture.
The buyer, was identified only as a Euorpean.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  DEBT


Behind Every High Brow
LEAD: To the Editor:


How to Groom Your Children for College
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Vetoes U.N. Resolution To Condemn the Israeli Raid
LEAD: The United States vetoed a Security Council resolution today that would have condemned what it called the ''invasion by Israeli forces of southern Lebanon'' for two days last week.
It also would have called for the ''immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces'' from southern Lebanon.


U.S. Panel Upholds a Shoreham Plan
LEAD: A Federal licensing board today upheld a Lilco plan to use three centers as evacuation sites in case of an accident at the Shoreham nuclear plant.


Police Evidence Counters Martin's Story; He Is Blamed For Altercation
LEAD: The Arlington Police Department has concluded that Billy Martin's claim that he was assaulted in the restroom of a topless bar early Saturday morning was unfounded.
The police said that Martin, the Yankee manager, threw the one and only punch in the incident and that he was injured when he was thrown out of the bar.


American Travellers Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Travellers Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,702,750
4,792,873
Net inc
796,506
608,193
Share earns
.23
.25
Shares outst
3,532,034
2,478,414


Dixie National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dixie National
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,595,000
3,209,000
Net inc
407,000
b203,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


Rebels Leave Mozambique A Bloodied and Fallow Land
LEAD: When the East African sun sinks below the savannah, workers at a cotton mill here vanish into the elephant grass, fleeing the invisible shadow of a brutal rebel group that has reduced this town and this land to dependence on foreign charity for survival.


Loral Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loral Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
412,466,000
214,756,000
Net inc
22,681,000
17,896,000
Share earns
.91
.73
Yr sales
1,440,775,000
690,043,000
Net inc
74,342,000
57,460,000
Share earns
3.01
2.35


What's Next for the Corporate Woman?
LEAD: NOT long ago, Rennie Roberts was rummaging through a stack of books she had accumulated over the years.
She picked out a dusty copy of ''Games Mother Never Taught You,'' Betty L. Harragan's 1976 best seller, which gave women hoping to move up the managerial ladder tips on such concerns as how to dress, when to drink with colleagues and how to handle intraoffice relationships.


Keystone Medical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Medical Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
1,299,000
b1,419,000
9mo net loss
5,547,000
b3,849,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $76,000 for the quarter and $523,000 for the 9 months.


Barnwell Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnwell Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,240,000
3,020,000
Net inc
750,000
550,000
Share earns
.54
.39
6mo rev
6,350,000
5,490,000
Net inc
1,320,000
790,000
Share earns
.95
.56


Tigers Snap Athletics' Streak
LEAD: The longest major league winning streak in more than a decade came to an end at 14 tonight when the Oakland Athletics lost, 8-2, to the Detroit Tigers.


Seaway Food Town Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seaway Food Town Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Sales
120,196,000
112,425,000
Net inc
852,000
676,000
Share earns
.90
.51
6mo sales
240,948,000
224,666,000
Net inc
b8,932,000
1,206,000
Share earns
7.50
.83


Review/Television; Goetz Trial as Drama
LEAD: Bernhard Goetz again.
The very thought is likely to induce groaning.
For more than two years, the Goetz case preoccupied the public.
From editorial pages across the nation to chic Manhattan cocktail parties, it became an almost obsessive center of attention.
The trial ended last June with Mr.
Goetz being acquitted of the more serious charges in connection with his shooting of four teen-agers he said had menaced him on a subway car in Manhattan.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Do Not Disturb
LEAD: The lawmakers working on the trade-accord legislation are not the only ones who are keeping the door shut.


Nord Resources Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nord Resources Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,026,241
18,072,297
Net inc
2,931,918
4,246,464
Share earns
.20
.30


Alan Paton Opposed Tutu on Disinvestment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Essex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Essex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,364,000
6,091,000
Net inc
20,000
b45,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Somalia Loans Barred
LEAD: Somalia was added today to the list of countries that may no longer borrow from the International Monetary Fund because of overdue payments on previous loans.
The East African republic owes the fund about $37 million.
Other countries on the list are Vietnam, Liberia, Peru, Sierra Leone, Guyana, the Sudan and Zambia.


Heart Federal Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heart Federal Savings &amp; Loan
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,390,000
1,810,000
Share earns
.32
.42


Akzo-Du Pont Deal Ends 11-Year Fight
LEAD: The Dutch chemical company Akzo N.V. and E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company announced a surprise deal today ending what Akzo called ''the biggest industrial patents battle of this century.''


Making Reservations
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Corvus Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corvus Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
6,200,000
6,959,000
Net inc
b2,869,000
c4,278,000
Share earns
.09
-
9mo rev
22,023,000
29,368,000
Net inc
b6,136,000
c9,232,000
Share earns
.20
-


Colgate Will Get A Part of Cotelle
LEAD: Henkel KGaA and the Colgate-Palmolive Company will split up the French company Cotelle S.A. between them after a proposed joint venture failed.
Henkel's board chairman, Helmut Sihler, told reporters that the French authorities would not allow each company to own half of Cotelle since they already had a joint share of almost 80 percent of the French household detergents market.


DROPOUT RATE OFF FOR BLACK PUPILS
LEAD: The Census Bureau today reported a significant decline in the dropout rate of black high school students over a 10-year period.


Dataproducts Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataproducts Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Revenue
96,015,000
84,922,000
Net loss
14,935,000
b1,656,000
Share earns
-
.08
Yr rev
345,248,000
338,758,000
Net loss
20,203,000
b8,965,000
Share earns
-
.43


About New York; On Each Lapel, A Small Badge Of Distinction
LEAD: The badge of the conventioneer in midtown Manhattan is the name tag, and most of them tend to bore.
Either they run along the strictly business lines of, say, ''Maurice Tiddlewhipple, Boise Cascade,'' or they take the casual, howdy approach, as in, ''Hello, I'm Sharon, Bayou La Batre.'' Given the dreariness of the usual identifications, then, it was arresting earlier this week to run across people festooned with chest labels that marked their achievements, such as ''bass fisherman'' or ''grower of largest squash'' or ''bubble gum blower.


Japanese Official Fires New Furor on the War
LEAD: A Cabinet minister who caused a stir with recent comments about Japan's wartime role embroiled himself in fresh controversy today by saying that the Japanese invasion of China five decades ago was not a war of aggression.


The Pain of Change
LEAD: The strains of attempting limited reform in Communist countries these days provoke reflections on old political and even deeper human issues.
Change is necessary and inevitable, but it always brings pain.
Violent revolutions make subsequent change even harder, not only because they concentrate power beyond civil challenge, but also because they instill such an attachment to order, stability and predictability, and such a fear of risk.


Alaska Oilfield Report Cites Unexpected Harm to Wildlife
LEAD: An unreleased preliminary report by officials of the Fish and Wildlife Service says oil development in northern Alaska has caused far more environmental damage than the Government predicted.


Loan Given to Rebuild a Harlem Hospital
LEAD: Governor Cuomo yesterday announced a $150 million loan to rebuild the financially beleaguered North General Hospital in Harlem, the only minority-owned hospital in the state.


Belden &amp; Blake Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Belden &amp; Blake Energy (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,339,462
1,809,625
Net loss
266,802
318,439


Justice Agency Ceases Inquiry into St Germain
LEAD: The Justice Department said today that it would not seek criminal charges against Representative Fernand J. St Germain, chairman of the House Banking Committee, who has been under investigation for months over reports that he improperly accepted meals and entertainment from Washington lobbyists.


Affiliated Publications Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Publications Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
126,718,000
102,793,000
Net loss
14,377,000
b8,768,000
Share earns
-
.25
b-Net income  The latest quarter's loss was after booking Affiliated Publications' $25,272,000 share of losses at McCaw Communications Cos.


Beer (Soon) for Icelanders
LEAD: After a yearlong debate, Parliament voted today to end 73 years of prohibition by legalizing beer with an alcoholic content of about 2.25 percent.


Public Administrator Is Chosen
LEAD: The two Surrogate Court judges in Manhattan have chosen Ethel Griffin, a member of the State Assembly's legal staff, as public administrator of New York County, a court official said yesterday.


9 Are Acquitted of Murder in Philadelphia
LEAD: A jury today acquitted Nicodemo Scarfo and eight associates on all charges in the slaying of Salvatore Testa, who prosecutors said was an underworld rival.


Corrections
LEAD: A correction in this space on April 26 about the Eating Well column in The Living Section of April 20 misstated the amount of fat in three and a half ounces of beef sirloin.
It is nine grams.


SINHALESE GROUP TO END INSURGENCY
LEAD: The Government signed a peace accord today with an ethnic Sinhalese group that has conducted a guerrilla campaign in which at least 260 people have died, officials announced.


Police Announce Major Drug Arrest
LEAD: A United States marshall padlocking a sporting goods store in Queens after it was seized in a drug raid.
Officials announced the arrest of a man they described as the leader of a multimillion-dollar heroin and cocaine operation.
The suspect Thomas (Tony Montana) Mickens, 24 years old, was arrested at his home in Dix Hills, L.I.


Ciba Vision Gives Job To McCaffrey &amp; McCall
LEAD: McCaffrey &amp; McCall, part of Britain's Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, has become the first consumer agency for the Ciba Vision Corporation's Aosept, the country's best-selling contact lens disinfectant.


In a Quiet Setting, U.S. Concludes Its Biggest Drug Trafficking Case
LEAD: Inside a Federal courtroom today, as a jury watched raptly, United States Attorny Robert Merkle turned his attention to one of the thousands of exhibits introduced as evidence over the past six months in the drug trial of Carlos Lehder, accused of being the mastermind of a Colombian drug ring.


E.P.A. to Relax Rules on Microbe Tests
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency is preparing new rules that would be the first tentative steps toward relaxing restrictions on small field tests of living, genetically altered microorganisms.


Diagnostic Medical Instruents reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagnostic Medical Instruents
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,745,254
2,186,230
Net loss
261,899
b50,448
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
3,596,767
4,390,216
Net loss
404,381
b124,043
Share earns
-
.03


Hugh Laing, Specialist in Ballets By Antony Tudor, Is Dead at 77
LEAD: Hugh Laing, one of the finest dramatic dancers of 20th-century ballet and a former star of both American Ballet Theater and the New York City Ballet, died yesterday at St.
Luke's Hospital.
A spokesman for Ballet Theater said Mr.
Laing had been suffering from cancer.
He was 77 years old and lived in New York


North American Biologicals Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North American Biologicals Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,921,000
10,578,000
Net inc
b318,000
b255,000
Share earns
.02
.02
b-Includes tax credits of $117,000 and $114,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


Country Lake Foods reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Country Lake Foods
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
35,576,000
35,100,000
Net inc
743,000
559,000
Share earns
.25
-
There were no year-ago share earnings because the company had not yet gone public.


Joyce Brown Faints At Manhattan Hotel And Is Hospitalized
LEAD: Joyce Brown, the former homeless woman who challenged the Koch administration's effort to remove her from the streets against her will, was hospitalized yesterday after collapsing in the residential hotel where she lives.


Comdial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comdial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
22,172,000
23,697,000
Net loss
910,000
b762,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Knight Moves?
LEAD: Bobby Knight, the Indiana basketball caoch, traveled to the University of New Mexico yesterday to talk with school officials there about the vacant coaching job, an Indiana official said.


Canadian Occidental Petroeum Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Occidental Petroeum Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
165,700,000
148,900,000
Net inc
15,100,000
14,700,000
Share earns
.23
.22
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Traditional Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Traditional Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,758,000
9,787,000
Net inc
1,264,000
851,000
Share earns
.52
.36
9mo rev
36,992,000
25,291,000
Net inc
3,719,000
2,254,000
Share earns
1.54
.98


Washington Talk: Briefing; Happier Mothers' Days
LEAD: Norma Downey did something of a turnabout for Mother's Day: She came to Washington to present her son, Representative Thomas J. Downey, with a new study on the economic situation of older women in the United States.


Jazz Stun Lakers
LEAD: Karl Malone scored 18 of his 29 points in the second half tonight to lead the Utah Jazz to a 101-97 upset of the Los Angeles Lakers in .their Western Conference semifinal playoff.


In Madrid's Mercados, a Barrio Flavor in an Urban Setting
LEAD: Like any major conurbation in Spain, Madrid is a sort of small town reproduced many times over.
It is a series of microcommunities or barrios whose residents are as familiar with each other's living patterns and deep-rooted life styles as they are with the lives of their own families.
And just as the small towns have shops that serve up personal service along with freshly baked breads, produce, fish and meats, so every


Makeup: Out of the Bathroom, Onto a Bus
LEAD: MASCARA wands in hand, women are increasingly puncturing the rules of etiquette by applying makeup en route to jobs and appointments.
No form of transportation seems to be exempt, no place too public, say observers of social behavior.


Market Facts Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Market Facts Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,733,000
7,405,900
Net inc
170,000
32,200
Share earns
.09
.02


Series of Fatal A-6E Crashes in Trials Prompts Navy Investigation
LEAD: Alarmed by six plane crashes and 10 deaths in the last 16 months, the Navy today began an investigation into the training program for A-6E jet bombers based at the Whidbey Island Naval Air Station north of here.


Aon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aon Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
47,311,000
44,009,000
Share earns
.73
.66


Limited Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Limited Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
811,075,000
803,545,000
Net inc
23,864,000
45,457,000
Share earns
.13
.24
Shares outst
179,911,000
191,168,000


Dismissal Is Upheld In New Yorker Lawsuit
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has upheld the dismissal of a libel suit against The New Yorker magazine brought by a man who said he was unfairly portrayed in an article about another libel case.


NASA Is Urged to Develop Space Platforms
LEAD: The National Academy of Sciences recommended yesterday that the nation develop small unmanned space platforms ''as soon as possible'' as a bridge to a larger and more elaborate space outpost planned for the 1990's.


Making Computers Compatible
LEAD: The barriers that separate different brands of desktop computers, like the Macintosh and I.B.M.
PC, are being torn down by a new type of software that permits one computer to emulate the functions of another.


SPREAD IN ABUSES IS SEEN IN PANAMA
LEAD: The military regime of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega is using sexual humiliation, threats, imprisonment, beatings and punitive fines to intimidate its opponents, according to human rights investigators, diplomats and opposition leaders.


Car Imports Up in Japan
LEAD: Sales of foreign cars in Japan rose 40.1 percent in April from a year earlier, to 10,675, marking the 52d successive monthly year-to-year gain and a record high for the month, an official of the Japan Automobile Importers Association said today.


HOUSE VOTE BACKS A PLASTIC-GUN BAN
LEAD: The House today passed, 413 to 4, a bill that would ban the manufacture, sale or possession of any plastic firearm that could evade detection by X-ray machines or metal detectors.


For the Michelin, A Secret Mission In West Germany
LEAD: ''THE paprika sauce,'' said the luncheon guest, dropping his voice and glancing around, ''is of a thin consistency.'' His companion nodded sympathetically. ''The rabbit is not very exciting,'' he whispered back.


Books of the Times; The Little Traps of Life in Carver Story Collection
LEAD:  Where I'm Calling From  New and Selected Stories  By Raymond Carver  393 pages.
Atlantic Monthly Press. $19.95.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: THE versatile leek is one of the oldest known cultivated vegetables.
There is much dispute about its origin, but it is known that leeks were grown by the ancient Egyptians, and evidently were much revered.
The food historian Waverly Root recounted that an Egyptian of the time wrote, perhaps jocularly, that ''onions are adored and leeks are gods.


Cargoes Adore a Vacuum
LEAD: One of the best insulators against heat flow is a vacuum.
The familiar thermos uses the principle: A vacuum is created between two walls of glass.
This greatly reduces heat flow into or out of the bottle, keeping soup hot and apple juice cold.


Jackson Is Top Rookie
LEAD: In the 35 years it has been given out, the National Basketball Association rookie-of-the-year award almost always went to a player who was a high first-round draft choice, and, in recent years, usually one with a rich long-term contract.


Mondale Gives Warning on Picking Running Mate
LEAD: Walter F. Mondale says the interviews he held four years ago with prospective running mates proved a ''damaged strategy'' and adds that Michael S. Dukakis ought to find a different way of selecting the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee this year.


House Approves Bill On Copyright Treaty
LEAD: The House of Representatives passed legislation today to permit the United States to join the Bern Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, an international copyright treaty to which 76 other nations subscribe.


Dukakis Quietly Trying To Gain Black Support
LEAD: After largely ceding the black vote to the Rev.
Jesse Jackson for most of the primary season, the campaign of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts is quietly and cautiously trying to build some bridges.


One of Our States Is Missing
LEAD: Senator Moynihan, whose public duties include trying to save the country from coming to a complete standstill, says that by the year 2020 Interstate 95 will have to be 44 lanes wide to carry the traffic between Fort Lauderdale and Miami.


Affiliated Posts $14.4 Million Loss
LEAD: Affiliated Publications Inc., the owner of The Boston Globe and Billboard Publications, yesterday reported a first-quarter net loss of $14.4 million, largely because of losses from the company's investment in the McCaw Communications Companies.


Misery Rises in Philippines' Swollen Slums
LEAD: Two weeks ago someone apparently knocked over a kerosene lamp and, in what seemed a nightmare out of the last century, more than 1,000 flimsy homes were burned to the ground within five hours.


Kodak-Immunex Pacts
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company and the Immunex Corporation said today that they had expanded the activities of their partnership, which was formed in 1986 for drug research activities.
The new agreements cover an advanced drug development process and the division of marketing rights.
Also, Kodak will invest an additional $20 million in Immunex and Immunex will buy out Kodak's share of the joint venture's manufacturing plant.


Topics of The Times; Impaired Vision at CBS
LEAD: Three of every four players in the National Basketball Association are black, including most of its biggest stars.
And unlike big league football and baseball, the N.B.A. even has several black head coaches.
But when CBS, which broadcasts N.B.A. games, convened all its basketball commentators on camera recently to discuss the playoffs, there wasn't a black face in sight.


Laurence Sickman, Scholar and Expert In the Art of China
LEAD: Laurence Sickman, a connoisseur and scholar of Chinese art who built one of the world's best collections of Chinese paintings, sculpture and furniture at the William Rockhill Nelson Gallery and Atkins Museum of Fine Arts in Kansas City, Mo., died Saturday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Kansas City.
He was 81 years old.


Canandaigua Wine Co reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canandaigua Wine Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
33,430,315
36,096,374
Net inc
696,512
1,682,047
Share earns
.14
.35
6mo sales
74,750,727
74,052,929
Net inc
1,600,558
3,518,515
Share earns
.33
.73


Impact Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Impact Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,530,000
6,976,000
Net inc
645,000
c876,000
Share earns
.07
.10
Shares outst
9,566,000
8,653,000
Yr sales
30,277,000
23,405,000
Net inc
b3,046,000
c2,105,000
Share earns
.32
.24
Shares outst
9,515,000
8,676,000


First Home Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Home Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
447,990
563,562
Share earns
.31
.38
The latest first quarter earnings included a $119,436 gain on the sale of an apartment complex.


Cone Raises His Record to 4-0
LEAD: When he was given the chance to start, David Cone said he would do everything he possibly could to make it difficult for Dave Johnson to tell him to stop.
Cone has made more than good on his word, and as a result Johnson has been left uttering only one: more.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-15


Camera Platforms Internaional Inc reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Camera Platforms Internaional Inc
Year to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
570,000
406,000
Net loss
1,826,000
448,000


Sharpton Arrested in Queens Court, Then Released
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton leaving Queens County Courthouse after his arrest yesterday for contempt of court.
A warrant for his arrest was issued after he walked out of a courtroom last week during a hearing on previous protest-related charges.
Page B3. (NYT/Frankie Ziths)


Edgar H. S. Chandler, Chaplain, Dies at 83
LEAD: The Rev.
Edgar H. S. Chandler, a United Church of Christ minister who directed the refugee services of the World Council of Churches after World War II, died Saturday at the Havenwood retirement community in Concord, N.H.
He was 83 years old.


Patient Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Patient Technology (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,275,000
6,746,000
Net inc
b65,000
c1,296,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $26,000.
c-Net loss


Customedix reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Customedix (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,028,517
8,562,657
Net inc
b605,382
c571,065
Share earns
.02
.03
Shares outst
30,470,402
22,817,811
9mo rev
31,966,224
10,900,933
Net inc
b1,486,034
c3,380,769
Share earns
.05
.22
Shares outst
30,634,695
15,687,984


Calgene Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calgene Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,163,000
7,353,000
Net inc
44,000
c493,000
Share earns
.01
.06
6mo rev
9,618,000
6,930,000
Net loss
858,000
bc469,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income


Beverly Sills Announces She Will Retire on Jan. 1
LEAD: Beverly Sills, who has revitalized the New York City Opera since she became the company's general director in 1979, announced yesterday that she would retire from the post effective Jan. 1.


Washington Talk: Congress; Judicial Impeachment: Is Process Antiquated?
LEAD: The power of impeachment, the procedure devised for placing public officials suspected of wrongdoing on trial by elected lawmakers, was given to Congress by the framers of the Constitution 200 years ago.
But now, as two Federal judges face possible impeachment, a debate is under way on Capitol Hill over whether the procedures make sense today.


People
LEAD: *
Patrick H. Joyce has been elected chairman of the Point-of-Purchase Advertising Institute.


Xerox to Eliminate 800 Marketing Jobs
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation, the giant copier company, said that its United States marketing group would eliminate about 800 jobs.
The company said that as many employees as possible would be reassigned to other Xerox operations and that it hoped to avoid layoffs.


Zayre Names Chairman For Its Troubled Stores
LEAD: The Zayre Corporation said yesterday that it had named Herbert J. Zarkin chairman of its largest unit, Zayre Stores.


Coradian Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coradian Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,810,000
3,761,000
Net inc
97,000
363,000
Share earns
.01
.03
Yr rev
11,541,000
11,416,000
Net loss
504,000
b148,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income and includes a $186,000 gain from a legal settlement with a former supplier.


Agency Orders Planes Examined for Cracks
LEAD: The Government has ordered inspections for commercial Lockheed-382 cargo planes after tests on military versions of the plane, the C-130, found wing cracks that could cause the aircraft to crash.


Man in Police Custody Suffers Seizure and Dies
LEAD: A 34-year-old Brooklyn man who had heart problems and epilepsy died in police custody Monday night, the police said, after he became violent, bit a paramedic and bruised another, and was restrained with handcuffs.


Esprit Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Esprit Systems (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
5,768,000
4,188,000
Net loss
333,000
714,000
9mo sales
17,343,000
14,753,000
Net loss
322,000
594,000


Upper Peninsula Power Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Upper Peninsula Power Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,039,000
15,127,000
Net inc
1,680,000
1,670,000
Share earns
1.09
1.11
Shares outst
1,449,528
1,410,881


Algorex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Algorex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,803,000
1,368,000
Net loss
781,000
556,000
9mo rev
5,287,000
7,006,000
Net loss
b1,308,000
c5,845,000
b-Includes a one-time charge of $638,000 for expenses associated with the anticipated sale of Algorex's headquarters in Hauppauge, N.Y., and the writeoff of certain computer equipment.


American Standard Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Standard Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
900,800,000
779,700,000
Net inc
21,300,000
21,600,000
Share earns
.67
.65
Shares outst
31,533,059
32,939,728
Latest first quarter included $30 million in investment banking and legal fees associated with the Black &amp; Decker tender offer.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: KATE COLBORN of Brooklyn is waiting for the traffic light to change at the corner of Third and Atlantic Avenues.
Alongside her is a small, frail elderly woman.
The woman is clutching a cane and, it is apparent, is quite concerned about crossing against the aggressively turning traffic.
Ms.
Colborn smiles in understanding, takes the woman's arm and escorts her - slowly, gently - across the intersection.


U.S. Subpoena In Hughes Case
LEAD: Albert D. Wheelon, who resigned last week as chairman and chief executive of the Hughes Aircraft Corporation, has been named in a subpoena related to a Justice Department investigation of the Los Angeles-based military equipment contractor, a person familiar with the inquiry said today.


Wheat Estimate Up 4%
LEAD: The Agriculture Department said today that 1988 winter wheat production is estimated at 1.62 billion bushels, up 4 percent from last year's harvest of 1.56 billion bushels.
Officials said the average yield, based on indications as of May 1, was estimated at 40.7 bushels an acre, compared with last year's 39.8 bushels.


Thermedics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thermedics Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,063,000
4,817,000
Net inc
b541,000
b257,000
Share earns
.03
.02
b-Includes gains of $317,000 and $96,000 from repurchase of debentures for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Moore Medical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moore Medical Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
57,870,000
56,539,000
Net inc
918,000
1,075,000
Share earns
.32
.38


Food Notes
LEAD:  Cajun Recipes in Braille


Lincoln Logs reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Logs
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,647,079
13,836,731
Net inc
650,012
367,986
Share earns
.50
.28


Kerr Glass Manufacturing Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kerr Glass Manufacturing Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
60,090,000
55,394,000
Net inc
17,000
b1,675,000
Share earns
-
.40
b-After a gain of $1,271,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Avondale Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avondale Industries Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
137,136,000
147,016,000
Net inc
233,000
b88,000
b-Net loss and after a loss of $3,028,000 from discontinued operations.
The company said share earnings for the latest quarter equals less than one cent a share.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of Ascension Thursday, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City Thursday.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Gunmen Slay Salvadoran Judge
LEAD: Unidentified gunmen shot a Salvadoran military judge to death outside his home today shortly before he was due to make a decision on an amnesty for jailed members of a right-wing kidnapping ring.


Outcry From Some Singapore Detainees
LEAD: Government opponents were detained last year under Singapore's Internal Security Act.
Here are passages from a statement issued by eight of them April 18:


When Will Rome Let Women Be Priests?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Roosevelt Federal Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roosevelt Federal Savings &amp; Loan (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,339,000
b5,723,000
Per share
.78
1.06
b-Includes a $1,795,000 tax credit.


MDC Holdings Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MDC Holdings Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
129,577,000
140,892,000
Net inc
1,899,000
b17,042,000
Share earns
.10
.84
Shares outst
18,130,000
20,264,000
b-Included a gain of $10,900,000 from an accounting change.


DEAL WITH NORIEGA REPORTED DRAWN
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has formulated a proposal under which it would drop all drug-related charges against Panama's military leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, in exchange for his speedy departure from the country, Administration officials said today.


Review/Television; Bringing the Invisible People of AIDS Into Focus
LEAD: The patient is dying.
Gathering for the death vigil, family and friends self-consciously try to comfort the patient and one another.
It would be a rather commonplace scene except that in this instance the patient has AIDS and just about all of his friends are gay.
And there is something else unusual about ''A Death in the Family,'' being shown this evening at 9 on Channel 13.


BI Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BI Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,345,000
410,000
Net inc
b76,000
c261,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
3,821,000
900,000
Net inc
b379,000
c846,000
Share earns
.15
-
b-Includes tax credits of $6,000 for the quarter and $31,000 for the 9 months.


Monitor Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monitor Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,292,319
2,360,600
Net inc
323,973
190,054
Share earns
.18
.10
Shares outst
1,768,823
1,866,089


Yanks Continue Scoring Barrage
LEAD: Beware the second spot in the Yankees' batting order.
If Joel Skinner or Bobby Meacham should somehow hit in that spot tomorrow night, he very likely will hit his first home run of the season.


In Gdansk, Elders Watched as the Young Struck
LEAD: They stood there in the faded blue denim of Poland's working class, broad men with their hands dug deep in pockets against a chill wind off the Baltic Sea.


Cable TV Monopoly Is Suggested
LEAD: Technological advances may eventually dictate that a single entity provide cable television services nationwide, the president of the nation's largest cable system operator told a Congressional panel today.


'Rapist's Voice' Trial Ending in Shouts
LEAD: In deliberations that have turned into shouting matches, a jury here is grappling with an unusual and emotion-charged case - a masked rapist who terrorized Long Island's South Shore, leaving a string of victims who say they can identify him not on sight, but by his taped voice.


A Redesign For Jewish Museum Expansion
LEAD: In a dramatic reversal of its plan to build a modern condominium tower, the Jewish Museum - at Fifth Avenue and 92d Street - said yesterday that it would construct a seven-story addition in the same French Gothic Chateau style as the landmark 1908 Warburg mansion that it now occupies.


Alger Hiss Recalls Emotional Side of His 2 Trials
LEAD:  Recollections of a Life  By Alger Hiss  Illustrated. 240 pages.
Seaver/Henry Holt. $19.95.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: WHEN Judy Monnin thinks about her childhood, she cannot remember a single time when her parents apologized to her or admitted they were wrong.
She described them as strict but loving.
And - in the image they presented to her - always right. ''Nobody in authority had to explain themselves to us,'' said Ms.


National FSI Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National FSI Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,549,000
4,129,000
Net inc
111,000
89,000
Share earns
.04
.03


Diagnostic Ventures reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagnostic Ventures
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,675,337
857,259
Net inc
157,111
b89,419
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
12,475,233
1,419,405
Net inc
229,217
b181,042
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


CLC of American Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CLC of American Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,267,000
17,516,000
Net loss
462,000
b2,000,000
b-Includes a charge of $716,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Schoenfeld Regrets The Commotion
LEAD: Jim Schoenfeld, the Devils' coach, said today that he regretted the incident that caused his suspension and the publicity it has attracted.


Sports People; White Sox Progress
LEAD: Chicago White Sox owners have agreed not to move their team if Illinois lawmakers approve a revised lease on a new stadium, saving the team up to $60 million over 10 years, Gov.
James R. Thompson said yesterday. ''They have given us their word that if we pass this bill, they'll stay,'' Thompson said at a news conference.


Sports People; A Dash of Spice
LEAD: The sprinting jrivals Ben Johnson of Canada and Carl Lewis of the United States will compete head to head in the 100-meter dash at a French meet on June 27, their first showdown since Johnson's world-record performance last September during the world championships in Rome.


Autopsy Reveals Crushed Neck
LEAD: An autopsy on the body of a Brooklyn man with epilepsy and heart trouble who died in police custody this week revealed a severe neck injury, according to preliminary findings announced yesterday by the New York City Medical Examiner's office.


Daniel Peterkin Jr., 82, Ex-President of Morton
LEAD: Daniel Peterkin Jr., former chairman of Morton-Norwich Products Inc., now Morton Thiokol Inc., died from complications of heart disease Monday at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 82 years old and lived in Chicago.


Swiss Urged to Lift Barriers
LEAD: The British Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, said today that the Swiss Government must be prepared to allow British companies to make takeover bids in Switzerland without legal restrictions if Swiss companies expect to be able to buy British concerns.


That's the Way a 'Berliner' Crumbles
LEAD: To the Editor:


RJR Picks Chairman At New Del Monte Unit
LEAD: RJR Nabisco Inc. announced yesterday that it was creating Del Monte Foods to stand as a separate major business, alongside its tobacco and Nabisco Brands operations.
It named Robert J. Carbonell chairman and chief executive of the new unit.


IGI Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IGI Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,079,415
3,909,820
Net inc
206,574
202,648
Share earns
.03
.03


Air Crash Laid to Fuel Leak
LEAD: A fuel leak has been found in the engine of a Horizon Air commuter aircraft that caught fire and crash-landed last month at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, injuring 19 people, investigators said.
The leak occurred because a ring was out of place in a fuel filter assembly, and the filter was not seated properly, Ted Lopatkiewicz of the National Transportation Safety Board said.


Southland Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southland Communications
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
822,001
563,069
Net loss
308,882
56,856


Washington Real Estate Investment Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Real Estate Investment Trust (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,261,850
5,571,543
Net inc
2,725,286
2,451,984
Share earns
.30
.27


The Struggle to Keep Family Time Quality Time
LEAD: ALTHOUGH her family's daily routine is already ''pretty hellish,'' said Sharon Marshall, she and her husband, Edward Willinger, scramble to be able to eat dinner with their two children in their Brooklyn home at least five days a week.
The result, however, is not always worth the valiant effort.
At the table, Ms.


Venturian Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Venturian Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,776,000
7,312,000
Net loss
10,000
b158,000
Share earns
-
.15
b-Net income


Mortgage-Backed Chemical Offering
LEAD: The Chemical Acceptance Corporation, a subsidiary of the Chemical Bank, is offering mortgage pass-through certificates to the public.
The First Boston Corporation heads the underwriting group.


Jaclyn Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jaclyn Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,709,000
14,304,000
Net inc
1,033,000
658,000
Share earns
.41
.27
9mo rev
66,515,000
44,390,000
Net inc
3,218,000
1,841,000
Share earns
1.29
.75


The Vote Count in the Primaries
LEAD:
$
Nebraska
West Virginia
All precincts reporting
99% of precincts reporting
DEMOCRATS
Dukakis
105,518 (63%)
254,206 (79%)
Jackson
43,117 (26%)
45,111 (14%)
Others
18,767 (11%)
22,923 ( 7%)
All precincts reporting
99% of precincts reporting
REPUBLICANS
Bush
137,162 (71%)
108,421 (89%)
Robertson
10,264 ( 5%)
10,494 ( 9%)
Others
45,347 (24%)
2,552 ( 2%)


REAGAN ENDORSES BUSH AS SUCCESSOR
LEAD: President Reagan ended one of Washington's longest-running and least suspenseful political dramas tonight when he endorsed Vice President Bush as his successor.


Snyder Oil Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Snyder Oil Partners LP (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,196,000
11,179,000
Net inc
1,491,000
1,653,000
Share earns
.06
.09


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
73,393,000
57,357,000
Net inc
1,824,000
b108,000
Share earns
.33
-
Yr sales
254,581,000
212,234,000
Net inc
5,203,000
c462,000
Share earns
.96
.09


China Said to Seek Bond Credit Rating
LEAD: China has hired the Morgan Stanley Group to help it obtain a credit rating for possible bond issues in the United States, Chinese sources said today.
They gave no timetable but called this the ''first step in a long process.''


Radiation Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radiation Technology Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
723,280
576,029
Net loss
433,246
871,518
The company said the year-ago first quarter results included $120,000 for a loss on project abandonment of a facility in Elizabeth, N.J.


Coradian Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coradian Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,914,000
2,372,000
Net inc
403,000
b235,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss  The company said the revenue increase was primarily because of the acquisition of Private Telephone Technologies Corp.


Humana to Buy Maxicare H.M.O.'s
LEAD: As part of a previously planned $120 million restructuring, Maxicare Health Plans Inc. agreed to sell its health maintenance organizations in Kentucky and San Antonio, representing 143,000 members, to Humana Inc. for undisclosed terms.


Review/Television; 'Koppel Report' on TV Evangelists
LEAD: ''The Koppel Report'' separates itself from ''Nightline'' by giving us more of Ted Koppel.
The program tonight, the first in a quarterly series, begins and ends with him in the pew of small country church; the rest of the time he's in an auditorium with 7 evangelists, 4,000 Christians and a large choir.


Datakey Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datakey Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,020,681
847,408
Net inc
b701,683
b80,504
Share earns
.20
.02
b-Included tax credits of $279,500 for the latest quarter and $32,000 for the year-earlier period.


Furniture of Original Design and Aboriginal Flavor
LEAD: MATTIA BONETTI and Elizabeth Garouste, a Paris-based design team, believe in contradictions.
In their new collection of tables, chairs and lamps, which is being shown at Furniture of the Twentieth Century beginning Saturday, they combine primitive imagery with sophisticated design; rough-hewn materials like wrought iron or cast bronze with lacquered wood or sandblasted glass.


Mets Score 3 in 9th, Beat Astros in 10th
LEAD: Terry Leach saw the ball that Tim Teufel hit in the ninth inning clear the wall and bang solidly off the concrete above it.
His view from the bullpen was clear, his angle good, his opinion unshakable. ''It was a home run,'' Leach said.
As Leach, who eventually would be the winning pitcher, soon learned, tonight's 10-inning, 9-8 comeback victory over the


Parks Book Aids the Disabled
LEAD: ''ACCESS AMERICA,'' the most ambitious project to date of Northern Cartographic, a small Vermont publishing house, is a much-needed reference work that describes in text and full-color photographs, charts and maps the facilities and programs for the disabled at 37 national parks.


Prime Computer To Cut 700 Jobs
LEAD: Prime Computer Inc. said it plans to lay off about 700 employees, about 5 percent of its work force, as part of the first phase of its integration of the Computervision Corporation, a computer work station maker that Prime acquired in February.


N.H.L. Playoffs; Oilers Gain Final
LEAD: Craig Simpson and Mike Krushelnyski each had two goals and an assist tonight as the Edmonton Oilers beat the Detroit Red Wings, 8-4, and advanced to the Stanley Cup finals.


Bralorne Resources Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bralorne Resources Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
25,471,000
18,414,000
Net loss
1,359,000
b3,377,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-Net income and after an extraordinary gain of $5,648,000.


Bowl America Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bowl America Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Revenue
7,363,310
6,692,073
Net inc
1,559,489
1,041,063
Share earns
.81
.54
9mo rev
17,991,065
16,518,128
Net inc
2,794,797
1,826,478
Share earns
1.46
.95


Sports People; Keenan Dismissed
LEAD: Mike Keenan of the Philadelphia Flyers, who had the best winning percentage (.638) among active National Hockey League coaches and one year remaining on a three-year contract, was dismissed yesterday.
Keenan and Bob Clarke, the general manager, were unable to resolve contract differences.
Keenan, the coach of the Flyers for four seasons, demanded a contract clause that would let him leave for a general manager's job elsewhere in the league, if one were offered.


Yields Post Broad Rise
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds rose in the week ended yesterday, but the momentum may well increase significantly after yesterday's rise in the prime rate.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Agency Sells One-on-One Marketing
LEAD: RAPP &amp; COLLINS, one of the better direct-marketing agencies, has won eight accounts in the last 12 months.
Six came in as the result of the book ''Maximarketing,'' written by Stan Rapp and Tom Collins and published by McGraw-Hill in November 1986.


Radiant Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radiant Technology Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,690,300
1,324,600
Net inc
b85,500
c16,600
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
3,221,300
2,909,600
Net inc
b167,200
c29,500
Share earns
.06
.01


Arms Control for City Schools
LEAD: In too many New York City schools, guns and knives are as common as notebooks.
School Chancellor Richard Green deserves support for his efforts to turn the deadly tide.


Stores Suffer Without the Williamsburg
LEAD: Since the 85-year-old Williamsburg Bridge was closed to vehicles nearly a month ago, merchants on both sides of it have coped with the sudden disappearance of their customers by cleaning, pacing and looking for any conceivable sign that the bridge will reopen.


Record U.S. Fish Catch
LEAD: United States fishermen had a record catch of 6.9 billion pounds of fish and shellfish last year, breaking the previous record of 6.5 billion pounds set in 1980, the Government said on Tuesday.
The 1987 catch, valued at $3.1 billion, was 865 million pounds higher than the 1986 total, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said.


Corken International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corken International
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,569,000
2,338,000
Net inc
219,000
225,000
Share earns
.07
.08
9mo rev
7,544,000
6,985,000
Net inc
713,000
608,000
Share earns
.24
.21


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Bank
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,200,000
5,900,000
Net inc
946,706
969,755
Share earns
.39
.40
Yr rev
23,900,000
23,700,000
Net inc
3,800,000
3,500,000
Share earns
1.56
-
The prior year share earnings were not available because the company was not publicly held during the entire year.


The Needless Tragedies of Accutane
LEAD: Accutane is a valuable drug with a horrifying side effect.
It's a unique cure for the severest form of acne, but when taken by pregnant women it often causes deformities in the fetus.
Use of the drug has been badly mismanaged by its maker, Hoffmann-La Roche, by the Food and Drug Administration and by the doctors who carelessly prescribed it.


Texstyrene Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texstyrene Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
43,548,000
37,968,000
Net loss
449,000
b7,979,000
b-Includes a $7,184,000 non-recurring change for an accounting change.


Giant Group Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Giant Group Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,063,000
14,962,000
Net inc
741,000
113,000
Share earns
.16
.02


Energy Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energy Service (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
27,589,000
9,835,000
Net inc
b2,026,000
1,172,000
Share earns
.03
.03
b-Included a $3 million gain from insurance proceeds on the loss of an offshore drilling rig.


As Strikes End, Solidarity Finds Its Power Is Limited, but So Too Is the Government's
LEAD: Today, for the first time in more than two weeks, Poland was free of labor disruptions, sit-ins or other strife.


Southern California Water Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern California Water Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,781,000
16,178,000
Net inc
1,379,000
b2,478,000
Share earns
.44
.79
b-Includes a gain from an accounting change of $1,575,000.


ESI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ESI Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
26,939,469
21,490,230
Net inc
b554,472
652,607
Share earns
.12
.13
b-Includes a gain of $326,000 from an income-tax accounting change.


State-O-Maine Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* State-O-Maine Inc
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
10,078,516
5,863,643
Net inc
349,867
241,009
Share earns
.15
.11
Yr sales
55,267,944
36,252,833
Net inc
4,062,108
2,087,874
Share earns
1.70
.96


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
British Airways P.L.C., London, said it wants to fly the supersonic Concorde to Atlanta as part of its regularly scheduled service.
The tentative plan calls for three Concorde flights a week from London to Washington to Atlanta.


Trump Sale Of Resorts Collapses
LEAD: Donald J. Trump's deal to sell his controlling interest in Resorts International Inc. to Merv Griffin collapsed today, and the men immediately resumed their feud over the Atlantic City hotel-casino company.


Carnegie Hall Marks a Milestone for a Cornerstone
LEAD: In the course of building its future, Carnegie Hall has been digging up its past.
Tomorrow at 4 P.M. both strands of history will be joined in a special ceremony on West 57th Street.


Doughtie's Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Doughtie's Foods Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,800,000
12,361,000
Net inc
7,700
127,700
Share earns
.01
.12


Columbia Savings &amp; Loan Association reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia Savings &amp; Loan Association (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b5,258,000
c98,034,000
Share earns
.13
2.60
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $4,855,000 on sales of loans and a pretax loss of $1,813,000 on sales of securities.


Queens Jewelry Thief Charged After a Car Chase
LEAD: As cinema, it had everything: a brazen jewelry thief, an outraged victim, a fearless retired detective, gunfire, a car chase, a foot race, a stolen vehicle, a severed ear, a traffic accident, an innocent bystander struck down, a heroic but anonymous civilian - even the United States Army.
But it was no movie.


Reuter Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reuter Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,082,000
6,194,464
Net loss
149,800
b581,180
Share earns
-
.25
b-Net income


Medicore Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medicore Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,610,712
4,298,188
Net inc
b264,138
b291,789
Share earns
.06
.06
b-Includes tax credits of $16,716 and $25,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Keeping a Secret
LEAD: The messages in dispute were secretly exchanged 17 years ago between Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's national security adviser, and Kenneth Rush, the United States Ambassador to West Germany.


Statue of Nurse Supported
LEAD: Legislation authorizing a bronze statue of a female Army nurse at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial was approved by a Senate committee today over a dissenter's protest that the memorial might become a sculpture garden for special interest groups.


United Inns Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Inns Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
42,058,169
41,774,060
Net inc
b702,849
c533,232
Share earns
.26
-
6mo rev
80,352,033
82,495,646
Net inc
646,825
c1,637,142
Share earns
.24
-


U.S. Fines Meatpacker $3.1 Million Over Injuries
LEAD: The Occupational Safety and Health Administration imposed a $3.1 million fine today against a major meatpacker for requiring employees to do repetitive motions that endangered their health.


Raytech Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raytech Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
38,344,000
33,410,000
Net loss
3,441,000
b1,999,000
Share earns
-
.65
b-Net income and includes tax credits of $696,000.


McCormick Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McCormick Capital
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,717,543
2,476,893
Net inc
204,765
161,630
Share earns
.08
.06


Review/Cabaret; Susannah McCorkle's Point of View
LEAD: The probing curiosity with which Susannah McCorkle gathers songs for her repertory brings a special sparkle to her program at Fat Tuesday's (190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street), where she is singing through Sunday.


Technical Tape Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technical Tape Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,823,000
17,107,000
Net inc
194,000
b1,076,000
Share earns
.05
.23
b-Includes an accounting change gain of $460,000.


Texas Bank Unsure of Rescue Cost
LEAD: The recapitalization of the First Republicbank Corporation is likely to be completed this year but the amount of aid that will be needed from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is impossible to estimate, Albert V. Casey, the banking company's chairman and chief executive, told reporters today.


Compuchem Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compuchem Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,506,000
3,545,000
Net inc
256,000
b404,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss


Study Suggests One Saturated Fat May Deserve Clean Bill of Health
LEAD: A new study has shown that stearic acid, one of the main saturated fats in beef and chocolate, may actually lower cholesterol levels in the blood and thus moderate the cholesterol-raising effect of other saturated fats in these foods.


Market Place; Some Confusion For Regulators
LEAD: A PROPOSAL by the Philadelphia Stock Exchange for a new trading instrument is fueling a controversy over which regulators are responsible for the oversight of products that have qualities of both a security and a futures contract.


Estimate of New Homes
LEAD: An organization representing the nation's home builders said Tuesday that it expected 1.5 million new homes to be started this year, down from 1987, but still what the group's leader described as a ''reasonably good'' showing.
Dale Stuard, president of the National Association of Home Builders, said single-family homes would account for 1.1 million starts in 1988, with multifamily homes accounting for about 400,000 starts.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Bird Leads Celtics by Hawks
LEAD: Larry Bird set a team playoff record with 24 points in the first quarter and the Boston Celtics held off a late rally by the Atlanta Hawks for a 110-101 victory in the opener of their National Basketball Association second-round playoff series tonight.


Alpha Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpha Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,680,000
17,217,000
Net loss
2,642,000
677,000
Yr sales
62,215,000
70,083,000
Net loss
3,203,000
818,000
The company said the latest quarter included a charge of $2.6 million related to writeoff of excess plant capacity, various unresolved litigation and contract-related issues, and writedown of its investment in Omega Microwave.


Knowledge Data reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knowledge Data
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,815,000
2,548,000
Net loss
631,000
b64,000
6mo rev
3,314,000
4,667,000
Net loss
1,440,000
b96,000
b-Net income


TV Notes
LEAD:  A Lip Theory of Identity ''Most of the things start in the lips.'' Daws Butler was telling how he slips into the voice of Jimmy Stewart or Charles Laughton - not to say Huckleberry Hound, whose 30th year will be celebrated with a cartoon movie on May 21 from 1 to 3 P.M., on Channel 5.


Pork Prices Sharply Higher As Drop in Supplies Is Seen
LEAD: Prices of pork futures rose sharply yesterday on a combination of technical factors and indications that a seasonal downturn in hog supplies had begun, analysts said.


Schoenfeld's Regrets
LEAD: Jim Schoenfeld, the Devils' coach, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena yesterday.
He said he regretted the incident that caused his suspension and that ''the light should be shining on the players.'' Page B11. (NYT/George McNish)


Chess Set With an Edge
LEAD: THOUGH chess sets are customarily made of such weighty materials as ebony, ivory or wood, Peter Hewitt has departed from this convention by designing a chess set of paper.
The design was perhaps, for him, inevitable.


Business Men's Assurance Co of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Business Men's Assurance Co of America (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b776,000
c1,552,000
Share earns
.08
.15
b-After a loss of $807,000 from investment losses.
c-After investment gains of $1,389,000 and a tax credit of $383,000.


West Virginia Republicans Back Gov. Arch Moore Jr. for 4th Term
LEAD: Republican primary voters gave Senator David K. Karnes of Nebraska a victory in the first election of his career and Gov.
Arch A. Moore Jr. of West Virginia a chance at a fourth term.


Physio Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Physio Technology
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,614,756
1,736,963
Net inc
31,028
b239,965
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
4,314,463
5,333,007
Net loss
444,357
198,402
b-Net loss


Prime Motor Inns LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Motor Inns LP (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,135,000
4,199,000
Net inc
794,000
983,000
Share earns
.20
.24


KN Energy Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KN Energy Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
108,944,000
92,529,000
Net inc
6,303,000
b9,720,000
Share earns
.64
1.02
b-After a gain of $3,158,000 from an accounting change.


Suspension &amp; Parts Indusries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suspension &amp; Parts Indusries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,055,530
2,165,530
Net inc
151,085
239,917
Share earns
.04
.07


New Index Future Allowed
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission today approved a new stock index futures contract for the first time since the October stock market crash.


Buck Clayton Big Band
LEAD: The jazz trumpeter Buck Clayton, a Count Basie alumnus, is to appear with his big band on May 12 at 8 P.M. at the Loeb Student Center of New York University, 566 La Guardia Place.
The concert is the last of the Highlights in Jazz series at the university.
Also appearing are to be Marty Napoleon, pianist; Harold Alden, guitarist; Spanky Davis, Randy Sandke and Paul Cohen, trumpeters, and Loren Schoenberg, a tenor.


Lottery Games Shut Down In Connecticut
LEAD: On Sunday, with ''horns, bells and whistles,'' according to its director, the Connecticut State Lottery went on line with its new computer system.
Yesterday, with the alarm sounded by two ticket sellers who knew they weren't entitled to $16,500 they had won, the entire system was shut down for most of the day.


Thrift Unit Notes Issued in Michigan
LEAD: First Federal of Michigan is offering $100 million of floating-rate notes due in 1993 through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.
The notes' initial interest rate, or coupon, is 7.26 percent.
The underwriters said the notes would be offered to the public at various prices.


IPM Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IPM Inc
Qtr to March 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,475,749
851,920
Net inc
125,153
92,691
6mo sales
3,129,466
1,865,994
Net inc
267,174
164,809
Share earns
.01
-
IPM recently changed its name from Investitech Ltd.


Staley Holds Talks With Tate &amp; Lyle
LEAD: Staley Continental Inc. held talks with the British sugar refiner Tate &amp; Lyle P.L.C., which announced a one-day extension of its $1.38 billion buyout bid for Staley.
But Staley, a major United States producer of corn syrup and food-service supplies, said the talks with its English suitor did not mean it was ready to sell.


Celebrating Irving Berlin's 100th Birthday
LEAD: Marilyn Horne and the United States Army Chorus singing 'God Bless America' during a gala salute last night at Carnegie Hall.
Page C25.


II-VI Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* II-VI Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,329,000
2,517,000
Net inc
362,000
199,000
Share earns
.14
.10
Shares outst
2,625,000
1,986,000
9mo rev
8,945,000
7,149,000
Net inc
862,000
455,000
Share earns
.35
.22
Shares outst
2,442,000
2,049,000


Tiffany &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tiffany &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
55,297,000
43,390,000
Net inc
2,915,000
1,021,000
Share earns
.28
.12
Shares outst
10,237,297
8,221,368


Central Vermont Public Servce Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Vermont Public Servce Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
64,777,000
59,197,000
Net inc
11,941,000
10,261,000
Share earns
1.72
1.46


Dillard Department Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dillard Department Stores Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
517,382,000
416,727,000
Net inc
16,018,000
14,502,000
Share earns
.50
.45


Sports People; Manhattan's Choice
LEAD: Manhattan College, whose basketball teams of the last four seasons have managed to win only 23 of 113 games under three different head coaches, yesterday attempted to break out of that losing rut by hiring Steve Lappas, an assistant under Rollie Massimino at Villanova.


U.N. Picks Afghan Aid Official
LEAD: Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, a former United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, was named today to coordinate all international relief and resettlement efforts in Afghanistan as the Soviet military withdrawal begins.


Proposed Insider-Trading Bill Worries Wall St. Lobbyists
LEAD: The securities industry and its lobbyists are up in arms over a proposed insider-trading law that is quietly being circulated among leading members of the House.


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: IT'S interesting to note the way medical miracles can go from brave new world to simple acceptance almost overnight.
Once it was a major news event when a heart from one person was placed in the chest of another.
Once it stopped the presses when a baby was born of an egg fertilized outside a woman's body.


Sports of The Times; Give Devils Their Due
LEAD: AFTER the silliness of the past week in the National Hockey League, it would be a shame to lose sight of two major things behind the famous ''Have Another Doughnut'' incident involving Jim Schoenfeld and Don Koharski.


Samson Energy Co LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Samson Energy Co LP (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,856,511
2,313,426
Net inc
470,796
34,862
Share earns
.13
.02
Shares outst
3,451,557
2,042,108


Neco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neco Enterprises (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,068,939
11,578,670
Net inc
520,508
213,012
Share earns
.51
.19


Cali Charged By S.E.C.
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today charged Cali Computer Systems Inc. and three of its senior officers with filing false and misleading financial information about the company in a two-year period from 1983 until 1985.


Baseball Notebook; Royals Hit Hard Times Again This Year
LEAD: Once more, the Kansas City Royals are fooling their architects.


Playing Fast and Loose on the Poverty Line
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sports People; Defending Budd
LEAD: One day after Zola Budd abandoned her bid to run in the Olympic Games for Britain and returned to her hometown of Bloemfontein in South Africa, saying she was angry and bitter but too exhausted to continue fighting against critics, newspapers in South Africa took to the defense of Budd.
The Citizen, a pro-Government daily in Johannesburg, said to Budd's foes: '


Sage Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sage Laboratories Inc
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Sales
1,290,280
1,132,870
Net inc
121,520
111,120
Share earns
.30
.27
9mo sales
3,815,773
3,035,449
Net inc
297,253
265,708
Share earns
.72
.61


Morino Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morino Associates (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,154,000
9,081,000
Net inc
2,483,000
2,264,000
Share earns
.24
.22
9mo rev
33,918,000
25,288,000
Net inc
7,039,000
5,350,000
Share earns
.68
.53


Bruins Are Seeking Redress
LEAD: The Boston Bruins, who go for the clinching victory tonight in their Stanley Cup semifinal series against the Devils, asked the league yesterday to forfeit last Sunday night's game to the Bruins and declare them the winner of the series.


US Facilities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US Facilities
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,716,000
7,028,000
Net loss
b305,000
c388,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Includes a $136,000 gain on sale of securities.
c-Net income and includes a gain of $84,000 on sale of securities.


Star Witness
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, former Treasury Secretary, listening to his horoscope during Senate hearings.
Mr.
Regan was more concerned with discussing the markets' future than his own. (NYT/Timothy Murphy)


Peril Seen in Pentagon's Biological Research
LEAD: An 18-month review by staff members of a Senate committee has found ''serious deficiencies'' in the Pentagon's safety procedures for research into defenses against chemical and biological weapons, according to a report issued today.


Internal Struggle by Contras Seen as Threat to Movement
LEAD: The Nicaraguan rebels have failed to resolve a three-week-old internal power struggle that is now so acute that it may split their movement apart, senior rebel leaders and American officials say.


All in the Family
LEAD: For years, conservative groups have been emphasizing their dedication to a cluster of what they call family issues, chief among them a campaign against abortion.
Now moderates and liberals are serving notice that they do not intend to give right-wing groups title to family matters.


Lay Off the Layoff
LEAD: ''We've got to be out of our minds,'' says a Republican pol. ''Here we are with the blue-collar vote up for grabs, and we hand Dukakis his dream issue -notification of plant closings.
We're for the bosses, he's for the workers.
Whatsamatter, can't Reagan count?'' Certainly it seems a peculiar place to draw a line in the sand.


No Cuba-Soviet Strain, Defector Says
LEAD: A senior Cuban Government official who has defected says that despite widespread speculation of friction between the Soviet Union and Cuba over conflicting economic policies, there is no tension between the two countries.


Control Resources Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Control Resources Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,900,000
8,684,000
Net loss
1,613,000
b221,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income


Banner Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banner Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
217,142,000
87,865,000
Net inc
b3,789,000
d775,000
Share earns
.65
.12
9mo sales
621,162,000
160,965,000
Net loss
b7,988,000
cd5,886,000
Share earns
-
1.23


Rai Research Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rai Research Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
1,378,386
1,318,165
Net inc
72,212
17,806
Share earns
.03
.01
9mo rev
3,366,894
5,612,818
Net loss
134,778
b640,156
Share earns
-
.25
b-Net income


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-19  News analysis: Polish labor unrest was prompted by issues still unresolved and a new calm after more than two weeks of turmoil may not be any more durable than the previous one.
Page A1  The contras have failed to resolve a three-week-old internal power struggle that is now so acute that it may split the Nicaraguan rebel movement apart, senior rebel leaders and American officials say.


Review/Comedy; Spoofing Old-Time TV
LEAD: Mike, an invented character who is the comic alter ego of the performance artist Michael Smith, is busy becoming the Ed Sullivan of the downtown performance world.
A bland, dimwitted square who wears an M-I-K-E belt buckle and foolishly tries out every new household gadget, Mike is the host of two live monthly variety shows.


Gabriel Kirschenbaum, Army Colonel, 87
LEAD: Dr.
Gabriel Kirschenbaum, a retired Army colonel, died Tuesday of congestive heart failure resulting from leukemia at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Metro Matters; After 100 Years, Casey's Strikeout Is Still a Hit
LEAD: On the ground floor of 1220 Broadway, Bruce Lee, manager of the Seoul Trading Corporation, briefly glanced up from an inventory form yesterday to answer two questions about baseball.
Yes, he said, he fancies himself a fan - he follows the Mets.
No, he never heard of a player named Casey.


Once Wild Is Winner as Belmont Opens; Front-Running Withers Victory
LEAD: Once Wild cruised through the mud to score a front-running 1 1/2-length victory in the $115,600 Withers Stakes yesterday on opening day at Belmont Park.
The triumph may have earned him a trip to the Preakness Stakes at Pimlico May 21, where his presence could compromise the chances of Winning Colors, the front-running filly who won the Kentucky Derby last


Review/Music; Faure Requiem Restyled For Chamber Orchestra
LEAD: According to John Rutter, the Faure Requiem with which modern audiences are most familiar may not in fact have been written by Faure.
Mr.
Rutter, a composer and choir conductor from Britain, brought to Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday evening his own reconstruction of the score, one that called for a chamber ensemble rather than full orchestra and that most faithfully conforms, he says, to the composer's intentions.


Van Gogh's 'Adeline Ravoux' Is Sold
LEAD: Van Gogh's glowing blue 1890 portrait of Adeline Ravoux was sold last night at Christie's for $13.8 million -more than six times the price paid for it in 1980.
Neither the buyer nor the seller were identified.


Allis-Chalmers Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allis-Chalmers Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
92,795,000
94,564,000
Net loss
9,708,000
b9,726,000
b-After a gain of $1,714,000 from discontinued operations.


Kurzweil Music Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kurzweil Music Systems Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,063,000
2,147,000
Net inc
373,000
b886,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Wharf Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wharf Resources
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,900,000
1,800,000
Net inc
1,200,000
b700,000
Share earns
.06
-
b-Net loss and included a $235,000 charge from early retirement of long- term debt and a $521,000 loss on foreign currency translation.


2 Ex-Fugitives Convicted of Roles In Fatal Armored-Truck Robbery
LEAD: Two former fugitives, Mutulu Shakur and Marilyn Buck, were convicted yesterday of taking part in a 1981 Brink's robbery in which a guard and two police officers were killed in Rockland County.


Historic New Orleans Building Burns
LEAD: Firefighters pouring water onto the roof of the Cabildo in the French Quarter yesterday afternoon.
The building, which dates to 1795, was the seat of French and Spanish colonial governments of Louisiana and was the scene of the formal transfer of the territory from France to the United States in 1803.


Ampal-American Israel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ampal-American Israel Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
34,074,000
28,616,000
Net inc
1,566,000
1,314,000
Share earns
.07
.06


Markel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Markel Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b2,108,000
b1,468,000
Share earns
.58
.40
b-Includes a capital loss of $146,000 for the latest quarter and a capital gain of $128,000 for the year-ago period.


Preferred Health Care reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Preferred Health Care
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,471,252
2,268,643
Net inc
927,100
727,200
Share earns
.10
.07


Mystery Writers Hear Word From Front Lines
LEAD: Homicide was the ghost at a banquet of the International Congress of Crime Writers yesterday, because the guest speaker, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, had white-collar crime on his mind and plate.


Cosmo Communications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cosmo Communications Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,550,000
8,636,000
Net inc
249,000
b68,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Starrett, L S Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Starrett, L S Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Sales
40,992,633
36,608,146
Net inc
4,002,102
3,210,927
Share earns
1.15
.92
9mo sales
125,176,266
104,112,392
Net inc
11,561,272
9,790,082
Share earns
3.33
2.79


ACCORD ON CLOSING SHOREHAM PLANT IS REPORTED NEAR
LEAD: New York State and the Long Island Lighting Company have reached several ''agreements in principle'' that are likely to result in the abandonment of the $5.3 billion Shoreham nuclear power plant.
It would be the first time in the United States that a completed nuclear plant was shut down before it began operating.


Defiance Precision Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Defiance Precision Products
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Revenue
15,710,000
14,954,000
Net loss
961,000
b117,000
Share earns
-
.03
9mo rev
45,367,000
22,690,000
Net loss
4,117,000
230,000
b-Net income


Asamera Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Asamera Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
28,481,000
29,021,000
Net inc
b728,000
c1,846,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-After a charge of $7,365,000 incurred as a result of a takeover offer by Gulf Canada Resources Ltd.


Medalist Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medalist Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
31,277,000
29,497,000
Net inc
130,000
228,000
Share earns
.06
.10


Enviropact Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enviropact Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,398,279
3,733,975
Net inc
1,184
144,561
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
25,601,545
9,673,099
Net inc
845,674
475,040
Share earns
.26
.19
Shares outst
3,209,461
2,538,806


Why Diapers Don't Make Horse Sense
LEAD: To the Editor:


Man Acquitted in AIDS Case
LEAD: A Navy technician accused of having sex with his fiancee without telling her he was infected with the AIDS virus was acquitted of assault today by a military jury.


Communications Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,324,374
10,888,360
Net inc
556,608
877,870
Share earns
.11
.17


House Passes a Military Bill at Odds With Reagan Priorities
LEAD: The House today approved a $299.5 billion military programs bill that is sharply at odds with two of President Reagan's top priorities: deployment in the 1990's of a limited defense against nuclear missiles and a rail system on which to base the MX missile.


Illness Prompts Study of Pregnancies
LEAD: An outbreak of a common childhood illness, fifth disease, in the schools of Torrington, Conn., has prompted a major testing program in Connecticut by Federal, state and local health officials who hope to learn more about how the disease affects pregnant women.


Salomon International Chooses President
LEAD: Salomon Brothers International Ltd., the London arm of the investment banking house, said yesterday that James L. Massey, a senior Salomon executive from New York, had been named president and chief executive to succeed Miles A. Slater, whose resignation was announced.


GF Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GF Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
35,377,000
31,492,000
Net loss
194,000
b154,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Manila Frets Over Export Of Its Women
LEAD: After years of abuse, the Philippines is trying to regulate what is described here as one of its most successful exports: its women.


Kim Philby, Double Agent, Dies
LEAD: H. A. R. (Kim) Philby, the double agent whose betrayal of his country and his social class indelibly marked British politics, has died in Moscow, officials in London said yesterday.
He was 76 years old.


New Shop Uptown Celebrates Crafts Era
LEAD: ARTS and Crafts home furnishings - the austere oak furniture by Gustav Stickley, for example, or the hammered copper pots and lamps of Dirk Van Erp - can now be found on Madison Avenue.
Last week Beth Cathers and Nick Dembrosky opened a shop near 78th Street to specialize in furniture of the era, 1900 to 1916.


Check Deposits To Clear Faster
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board today issued rules that would require banks, savings institutions and credit unions to meet strict deadlines in making funds from check deposits available to customers.


Starting Over: Illustrator Drops Canvas for Straw
LEAD: THE Hamptons are not just a place to relax, but also, for Andre La Porte, a place to reinvent oneself.


Talking Deals; Why Sterling Did Not Move
LEAD: NO American city is more expensive than New York for doing business, says the conventional wisdom in real estate.
That, however, did not stop one real estate man from persuading a $2 billion pharmaceutical company that it could actually save money by staying in New York.


Horn &amp; Hardart Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horn &amp; Hardart Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Revenue
100,015,000
94,509,000
Net loss
1,675,000
b1,303,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income and after tax loss carryforwards of $521,000.


Enterra Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enterra Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,763,000
8,886,000
Net loss
662,000
b5,136,000
b-After net from discontinued operations of $176,000.


A Military Revolt Is Thwarted, Guatemala Reports
LEAD: Two army officers tried to stage a rebellion today against President Vinicio Cerezo's civilian Government, but the effort failed and they were arrested, the Defense Minister announced.


Sceptre Resources Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sceptre Resources Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
30,300,000
17,000,000
Net inc
2,200,000
2,200,000
Share earns
.02
.05
Shares outst
57,600,000
25,800,000
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Teflon in the Stars
LEAD: Above all things our royalty is to be reverenced, and if you begin to poke about it you cannot reverence it. . . .
We must not let in daylight upon magic. - Walter Bagehot, ''The English Constitution''


Literary Luminary Gets His Diploma After 57 Years
LEAD: Robert Giroux showed up at Regis High School in Manhattan two nights ago to accept the Campion award given by America magazine for service in the cause of Christian letters.
While he was there the Rev.
James J. Fischer, the president of the Jesuit school, had a surprise for him: the diploma he had forsaken when he dropped out of


Howe Richardson reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howe Richardson (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,320,000
17,360,000
Net inc
150,000
139,000
Share earns
.06
.05


Toying With the Unpardonable
LEAD: A month ago, President Reagan told some House Republicans that he liked the sound of a post-election pardon for Iran-contra defendants.
Later, a spokesman took it back: No, he said, that was just a throwaway line.


Cushman Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cushman Electronics Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,110,000
1,916,000
Net inc
143,000
b186,000
Share earns
.14
-
6mo sales
2,358,000
3,806,000
Net inc
235,000
bc150,000
Share earns
.23
-
b-Net loss


Next Wave Announces Schedule
LEAD: The Brooklyn Academy of Music will present 14 programs of dance, theater and music during its sixth annual Next Wave Festival from Oct. 19 through Dec. 17.
The festival - which is dedicated to new and experimental works in the performing arts - will include 18 world premieres, one American premiere and five works commissioned by the academy, according to the schedule announced yesterday by Harvey Lichtenstein, the academy's president.


Plexus Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plexus Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,340,000
5,540,000
Net loss
55,000
133,000
6mo sales
21,267,000
10,104,000
Net loss
105,000
497,000


Praxis Biologics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Praxis Biologics (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,127,410
3,264,355
Net loss
2,943,884
b206,325
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


U.S. ENVOY SEEKS MISSILES FOR OMAN
LEAD: The United States Ambassador to Oman, with the approval of the Administration, has asked Congress to reconsider the sale of Stinger antiaircraft missiles to Oman, just four months after Congress prohibited sales of such weapons to Oman and other countries in the Persian Gulf region.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Marietta Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marietta Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,714,714
3,752,771
Net inc
508,578
325,305
Share earns
.21
.14
6mo sales
10,575,776
7,069,781
Net inc
905,382
600,877
Share earns
.38
.25


American Equine Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Equine Products
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
504,383
477,890
Net loss
191,164
299,694


Danish Chief Resigns Amid Complex Maneuvering
LEAD: Prime Minister Poul Schluter resigned today after failing to win a clear mandate for his pro-NATO defense policies in the general election on Tuesday.


A Life in Central Moscow: Contented but Cloistered
LEAD: Harold A. R. (Kim) Philby lived a comfortable but somewhat cloistered life in the Soviet Union after defecting here in 1963.


Health; Paris Surgeons Transplant Same Liver Into 2 Patients
LEAD: Surgeons in Paris transplanted parts of the same liver into two different patients, one of the doctors has reported.


Review/Concert; Ancora Chamber Group
LEAD: The Ancora Chamber Ensemble brought a New England-oriented program to Merkin Concert Hall Monday night.
Unfortunately, about the most piquant aspect of the evening was that a group with ''ancora'' - Italian for ''again'' - in its title would offer four world premieres.


Long Sentence Imposed in Killing Of Chinese-American Journalist
LEAD: A gangster was sentenced today to 27 years to life in prison for killing a Chinese-American journalist in 1984, an act he testified was ordered by the Taiwan Government.


New College Newspaper Takes Digest Approach
LEAD: Just when magazines aimed at college students seemed to be a dying breed, a new national college newspaper has emerged.


First Executive Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Executive Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
811,985,000
973,395,000
Net inc
b49,369,000
b44,407,000
Share earns
.51
.45
b-After investment gains of $2,291,000 for the latest first quarter and $2,197,000 for the year-ago period.


'Rage of Venice' Sweeps Benefit Gala
LEAD: They were the same 800 or so faces that always seem to turn up at New York galas, only last night they were masked.
The occasion, at Lincoln Center, was a white-tie ball - with all the stops pulled out - to benefit the New York Philharmonic.


Laclede Gas Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laclede Gas Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
230,156,000
192,368,000
Net inc
20,599,000
16,708,000
Share earns
2.62
2.12
6mo rev
355,381,000
319,325,000
Net inc
28,231,000
24,440,000
Share earns
3.58
3.09


Two Forks Journal; Coloradans Anxiously Await Decision Over a Proposed Dam
LEAD: While the construction of Two Forks Dam on the South Platte River 25 miles southwest of here has been on the drawing board for decades, Coloradans have spent the last few weeks debating whether Denver and its suburbs need the 550-foot-high dam, now or ever.


Korea Shipyard Decline
LEAD: South Korea's shipbuilding orders have dropped by 41.3 percent this year, compared with the 1987 period, because of the national currency's appreciation in foreign exchange, officials said today.
The value of the South Korean won has risen 7.43 percent against the United States dollar since the beginning of the year.


3 More Killed as Standoff Persists at Sikh Temple
LEAD: Three more people were reported killed today in the third straight day of armed confrontation between Indian security forces and Sikh militants based in the Golden Temple at Amritsar, Sikhdom's holiest shrine.


A Bit of Hancock's History May Have Been Found
LEAD: Archeologists say they may have found traces of John Hancock's Beacon Hill estate amid piles of dirt dug up on the State House lawn during a renovation project.


A Broadside in Favor Of Aid for the Young
LEAD: The Reagan years have been hard on disadvantaged youths, in the opinion of liberal critics.
High budget deficits have resulted in the underfinancing of existing social programs, they say, and discouraged new efforts.
Especially harmful to those with nowhere else to turn, the critics contend, is the Reagan philosophy that government is largely part of the problem of poverty instead of the solution to it.


A New Antiques Fair With an Intimate Touch
LEAD: SOME antiques dealers believe that less is more.
As an antidote to large antiques fairs that feature hundreds of dealers, the owners of five antiques shops - Briger Fairholme, Doris Leslie Blau, J. Mavec &amp; Company, Stockspring Antiques and Ursus Prints -have organized the tiny May Antiques Fair.
It opens today and displays their wares in an intimate setting.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  No Easy Victories: Ivan Lendl, Mats Wilander and Andre Agassi were extended to three sets before posting second-round victories yesterday in the Italian Open in Rome.
Lendl, the top-seeded player, overcame Milan Srejber of Czechoslovakia, 6-1, 5-7, 6-1, on the slow red clay of the Foro Italico.


Cadema Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cadema Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
352,113
307,589
Net loss
108,100
4,044


Gendex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gendex Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,270,000
3,480,000
Net inc
461,000
b275,000
Share earns
.16
.12
Shares outst
2,949,000
2,245,000
Yr sales
16,220,000
12,707,000
Net inc
1,336,000
b785,000
Share earns
.50
.36
Shares outst
2,691,000
2,168,000


Minnesota Scientist Plans to Publish Nazi Experiment on Freezing
LEAD: A university scientist specializing in hypothermia is planning to republish, along with his own analysis, a Nazi study in which concentration camp prisoners were subjected to extreme cold.


Key Campaign Reform
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cordero in Hall of Fame
LEAD: Angel Cordero Jr., Angel Penna and the horses Majestic Prince, Chris Evert and Emperor of Norfolk have been elected to thoroughbred racing's Hall of Fame.


Mid-America Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid-America Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,647,000
17,462,000
Net loss
1,315,000
769,000


Datron Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datron Systems Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,498,000
6,749,000
Net inc
925,000
442,000
Share earns
.33
.16
Yr sales
32,297,000
22,489,000
Net inc
2,278,000
1,382,000
Share earns
.82
.51


Aerosonic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aerosonic Corp
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,920,080
2,454,443
Net loss
7,113
b52,852
Share earns
-
.02
Yr sales
11,110,674
9,192,874
Net inc
165,953
106,587
Share earns
.04
.03
b-Net income


Security American Financial Enterrises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security American Financial Enterrises (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,185,168
10,109,239
Net inc
b750,838
b2,475,542
Share earns
.21
.71
b-Includes realized gains on investments of $18,629 and $63,568 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively, and the year-ago period also included a gain of $1,773,186 from the cumulative effect on prior years of an accounting change.


Campaign Trail
LEAD:  Nixon's Decline


Bridge
LEAD: Foreign invaders, who captured the Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs title Sunday, seemed on the way to another victory in the Cavendish Teams.
But when play ended Tuesday night the winners were Cliff Russell of Miami, Larry Cohen and Dan Rotman, both of Los Angeles, Brian Glubok of Manhattan, Marty Bergen of White Plains and Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N


Alpha Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpha Microsystems (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1988
1987
Sales
12,486,000
12,103,000
Net inc
907,000
b7,003,000
Share earns
.29
-
Yr sales
46,422,000
47,040,000
Net inc
1,687,000
b7,941,000
Share earns
.53
-


Report Accuses Burma Of Torture and Killings
LEAD: Army units in Burma have killed and tortured members of the country's ethnic minorities in gross defiance of Burmese and international law, according to an Amnesty International report published today.


Safety Railway reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safety Railway
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
806,000
955,000
Net loss
35,000
b13,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


U.S. Sees Progress on Verification Issues
LEAD: American and Soviet arms control experts have made some progress toward resolving their differences over verifying the new accord on medium-range nuclear missiles, American officials said today.


Diasonics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diasonics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
58,145,000
54,097,000
Net inc
152,000
2,455,000
Share earns
-
.04


International Cogeneration reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Cogeneration
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
58,347
28,379
Net loss
1,228,455
587,267
Yr rev
189,935
88,042
Net loss
2,670,782
1,648,301


Wesco Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wesco Financial Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b10,914,000
3,155,000
Share earns
1.53
.44
b-Included gains of $5,026,000 from sales of securities, principally Wesco's 9-percent equity interest in Bowery Savings Bank.


Financier's Dream: High-Yield Garden
LEAD: MICHAEL STEINHARDT'S well-worn briefcase sat open on the kitchen table.
Inside were copies of Barron's and The Wall Street Journal and computer-printout schedules.


Dance Groups Join Forces for an Uptown Series
LEAD: Two noted modern-dance companies joined hands with each other and with a theater group last night, when the Laura Dean Dancers and Musicians appeared on the same program with Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane and Company and Bill Irwin and Friends in the gala opening of the two-week New Contemporary Masters series at City


British Coal Industry
LEAD: The British Government said today that it would like to sell the state-owned coal industry to private investors, but not for several years.
Energy Minister Michael Spicer said at a seminar that there were no plans to sell off state-owned British Coal before the next general election, due by 1992, but his speech marked the first time the minister had publicly said the Government planned to sell the coal industry.


Knight Reported Going
LEAD: Bob Knight returned to Indiana today, reportedly to tell his team and university officials that he has accepted the coaching job at New Mexico.
The Dallas Times-Herald, quoting unidentified ''sources close to Knight and the Lobos' program,'' reported in Wednesday's editions that Knight reached an oral agreement on a five-year, $350,000-a-year contract with New Mexico.


Princeton Beats Princeton After Bitter Mayoral Campaign
LEAD: Clifford F. Lindholm, Princeton, Class of 1953, unseated Mayor Robert Jackson, Princeton, Class of 1978, by about 1,000 votes in the municipal election here Tuesday.


Laidlaw's Chief Sells Big Stake
LEAD: Laidlaw Transportation Ltd.'s chairman, Michael G. DeGroote, unable to attract a buyer for his entire company, said today that he had sold his controlling stake in North America's largest school bus operator to Canadian Pacific Ltd. for $500 million (Canadian), or about $404 million.


Metropolitan Opera Schedules Park Series
LEAD: The Metropolitan Opera's 22d annual summer series of free opera performances - in concert version - in parks in and around New York City will begin June 21 on the Great Lawn of Manhattan's Central Park with Donizetti's ''Elisir d'Amore.'' The opening-night cast will include Kathleen Battle, Luciano Pavarotti, Paolo Coni, Giuseppe Taddei and Dawn Kotoski, with Marcello


Corrections
LEAD: The Foreign Exchange table in Business Day last Saturday misstated the value of the dollar in South Korean won for Friday's trading.
It was 735.90 won to the dollar.


Asian Exemplar Moves Toward Authoritarianism
LEAD: The Government of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, which labored for more than a quarter of a century to make this small nation a model for the developing world, is responding to stirrings of opposition by creating a climate of fear through increasing use of surveillance and detention without trial.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council  FIRST COMMITTEE (ECONOMIC) - 10:30 A.M.
SECOND COMMITTEE (SOCIAL) - 3 P.M.
Trusteeship Council  Meets at 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Wetterau Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wetterau Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
1,200,000,000
940,800,000
Net inc
8,700,000
7,600,000
Share earns
.35
.31
Yr sales
4,200,000,000
3,800,000,000
Net inc
38,600,000
35,000,000
Share earns
1.58
1.41


Pro-Iranian Group Appears to Gain in Beirut
LEAD: Pro-Iranian Shiite Moslem fundamentalists appear to have gained the upper hand in Beirut's densely populated southern suburbs after six days of heavy fighting against the Syrian-backed Amal militia.


Home Office Reference Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Office Reference Laboratories (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,260,042
6,111,493
Net inc
5,986,000
1,650,775
Share earns
.40
.11


Transactions
LEAD:  COLLEGES


Review/Concert; Harrell and Ashkenazy
LEAD: The cellist Lynn Harrell and the pianist Vladimir Ashkenazy are unquestioned front-runners in the classical music business, and their sonata recital at Avery Fisher Hall Monday evening offered several reminders of the reason why.
Mr.
Ashkenazy has technical security to burn.
When the music gets too fast and too difficult for the average pianist to play with ease - as it did in the finale of the opening Shostakovich Sonata (Op.


Got You, Ollie!
LEAD: It cost the United States Senate $2,000 in overtime pay for the Capitol Police to serve a subpoena on Oliver L. North last week, according to Henry K. Guigni, the Senate's Sergeant-at-Arms.


FFP Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FFP Partners LP (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
36,282,000
-
Net inc
179,000
-
Share earns
.05
-
There is no year-ago comparison because the partnership began operations in May 1987.


Health; Personal Health
LEAD: Until recent years, few professionals or lay people acknowledged the extent of serious alcohol problems among older Americans.
It was generally assumed that few people took to drinking heavily after five or more decades of sobriety, and many physicians believed that most longstanding alcoholics either died or stopped drinking before getting old.


Review/Theater; An Appalachian Fling
LEAD: You worry that you have not seen everything?
You might try ''The Yellow Dog Contract'' by Ed Setrakian at the Apple Corps Theater.
About two hours into the play you might conclude that Mr.
Setrakian has thrown every imaginable bafflement into it except resurrection.
Don't be hasty; that, too, will come.


Oilcan Art: Living as One With the Urban Environment
LEAD: HIS materials - old car parts and broken tools, gears, nuts and bolts, fragments of metal chair backs, bits of plumbers' tubing and rusted farm implements - are the detritus of the modern industrial age.
Out of these pieces of scrap metal, Linus Coraggio is fashioning some intriguing and original pieces of furniture.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of Ascension Thursday, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Black Students End Occupation Of Office at Harvard Law School
LEAD: Black students at Harvard Law School ended a 24-hour occupation of the dean's outer office today after the school administration promised to continue to give high priority to hiring faculty members from minority groups.


Zentec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zentec Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,762,000
6,820,000
Net loss
1,180,000
b480,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income and includes a gain of $105,000 from tax credits and a gain of $240,000 for the cumulative effect on prior years of a change in accounting principle.


Dover Journal; Will the Port Boom Again? Just You Wait and See
LEAD: For 14 weeks, this port town with its white cliffs has been the center of a strike by British seamen who work on English Channel ferries.
It is the bitterest industrial conflict in Britain since Rupert Murdoch crushed Fleet Street's print unions in early 1986.


American Consulting Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Consulting Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,299,118
4,424,792
Net inc
257,603
197,458
Share earns
.06
.06
Shares outst
4,350,110
3,523,333


U.S. Study Sees China as a Top Arms Dealer
LEAD: China has vaulted into the top ranks of nations that supply arms to developing countries, largely through its arms sales to Iran and Iraq, a research arm of Congress has concluded.


Aifs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aifs Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,156,000
10,541,000
Net loss
620,000
b171,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
28,723,000
20,164,000
Net loss
1,614,000
b339,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


Ahmanson Unit Is Selling Pass-Through Certificates
LEAD: Home Savings of America, a unit of H. F. Ahmanson &amp; Company, is offering $201 million of floating-rate mortgage pass-through certificates, with a final maturity in 2027, at par through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
They are backed by a pool of mortgages with a weighted average maturity of 29.9 years.


Calendar: Welcoming Spring With Flowers, Tours and Fairs
LEAD:  Spring Flowers Show, United Methodist Church, Middleneck Road (Forest Drive), Sands Point, L.I.; 516-883-1430.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. Our wood deck appears to be made of cedar.
There seems to be no sealer or finish, and when people walk or sit on it, a gray-brown dust gets all over clothes and shoes.
What can we put on the deck to prevent this?
A.
First clean the wood thoroughly with one of the special wood restorers or cleaners that are sold for rejuvenating old wood siding and shingles.


Three Policemen Are Arrested
LEAD: Three police officers were arrested yesterday in separate cases on charges that included perjury, illegal drug possession and public lewdness, officials said.


South Africa Arrests 4 Whites, Seizing Arms Cache
LEAD: The Pretoria Government said tonight that the police had arrested four whites suspected of being African National Congress guerrillas and had seized the largest consignment of weapons ever captured inside the country.


Berkline Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Berkline Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Revenue
20,656,000
21,173,000
Net inc
131,000
27,000
Share earns
.09
.02
9mo rev
62,862,000
64,829,000
Net inc
381,000
635,000
Share earns
.25
.42


2 New Tiffany Stores
LEAD: Tiffany &amp; Company said yesterday that it plans to open two new stores later this year, in Costa Mesa, Calif., and Zurich.
Tiffany now operates stores in New York, Atlanta, Beverly Hills, Calif., Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Houston and San Francisco.


Hamilton Oil Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hamilton Oil Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
111,391,000
109,402,000
Net inc
15,080,000
11,275,000
Share earns
.57
.42


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Creamer Dickson Head Quits for Rowland Post
LEAD: Mitchell Kozikowski, 51 years old, the chairman and chief executive of Creamer Dickson Basford, the public relations subsidiary of Britain's WCRS Group, has left to become president of the New York office of the Rowland Company, the public relations subsidiary of Britain's Saatchi &amp; Saatchi.


Cavco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cavco Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,671,732
6,336,059
Net inc
264,324
222,367
6mo sales
16,838,848
11,236,512
Net inc
510,865
342,899
Share earns
.46
.32


Primark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Primark Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
554,946,000
536,674,000
Net inc
33,323,000
b36,702,000
Share earns
1.69
1.87
b-Includes a gain of $4,767,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Land's End reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Land's End (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
82,200,000
60,800,000
Net inc
5,900,000
b3,900,000
Share earns
.29
.20
b-After a gain of $685,000 from a change in income-tax accounting.


Molecular Genetics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Molecular Genetics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,411,678
2,212,986
Net loss
384,296
906,654


Pan Am Shuttle Turns the Corner
LEAD: There is at least one man who has no trouble finding a silver lining in the dark cloud now hanging over Eastern Airlines: Frank A. Signor, the executive who oversees Pan American World Airways' shuttle operation at La Guardia Airport.


Publicker Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Publicker Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,744,000
3,164,000
Net loss
194,000
997,000
Latest quarter results included a $300,000 reversal of a previous writeoff of its investment in a joint venture.


Why Diapers Don't Make Horse Sense
LEAD: To the Editor:


One Child or More?
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Trans Leasing International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans Leasing International
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,378,000
2,891,000
Net inc
213,000
171,000
Share earns
.07
.05
Shares outst
3,012,500
3,361,000
9mo rev
9,791,000
8,529,000
Net inc
770,000
588,000
Share earns
.24
.17
Shares outst
3,194,500
3,361,000


International Proteins Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Proteins Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,117,000
24,966,000
Net inc
885,000
583,000
Share earns
.27
.26
Shares outst
3,325,578
2,265,778


Sonesta International Hotels Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonesta International Hotels Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,393,000
11,854,000
Net loss
1,319,000
1,212,000


Penn Treaty American reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penn Treaty American
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,496,761
2,860,062
Net inc
743,147
576,739
Share earns
.30
.28
Shares outst
2,517,198
2,024,140


Ex-Hostage Urges Dealing to Free Captives
LEAD: A former hostage said today that he and two other Frenchmen were freed by captors in Lebanon because the public pressured France to negotiate with Iran, and he urged Americans and Britons to put the same kind of pressure on their Governments.


Rate Rises Help Lift Dollar In U.S. While Gold Is Mixed
LEAD: The dollar received a lift from rising interest rates and closed higher yesterday against most major currencies in domestic trading after dipping overseas.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Irving Berlin Centennial


Group Assails U.S. Information Flow
LEAD: Librarians are alarmed at what they regard as a reduction of access to Government information, according to a report issued by the American Library Association.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
AMC Entertainment Inc., Kansas City, Mo., a theater chain, announced the resignation of Ron D. Leslie as president and chief operating officer.
Stanley H. Durwood, chairman and chief executive, will take over as president, and William B. Doeren will become chief operating officer.


A GARDENER'S WORLD
LEAD: I WAS just beginning to relax a bit, as last fall's planting rewarded me with some attractive new wild tulips and as this spring's planting was almost finished.
Then something gruesome turned up in my garden and I suspect in a good many others in the Northeast.
It bears an ugly-sounding name, plasmolysis.


Williams-Sonoma
LEAD: Williams-Sonoma Inc., a retailer of cookware and home furnishings based here, said it had agreed to develop free-standing Ralph Lauren Home Collection retail stores in the United States.
Under the agreement, the Polo Ralph Lauren Corporation will supply its proprietary line of home furnishings, which ranges from towels and bedding to upholstered furniture, while Williams-Sonoma will own and operate the stores.


Martin Gains Support
LEAD: Despite a police report that labeled Billy Martin's version of a weekend fight in Texas as unfounded, George Steinbrenner said yesterday that he accepted his manager's version and planned no action against him.


Paraguay Cancels a Civic Meeting With Pope
LEAD: As Pope John Paul II continued a tour of South America today, the Paraguayan Government canceled a planned meeting between the Pope and civic leaders next week.


Ross Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ross Industries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,514,083
1,359,447
Net inc
61,974
b57,839
Share earns
.05
-
9mo sales
4,122,402
3,654,592
Net loss
1,269,000
128,345
b-Net loss


U.S. Charges 7 In the Bombing At U.S. Capitol
LEAD: Seven members of a group describing itself as a ''Communist politico-military organization'' were charged today with the 1983 bombing of the Capitol and attacks on several other buildings, including at least four in New York City, according to the Justice Department.


Techdyne Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Techdyne Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,184,972
2,807,165
Net inc
b58,327
b116,919
Share earns
.03
.06
b-Includes tax credits of $28,000 and $41,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Review/Ballet; Violette Verdy Premiere
LEAD: The New York City Ballet's American Music Festival continued Tuesday night at the New York State Theater with a program that featured two well-crafted new works: Violette Verdy's ''Set of Seven'' and Peter Martins's ''Tea-Rose.''


LARGE BANKS RAISE PRIME RATE TO 9% ON INFLATION FEAR
LEAD: Many of the nation's major banks raised their important prime lending rate today, a decision prompted by growing fears at the Federal Reserve Board and on Wall Street that inflation is now a greater threat than recession.


Index Trading Is Called A 'Scandal' by Regan
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, former Treasury Secretary and White House chief of staff, thrust himself into the middle of another Washington political battle today when he urged Congress to force an immediate halt to all trading of stock index futures.


Study Finds Fewer Defects In Condoms on U.S. Market
LEAD: Fewer defective condoms are showing up on the United States market, although more than 33 million condoms were recalled or rejected in the last year, a Federal study reports.


Review/Theater; Earthy Humor Through Welfare Eyes
LEAD: At the core of Casey Kurtti's ''Three Ways Home'' is the growing friendship between a beleaguered welfare mother (S. Epatha Merkerson) and a volunteer social worker (Mary McDonnell).
In the course of the play, which opened last night at the Astor Place Theater, the two women reach at least a tentative understanding of each other.


Post Editor Gets Pledge of Autonomy
LEAD: Peter S. Kalikow, owner of The New York Post, said his new editor, Jane Amsterdam, has been given strong assurances of editorial autonomy in a three-year contract she signed late Monday.


Suave Shoe Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suave Shoe Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
23,629,000
20,302,000
Net loss
b37,000
c825,000
Share earns
-
.30
6mo sales
37,926,000
35,949,000
Net loss
b472,000
c1,486,000
Share earns
-
.55


Migrant Farm Workers' Unexpected Worry: New Alien Law
LEAD: Migrant farm workers, still America's most afflicted class of laborers despite slowly improving working conditions, are now grappling with problems from an unexpected source: the 1986 immigration law.


Daxor Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Daxor Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
989,507
3,516,755
Net inc
1,763,279
2,108,629
Share earns
.33
.40
The company said the latest quarter included net unrealized gains on marketable securities of $1,438,477 representing a partial recapture of the net unrealized losses reported for fiscal 1987 of $2,212,250.


Metropolitan Consolidated Indusries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metropolitan Consolidated Indusries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,941,618
2,936,834
Net inc
b3,650,669
b650,892
Share earns
.35
.05
b-Included tax benefits of $476,000 and $194,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


Stalking Delegates for the Dukakis Camp
LEAD: This was supposed to be the year of the broker, who would wheel and deal against the threat of a deadlocked convention to produce a Presidential nominee.
Instead, a more appropriate emblem for the season is Tad Devine, a lanky and bespectacled lawyer, bent over his personal computer in his cluttered office in the campaign headquarters of Gov.


Stanwood Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanwood Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
21,960,000
30,420,000
Net inc
520,000
429,000
Share earns
.33
.28


Richard Tucker Award Goes to Richard Leech
LEAD: Richard Leech, a 31-year-old American tenor, is the 1988 winner of the Richard Tucker Music Foundation Award, which this year amounts to $25,000 - the country's largest cash offering for a career in music.
Mr.
Leech is to take part in the annual Tucker Foundation concert, which is to be held this year on Nov.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Medical Science page of Science Times on Tuesday about delayed labor misstated the thickness of the cervix.
It is normally two to three centimeters.


Southern Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Electronics
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,748,000
6,497,000
Net inc
b307,000
c42,000
Share earns
.10
-
9mo sales
39,470,000
22,790,000
Net inc
b732,000
151,000
Share earns
.24
.03
b-Includes tax credits of $95,000 and $225,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


U.S. Law Firms Expand To Reach Global Clientele
LEAD: Coudert Brothers, a Park Avenue law firm, earlier this year sent a partner to practice full time in Moscow.
Shortly before that, Baker &amp; McKenzie, the mammoth Chicago firm with more than 1,000 lawyers, established offices in Budapest and Barcelona.
And Kelley Drye &amp; Warren has hired a New Delhi lawyer to serve clients with Indian interests.


Encore on Swan Lake: 8 Births in Prospect Park
LEAD: To nature lovers, a twice-told tale is far from tedious.
For the second year in a row, the only nesting pair of swans in New York City has produced a new family in Prospect Park Lake.
In a repeat of last year's well-timed performance, the cygnets hatched from their six-inch long eggs over the Mother's


Review/Ballet; 'DeMille's 'Informer': Of Love and Ireland's Pain
LEAD: ''The Informer,'' Agnes de Mille's first ballet for American Ballet Theater since 1976, turned into a highly deserved personal triumph after its New York premiere Tuesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.


Healthcare International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthcare International (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
85,458,000
64,061,000
Net loss
b630,000
c140,000
9mo rev
229,467,000
179,728,000
Net loss
b308,000
cd2,318,000
Share earns
-
.24
b-After a $752,000 loss from the early retirement of debt for the quarter and 9 months.


Coradian Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coradian Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,810,000
3,761,000
Net inc
97,000
363,000
Share earns
.01
.03
Yr rev
11,541,000
11,416,000
Net loss
504,000
b148,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income and included a $186,000 gain from a legal settlement with a former supplier.


Century Telephone Enterrises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Telephone Enterrises Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
42,110,000
36,632,000
Net inc
5,203,000
4,544,000
Share earns
.43
.38


Rainbow Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rainbow Technologies
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,205,400
502,396
Net inc
194,200
100,494
Share earns
.11
.10
Shares outst
1,750,000
1,025,243


International Thomson Oranisation Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Thomson Oranisation Ltd
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
713,000,000
585,000,000
Net loss
8,000,000
3,000,000


Forest Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forest Laboratories Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
23,938,000
19,083,000
Net inc
4,881,000
3,616,000
Share earns
.28
.22
Shares outst
17,681,000
16,202,000
Yr rev
85,369,000
66,942,000
Net inc
16,810,000
12,374,000
Share earns
.96
.77
Shares outst
17,460,000
16,133,000


7 Westies Given Sentences Of Up to 75 Years in Prison
LEAD: Seven members of the Westies, a gang that used violence and terror to extort money from businesses and residents of the Clinton area for 20 years, were given prison sentences yesterday of up to 75 years each.


General Physics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Physics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
31,797,000
23,297,000
Net inc
1,039,000
1,085,000
Share earns
.31
.31
The company is an 84 percent owned subsidiary of National Patent Development Corp.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: A SQUEAKING wood floor is annoying, but seldom more than an inconvenience.
Repairs are usually easy, even for the inexperienced.
Of course, squeaks sometimes indicate serious structural problems, but usually not.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Air Express International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Air Express International Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
129,854,000
83,071,000
Net inc
1,174,000
b1,158,000
Share earns
.24
.24
b-Includes tax loss carryforwards of $377,000.


Keeping Old Timepieces Running Like New
LEAD: IN the early 1970's, Stewart Unger started buying old wristwatches for $5 or $10 at flea markets. ''I was buying watches and putting them in the apartment,'' he said. ''I didn't even know why I was doing it.''


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Magazine for Managers Of Pension Funds Shuts
LEAD: Publication of Trillion magazine, for pension fund managers, has been suspended by its second owner, as it had been by the first.


Esquire Radio &amp; Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Esquire Radio &amp; Electronics Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
21,791,000
8,666,000
Net inc
615,000
b2,666,000
Share earns
1.27
5.52
b-Included a gain of $2,465,000 from a litigation award.


Dresher Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dresher Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
19,206,000
10,512,000
Net inc
742,000
729,000
Share earns
.16
.16
9mo sales
46,133,000
34,152,000
Net inc
2,134,000
2,073,000
Share earns
.47
.46


Lifecore Biomedical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lifecore Biomedical
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,103,000
815,000
Net inc
b163,000
c216,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
2,561,000
2,509,000
Net inc
b171,000
c535,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Included tax loss carryforwards of $67,000 for the quarter and $70,000 for the 9 months.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I'm going to work as hard as I can to make Vice President George Bush the next President of the United States.''  - President Reagan  [ A33:1. ]


Woolworth, F W Co reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Woolworth, F W Co (NYSE)
(
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,721,000,000
1,540,000,000
Net inc
35,000,000
29,000,000
Share earns
.54
.43
Shares outst
64,300,000
66,100,000


Nixon Said to Decline A Role at Convention
LEAD: Former President Richard M. Nixon has notified Republican Party officials that he does not want to be invited to address the party's national convention in August, a party worker said today.


Review/Music; Piazzolla's Rhythm-Driven Tangos
LEAD: It is only in the last three years that Astor Piazzolla, the 67-year-old Argentine composer and architect of the style known as nuevo tango, has become widely recognized in this country as a protean ''semi-classical'' musician comparable in some ways with George Gershwin.


Treasury Issues Decline Slightly
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds dipped slightly in relatively quiet trading yesterday.


Transmedia Network reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transmedia Network
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
698,268
430,557
Net inc
43,938
b131,173
6mo rev
1,376,299
805,256
Net inc
95,522
b168,455
b-Net loss  Net for both latest periods was less than 1 cent a share.


Duramed Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duramed Pharmaceuticals (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,018,000
6,359,000
Net loss
538,000
b591,000
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income and included a tax credit of $57,000 and a gain of $63,000 from an accounting change.


Acme Precision Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme Precision Products Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,132,499
12,747,808
Net loss
856,310
b1,194,881
6mo sales
17,436,605
17,780,777
Net loss
1,950,991
b1,692,702
b-Includes tax credits of $350,000 and $700,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


A Feasible End Run For Food to Ethiopia
LEAD: To the Editor:


Renco Set to Buy LTV Steel Plants
LEAD: The LTV Steel Company said it had signed a contract to sell its steel plant in Warren to the Renco Group Inc. of New York.
Terms of the sale, which includes LTV's Republic Drainage Products Company in Canton and its six plants, were not disclosed.


International Aluminum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Aluminum Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
45,202,000
37,557,000
Net inc
3,713,000
1,140,000
Share earns
.82
.25
9mo sales
140,997,000
127,947,000
Net inc
9,810,000
5,367,000
Share earns
2.16
1.18


An Only Child Speaks
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Discus Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Discus Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,717,000
2,560,000
Net loss
113,000
69,000


Jewish Museum Opts for Tradition
LEAD: Rendering of proposed expansion, to the left of the dotted line, of the museum at Fifth Avenue and 92d Street.
Plans for a modern condominium tower were scrapped in favor of a seven-story addition in the style of the landmark Warburg mansion it now occupies.
Page C25. (Kevin Roche, John Dinkeloo &amp;


American Medical to Sell 37 Hospitals for $910 Million
LEAD: In a bid to improve its profits and quiet dissatisfied shareholders, American Medical International Inc. said today that it planned to sell 37 small hospitals to its employees for about $910 million in cash, debt and securities.


P.&amp;G. Testing Colored Diaper
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company is testing colored diapers


In Poland, the Only Solution Is Political
LEAD: To the Editor:


Micro General Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micro General Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,446,518
1,028,682
Net inc
66,839
b18,296
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


The G.O.P. Can Win Blacks
LEAD: Political experts say it's a pipe dream for Republicans to win black and other minority votes in any significant numbers in 1988, whether the Rev.
Jesse Jackson is on the Democratic ticket or not.
Nonsense.


New Bank Product
LEAD: Into the hotly contested New York City consumer-banking market, the Chemical Bank has introduced a product aimed specifically at recent college graduates.
Although other local banks have offered low-cost checking, Chemical is apparently the first to offer a product specifically for recent graduates.


'Drop Dead' Lapidus Look: Going for the Gorgeous Design
LEAD: ''STUNNING'' is the only word for the Lucite, gold and mother-of-pearl paradise that is the duplex apartment of Morris Lapidus, the Miami Beach hotel designer whose Fontainebleau was once proudly described by its owner as ''the world's most pretentious hotel.''


3 Dead in Explosion of Car Bomb Near Israel's Embassy in Cyprus
LEAD: A car loaded with dynamite blew up about 200 yards from the Israeli Embassy here today after the police prevented the driver from parking at the embassy building.
The car's driver and two Cypriots were killed in the explosion and 15 others were wounded, the police said.


USG Claims Victory In Desert Proxy Fight
LEAD: The USG Corporation today claimed victory in the proxy fight waged by Desert Partners L.P. to gain six seats on the company's 15-member board of directors.


Basix Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Basix Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,573,000
27,123,000
Net loss
b32,531,000
c768,000
Yr rev
101,666,000
102,260,000
Net loss
b43,287,000
c13,559,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $21,678,000 for the quarter and $30,282,000 for the year.


Democrats Stage Rally At Capitol for Trade Bill
LEAD: The Democratic leaders of Congress had a ceremonial gathering at the Capitol today to try to increase the pressure on President Reagan to sign the comprehensive trade bill that Congress has passed.


Review/Recital; Five Works for Organ
LEAD: Marilyn Mason has spent the last 41 years commissioning and performing new concert works for the organ, and so when she was named International Performer of the Year by the New York Chapter of the American Guild of Organists, it was natural that she should select the program of her award recital - given Tuesday evening at Riverside


Gerber Is Selling Furniture Group
LEAD: The Gerber Products Company said it had retained Salomon Brothers Inc. to help it sell its furniture group, whose annual sales of more than $100 million have accounted for about 11 percent of total revenue.


Texan Charged With Plot to Slay Mayor of San Antonio and Others
LEAD: The police here have arrested a former Congressional candidate of the Libertarian Party on a charge of plotting to have Mayor Henry Cisneros and other public officials assassinated.


Into the World With a Learning Difficulty
LEAD: Sam Clinton, 17 years old, likes to prepare Korean dishes for his family and talks about working someday as a chef or restaurant manager.
He could study the restaurant business at a junior college, but his mother, Dr.
Elizabeth Dane, worries about his chances for success.


Selecterm Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Selecterm Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,292,000
5,897,000
Net inc
586,000
147,000
Share earns
.23
.06


Espey Manufacturing &amp; Elecric Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Espey Manufacturing &amp; Elecric Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,242,595
3,381,791
Net inc
444,990
264,403
Share earns
.37
.22
9mo sales
10,027,739
10,651,472
Net inc
1,517,922
1,357,089
Share earns
1.26
1.12


New York Area Store Sales Off
LEAD: Sales of several large New York retailers dropped by an average of 6.7 percent in the city in April from the period a year earlier, while the stores' overall sales in the metropolitan area fell 7.8 percent, a spot-check found.


Why the Rush to Tax Nonprofits?
LEAD: Should the local ''Y'' be permitted to run an expensive health club, but not pay taxes on the profits?
Should tax-exempt college bookstores compete with stores that sell everything from tennis rackets to Beatles tapes?
No, say some members of the House Ways and Means Committee.
With Reagan Administration support, they propose to tighten the tax rules on the unrelated businesses of nonprofit organizations.


Hi-Port Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hi-Port Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,562,000
4,281,000
Net inc
228,000
26,000
Share earns
.12
.02


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Four Promotions At DFS Compton
LEAD: Judith Damin, Stephen Dolleck, Teresa L. Gallo and Norman J. Weill have been promoted to executive vice presidents in the creative department of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's DFS Compton.


Donnelly Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donnelly Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
43,639,000
35,237,000
Net inc
1,943,000
1,701,000
Share earns
.39
.34
9mo sales
108,108,000
92,671,000
Net inc
3,363,000
3,432,000
Share earns
.68
.69


Bull &amp; Bear Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bull &amp; Bear Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b114,000
c233,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Includes a tax loss carryforward of $44,000.
c-Net loss


Irving Berlin, Absent, Is Much the Star of Carnegie Tribute
LEAD: Gathered from the four corners of show business, more than two dozen stellar performers assembled at Carnegie Hall last night to salute Irving Berlin on his 100th birthday.
From Frank Sinatra to Willie Nelson, from Ray Charles to Marilyn Horne, they represented an array of American musical styles as rich and varied as the songs of the man they were honoring - songs that have become so embedded in the texture of


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the credit markets misstated the direction of bond prices in some copies.


Energas Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energas Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
132,760,000
80,484,000
Net inc
9,663,000
3,643,000
Share earns
2.36
.89
6mo rev
208,760,000
146,646,000
Net inc
13,969,000
5,015,000
Share earns
3.41
1.23


Transplant Patient, 3, Dies After Organs Fail
LEAD: Tabatha Foster, a 3-year-old who was the world's longest survivor of a five-organ transplant, died today after an infection caused her heart, kidneys and liver to fail.


Sunshine-Junior Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunshine-Junior Stores Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
38,501,313
38,790,759
Net inc
654,012
88,392
Share earns
.38
.05


Baseball; Eckersley Finally Falters as A's Fall, 8-4
LEAD: Mike Heath's two-run, ninth-inning single off Dennis Eckersley led the Detroit Tigers to a 8-4 victory today, handing the Oakland Athletics their second loss after 14 consecutive triumphs.


Syntro Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Syntro Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
506,652
734,495
Net loss
1,538,142
1,253,672
6mo rev
933,635
1,957,544
Net loss
2,919,205
1,780,778


Texas Savings Institution Weakens
LEAD: A single savings institution in Texas lost nearly $1.2 billion in capital in March, the Government said today.
The Government refused to identify the institution.


Health; Psychologists and Psychiatrists Clash Over Hospital and Training Barriers
LEAD: The long battle for patients between psychologists and psychiatrists has reached a new intensity, as psychologists try to break down barriers at hospitals and at some psychoanalytical training institutes.


Winston Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Winston Resources (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,644,195
4,691,725
Net loss
54,326
b214,389
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


American Israeli Paper Mills Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Israeli Paper Mills Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
57,684,000
44,236,000
Net inc
1,825,000
2,388,000
Share earns
.48
.71
Results for both quarters were translated into U.S. dollars at the rate of $1 for every 1.5596 new Israeli shekels, the rate of exchange on March 31, 1988.


Health: Clinical Advances; Confident Obstetricians Discovering New Frontiers of Prenatal Diagnosis
LEAD: With growing confidence in their abilities to perform delicate procedures, obstetricians are pushing the limits of prenatal diagnosis, offering tests at times in pregnancy when the tests had been thought too dangerous.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, lottery numbers did not appear in some copies yesterday.
Lottery numbers for Tuesday and Wednesday appear on page B4.


Genzyme Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genzyme Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,297,000
4,088,000
Net inc
82,000
53,000
Share earns
.01
.01


Jackson Assails Dukakis as a Bush Twin
LEAD: According to the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, the politician whom Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis has begun to resemble most is Vice President Bush.


Danger on the Railroads
LEAD: Every now and then the newspapers and TV report a local story that takes hold of the country.
The stories startle us, not because they are bizarre, but because they force us to face plain dangers that come with the way we live, but which we usually manage to push out of our minds.
Two planes collide in the sky, a subway rider whips out a gun and opens fire.


Expanding a League's Scope
LEAD: Annie Dwyer hit one up the middle and headed to first base using only one crutch.
A coach held the 11-year-old's arm and carried the other crutch.
A helmet hid her face, except for the smile.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: MBNA Credit Card Trust is offering $500 million worth of asset-backed securities with a final maturity in 1993 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The securities are backed by credit card receivables from Maryland Bank N.A. and have an estimated average life of 2.51 years.


Righetti Is Stuck In Limbo
LEAD: Last winter, the debate centered on this question: Should Dave Righetti continue to be a relief pitcher or should he become a starter again?
At the moment, Righetti doesn't seem to be either.
Instead of being in the bullpen or in the rotation, he is in limbo.


Washington Talk: Briefing; The Omen
LEAD: Ronald Reagan has often been accused of confusing his movie roles with his real-life experiences.
But no one has suggested that he follows plot lines from novels or, more specifically, that life imitates science fiction.
Until now.
The capital is humming this week over the rediscovery of ''Stranger in a Strange Land,'' a science fiction novel written by Robert A.


Olympia &amp; York
LEAD: Canada's Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. has agreed to acquire a 33 percent stake in Stanhope Properties P.L.C. for $:137 million ($258 million), the British real estate group said.
Olympia &amp; York is developing London's Canary Wharf.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


The Law; Bare-Knuckles Litigation Jars Many in Dallas
LEAD: There is a story making the rounds here of the businessman seeking a lawyer to handle his multimillion-dollar lawsuit.
He went from one plush office suite to the next, giving written psychological tests to the city's best lawyers.


Halliburton Revises Terms for Gearhart
LEAD: The Halliburton Company and Gearhart Industries have revised the terms of Halliburton's proposed acquisition of Gearhart to give Gearhart creditors an additional $6 million.
The restructuring would not change the value of the transaction, worth approximately $295.5 million in cash, stock and assumable debt, Halliburton's head of investor relations, Guy T.


A State Agency Curbs Philadelphia Hospital
LEAD: The state Health Department closed all but two units of a Philadelphia hospital today, saying inadequate care might have caused 12 deaths in the last year.


Gap Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gap Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
241,348,000
211,348,000
Net inc
b4,414,000
16,165,000
Share earns
.12
.45
b-Included an after-tax charge of $4 million from the restructuring of the company's banana republic operations.


Stand Firm Against School Surrender
LEAD: During seven months of contract negotiations, New York City's Board of Education has tried to break the stranglehold of the school custodians.
The board president, Robert Wagner Jr., has now issued a bold ultimatum: Unless ''significant progress'' is made toward a new contract by next week, the board will hire private contractors to clean the schools.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Devils Force 7th Game


Perkin-Elmer Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Perkin-Elmer Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
351,400,000
337,000,000
Net inc
19,200,000
18,200,000
Share earns
.44
.40
9mo sales
1,028,300,000
969,800,000
Net inc
51,000,000
b41,300,000
Share earns
1.15
.91
Shares outst
44,503,929
45,514,177


Japan's Military Past Comes Back to Haunt Again
LEAD: The Foreign Ministry's chief spokesman said today that Japan's relations with its Asian neighbors had suffered ''quite severe'' damage as a result of repeated incidents in which senior officials played down Japanese wartime aggression.


Irving Picks Group for Talks
LEAD: The Irving Bank Corporation said yesterday that it had set up a committee of three independent directors to hold talks with its two suitors, the Bank of New York and Banca Commerciale Italiana.


Piedmont Management Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Piedmont Management Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b1,761,773
b2,764,910
Share earns
.33
.51
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $20,378 and $251,338 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Arrest in Japan Raises Fears Of Terrorism at the Olympics
LEAD: The Japanese police say a radical arrested here last week may have traveled to North Korea several times in the last two years, fueling speculation that he was planning a terrorist attack at the Olympic Games in Seoul.


Forest Oil Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forest Oil Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
32,204,000
23,646,000
Net inc
1,601,000
190,000
Share earns
.03
-
Preferred stock dividends exceeded net income in the year-ago first quarter.


People
LEAD: *
Laurie S. Kahn has been named executive vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam New York.


Offshore Logistics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Offshore Logistics Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,503,000
12,361,000
Net inc
2,092,000
504,000
Share earns
.12
.03
9mo rev
52,592,000
41,104,000
Net inc
b6,563,000
c14,778,000
Share earns
.38
1.79


Big Client Pressed 2 Firms To Halt Program Trading
LEAD: Salomon Brothers Inc. and Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, two of the Wall Street firms that suspended their program trading on Tuesday, had been warned just days before that they would not get the investment banking business of a large corporate client unless they halted the controversial practice.


A Man of Words and Francs
LEAD:  GASTON GALLIMARD  A Half-Century of French Publishing  By Pierre Assouline  Translated by Harold J. Salemson. 430 pages.
Illustrated.
Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $35.


Buckner a Royal
LEAD: Less than a week after his release by the California Angels, Bill Buckner agreed to contract terms yesterday for the remainder of the season with the Kansas City Royals.
Buckner, 38 years old, will be used primarily as a designated hitter, the Royals said.
Contract terms were not announced.
Buckner, who has played the outfield and first base for four teams in a 17-year career, was hitting .209 with 9 runs batted in after 19 games with the Angels.


County Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* County Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
460,000
b4,100,000
Per share
.05
.48
b-After an accounting change gain of $600,000.


Lauda Inaugural Flight
LEAD: Niki Lauda, the former racing car champion, flew a new Boeing 767 to Hong Kong Wednesday on an inaugural flight for his Vienna-based airline, Lauda Air.


Integrated Generics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Integrated Generics (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,141,246
707,376
Net loss
b252,373
cd24,749
Share earns
-
.02
6mo sales
2,275,475
1,022,497
Net loss
b506,838
d62,778
b-After net from discontinued operations of $7,991 for the quarter and $60,901 for the 6 months.


Coach Dismissed
LEAD: Last Sunday, the University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point announced it was forfeiting its share of last year's National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics national football co-championship and the rest of its 1987 schedule because it unknowingly used two ineligible players from Dallas who had transferred last fall.


Seacoast Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seacoast Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
161,000
158,000
Per share
.13
-
9mo net inc
595,000
498,000
Per share
.48
-
The year-ago periods per share earnings are not available; the company went public in March 1987.


P&amp;C Foods reports earnings for Qtr to April 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* P&amp;C Foods (OTC)
Qtr to April 23
1988
1987
Sales
298,932,000
291,193,000
Net inc
2,016,000
1,257,000
Share earns
.26
.16


Their Just Desserts
LEAD: Members of the Civil Service Employees Association sampling pieces of a 450-pound cake yesterday on the lawn of the Capitol in Albany on Public Employees Day.
The cake was expected to yield 3,500 servings. (AP)


Maxicare Health Plans reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxicare Health Plans (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
493,823,000
447,863,000
Net loss
21,328,000
13,857,000
The company said that contributing to the net loss for the latest first quarter were costs associated with servicing its debt and the continued rise in medical costs.


Russell W. Lavengood Jr., Urologist, 63
LEAD: Dr.
Russell W. Lavengood Jr., a Manhattan urologist whose patients included actors, writers and politicians, died of a heart attack Wednesday at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 63 years old and lived in Pelham, N.Y.


Applied Spectrum Technoloies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Spectrum Technoloies
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
304,000
906,000
Net loss
213,000
450,000
6mo rev
541,000
1,903,000
Net loss
750,000
962,000


Talks on Euro-Currency
LEAD: Finance and economic ministers from the European Community will meet Friday and Saturday to discuss an idea that some key observers say may be an impossible dream: creation of a single European Community currency.


Ark Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ark Restaurants (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
6,728,000
6,612,000
Net inc
195,000
341,000
Share earns
.06
.10
6mo sales
13,962,000
12,463,000
Net inc
650,000
262,000
Share earns
.20
.08


Don't Discount Supply-Siders and the Curve
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  A new method of regulating long-distance telephone rates was proposed by the F.C.C.
The plan could save callers $1.6 billion in the next four years, the agency said.
The new system would allow A.T.&amp;T. and local phone companies to set their own rates for long-distance calls and access charges as long as they do not exceed new price ceilings.


Lancer Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lancer Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,844,000
6,030,000
Net inc
494,000
302,000
Share earns
.21
.13


Cal Federal Income Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cal Federal Income Partners LP (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
889,000
b736,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income  The company attributed the latest quarter loss primarily to a nonrecurring writeoff of $933,000 for expenses incurred during the Wells Fargo Mortgage and Equity Trust negotiations, which is net of reimbursed costs, together with an increase in interest expense on property debt.


Accel International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Accel International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b1,419,000
c1,463,000
Share earns
.31
.27
Shares outst
4,628,376
5,423,364
b-Included a loss of $5,000 on the sale of investments and a tax credit of $50,000.


Wiland Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wiland Services
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,797,512
3,132,079
Net loss
211,125
295,014


Chicago Aldermen and Police Seize Portrait That Blacks Deem Offensive
LEAD: Like several other aldermen here, Allan Streeter was incensed when he learned that a portrait of the late Mayor Harold Washington, depicted in frilly lingerie, was hanging among an exhibition of student works at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago.


Data Med Clinical Support Servics reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Med Clinical Support Servics
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
222,256
138,203
Net loss
609,097
344,964
Yr rev
767,041
328,197
Net loss
1,671,080
1,055,845
Results for the prior year included the period from Feb.


Inspiration Resources Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inspiration Resources Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
282,695,000
246,890,000
Net loss
b5,008,000
5,719,000
Shares outst
66,235,000
64,772,000
b-Included equity in losses of unconsolidated affiliates of $2,095,000- -IRC's 50 percent interests in two gold affiliates.


Boos Turn Into a Barrage
LEAD: At Byrne Meadowlands Arena, where acts of civil, and uncivil, disobedience have become something of a playoff trend, the fans got into the act tonight after the Bruins scored a second-period goal that produced a 2-2 tie in a game the Devils won, 6-3.


Review/Film; Tax Cheats and a Japanese Nemesis
LEAD:  ''A Taxing Woman'' was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times Sept. 26, 1987.
The film opens today at the Lincoln Plaza 1, Broadway at 63d Street.


Taiwan Grants Asylum to Two Who Hijacked Mainland Jet
LEAD: Two Chinese men, seeking to defect, hijacked a domestic airliner from the mainland to Taiwan on Thursday.
They were granted asylum, and the jet took the other 116 people aboard back to China early today.


Dutch Plan Insider Law
LEAD: The Dutch Government has toughened its proposal for countering insider trading by making all such trades illegal even if they fail to generate profits, a Finance Ministry spokeswoman said this week.
The move is expected to win wide support in Parliament, and the new law could come into force at the end of this year.


Brooklyn Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brooklyn Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
229,000
295,000
Per share
.20
-
Year-ago per share net is unavailable because the bank went public in March 1987.


Clairson International reports earnings for Qtr to March 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clairson International (OTC)
Qtr to March 28
1988
1987
Sales
27,444,488
18,892,751
Net loss
2,568,891
b808,134
Share earns
-
.16
6mo sales
51,165,537
35,217,176
Net loss
2,158,726
b1,044,770
Share earns
-
.22


Health-Mor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health-Mor Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,309,789
5,521,271
Net inc
b615,490
c235,675
Share earns
.28
.13
b-After income from discontinued operations of $23,973.
c-After income from discontinued operations of $3,217 and a loss on the disposal of discontinued operations of $90,000.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Mulgrew Miller Music


Child Care Crisis Cries Out for Federal Help
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ambulance Crew Backed in Inquiry on a Death
LEAD: Reports that a mortally wounded man waited 40 minutes on a Brooklyn street for an ambulance Monday were exaggerated by at least 15 minutes, the police and the Emergency Medical Service, which operates the city's ambulance system, said yesterday.


Ford Sets Strategy to Diversify
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that it would invest more heavily in products and manufacturing technology, strive to increase the share of its profits from financial services and develop a third business sector, probably in electronics.


Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Cos reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Cos
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
24,539,000,000
22,135,000,000
Net inc
1,479,000,000
1,069,000,000
The share earnings for the Royal Dutch Petroleum Co. are $3.52 for the latest first quarter, compared with $2.54 for year-ago period.


Corrections
LEAD: A correction in this space on Monday about the name of a South African girl who was surgically separated from her twin sister misidentified the language from which her name comes.
It is Tswana.


First Banc Securities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Banc Securities (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,408,000
1,818,000
Per share
.79
.60


Insituform Mid-America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Insituform Mid-America (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,122,896
4,081,160
Net inc
10,110
b472,513
Share earns
-
.07
6mo rev
7,681,322
7,884,665
Net inc
54,635
b815,605
Share earns
.01
.14


Viner, E A Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Viner, E A Holdings
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,205,000
8,475,000
Net inc
1,292,000
38,000
Share earns
.12
-
The company said the 1988 first quarter earnings include the business and operations of Fahnestock &amp; Co.


New Jersey Plans U.S. Arts Convention
LEAD: New Jersey will be the host for a National Arts Convention in October, Governor Kean announced yesterday.
Some 300 delegates from arts institutions across the country are expected to attend and will try to develop a consensus on national goals.


In Guatemala, A Restiveness On the Right
LEAD: Guatemala's civilian Government weathered a coup attempt this week but remains seriously threatened by disgruntled army officers allied to far-right groups, Guatemalan politicians and diplomats here say.


Dr. Carroll Daugherty, 82, Dies; Economist Shaped Pension Plans
LEAD: Dr.
Carroll Roop Daugherty, a distinguished economist, labor arbitrator and educator, died of liver cancer Wednesday at the Scripps Memorial Hospitals in La Jolla, Calif.
He was 87 years old and lived in La Jolla.


Teleprobe Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teleprobe Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 25
1988
1987
Sales
516,000
865,000
Net loss
b103,000
c65,000
9mo sales
4,658,000
3,322,000
Net inc
b2,969,000
c355,000
Share earns
.72
.05
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $41,000 for reversal of anoperating loss carryforward; the 9 months include a $1,180,000 gain from an operating loss carryforward.


DH Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DH Technology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,039,000
4,071,000
Net inc
175,000
710,000
Share earns
.04
.14
Shares outst
4,820,000
5,200,000


System Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* System Industries (OTC)
Qtr to April 23
1988
1987
Revenue
36,086,000
29,809,000
Net inc
1,185,000
1,390,000
Share earns
.24
.29
9mo rev
102,636,000
88,134,000
Net inc
3,140,000
3,769,000
Share earns
.64
.82


El Al Israel Airlines reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* El Al Israel Airlines
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
520,600,000
567,000,000
Net inc
18,200,000
15,200,000
The company's latest year's recent change from fiscal to calendar year relates the above figures for a period of nine months (April to December).


Foiled, Car Bomber Sought To Prevent Blast on Cyprus
LEAD: The driver of a car rigged with explosives that blew up in Nicosia Wednesday was racing to warn an accomplice not to detonate the bomb, Interior Minister Christodoulos Veniamin said today.


Marsh Seeks Return
LEAD: Terry Marsh, the former world light welterweight champion, wants to return to the ring eight months after being diagnosed as an epileptic.
The unbeaten Briton said yesterday that he believed the diagnosis was wrong and that the blackouts he had been suffering may not have been symptoms of epilepsy.


Just a Few Feet From Victory
LEAD: Tammie Green hasn't won on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour.
But everyone expects the 29-year-old from Ohio to get her first victory soon if she just starts dropping some of those 10- and 15-foot birdie putts.


Safeguard Health Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safeguard Health Enterprises (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,802,000
16,509,000
Net inc
757,000
559,000
Share earns
.12
.07
Shares outst
6,525,000
7,696,000


Pro-Med Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pro-Med Capital (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
299,047
-
Per share
.09
-
The company said it has no year- ago quarter comparison figures because it had been reporting earnings on a semi-annual basis.
The company also said the FASB 91 accounting rule change resulted in a 1-cent-a-share reduction of first quarter income.


Thomas Pollock, 86, Former N.Y.U. Dean
LEAD: Thomas Clark Pollock, former dean of arts and sciences at New York University, died of pneumonia yesterday at Duke University Hospital in Durham, N.C.
He was 86 years old and lived in Durham.


Paraguay Rebuff 'Astonishes' Vatican
LEAD: The Vatican expressed ''astonishment'' today at Paraguay's cancellation of a papal encounter with civic leaders as tensions continued to build between the Roman Catholic Church and the Paraguayan leader, Gen.
Alfredo Stroessner.


Southland Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southland Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,798,200,000
1,904,942,000
Net loss
b71,463,000
bc25,016,000
Share earns
-
.47
Shares outst
200,000,000
48,383,000
b-Includes a loss of $113,862,000, before income taxes, Citgo and business units to be divested for the latest period; the year-ago period includes a gain of $24,116,000, before income taxes, for the same reasons.


The Shows and Where to See Them
LEAD: The coming of the American Institute of Architects convention to New York has unleashed a virtual torrent of architectural exhibitions, tours, events and displays in the city.
This is a summary of those that will be open to the public.
Hours and dates vary; telephone ahead.
EXHIBITIONS  AMERICAN CRAFT MUSEUM, 40 West 53d Street (956-6047).


Representative Faces a Charge Of Harassment
LEAD: Representative Floyd H. Flake, a Queens Democrat and the pastor of an African Methodist Episcopal church, has been accused by a former church employee of forcing her to resign after she ended an affair with him.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The New York City Industrial Development Agency yesterday announced plans to issue more than $166.5 million worth of bonds, more than three-fourths of them on behalf of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment banking firm.


Marion Hartshorne, Professor, 78
LEAD: Marion Holmes Hartshorne, the Harry Emerson Fosdick professor emeritus of philosophy and religion at Colgate University in Hamilton, N.Y., died of a malignant brain tumor Tuesday at Community Memorial Hospital in Hamilton.
He was 78 years old and lived in Hamilton.


New Chrysler Contract Is Narrowly Approved
LEAD: Members of the United Automobile Workers have ratified a two-year contract with the Chrysler Corporation by a margin whose narrowness one union official attributed to anger toward the company.


Accounting Merger
LEAD: Laventhol &amp; Horwath, the nation's ninth-largest accounting and consulting firm, announced that it would merge with Stuart Becker &amp; Company, accountants and consultants in New York.
Laventhol &amp; Horwath said the combined New York office would have 550 employees and revenues of $70 million.
Laventhol &amp; Horwath is based in Philadelphia and has offices in 50 American cities.


Chief Resigns At Wickes Unit
LEAD: Alfred S. Crimmins, the president and chief executive of one of the Wickes Companies' largest subsidiaries, said today that he was resigning to pursue other business opportunities.


Key Centurion Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Key Centurion Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,986,000
4,214,000
Per share
.58
.58
Shares outst
8,659,765
7,191,211


How to Clean Up 'Roadside Rot': First, Stop Littering
LEAD: To the Editor:


First United Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First United Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,720,000
1,550,000
Per share
.81
.72


First Oak Brook Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Oak Brook Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
740,000
711,000
Per share
.61
.59


Christiana Cos reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Christiana Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
953,000
2,510,000
Net loss
305,000
155,000
9mo rev
3,238,000
24,988,000
Net loss
b473,000
1,390,000
b-Includes a $516,000 payment in settlement of a wrongful death suit.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  The Taffetas


T. Ward Cleary, Lawyer, 71
LEAD: T. Ward Cleary, a lawyer and educator, died of a heart attack on Tuesday at his home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 71 years old.


Apogee Robotics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apogee Robotics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
684,002
343,031
Net inc
6,499
b280,801
9mo rev
2,418,031
993,835
Net inc
19,605
b686,014
b-Net loss


U.S. Natural Gas Supply
LEAD: The nation has a 35-year supply of recoverable natural gas at prices below $3 per thousand cubic feet, the Energy Department said today.
A price increase to $5 would encourage the development of only another 10 years' supply, the department said.
The nation uses about 17 trillion cubic feet of natural gas a year.


Dining Out Guide: TriBeCa
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
Arqua


Duckworth Honored
LEAD: Kevin Duckworth, the 7-foot center who nearly tripled his scoring average and helped lead the Portland Trail Blazers to 53 victories, has been named the National Basketball Association's most improved player, receiving 33 of the 80 votes from a national panel of news-media representatives.
Duckworth, who was traded from the San Antonio Spurs to Portland for Walter Berry midway through his rookie season in 1986-87, averaged 15.8 points and 7.4 rebounds this season.


Biotechnica International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biotechnica International
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,158,000
1,592,000
Net loss
1,275,000
1,964,000
The 1988 revenue reflects product sales of $5,055,000 from three recently acquired businesses.


Treatment for Common Type of Fish Poisoning Is Discovered
LEAD: Doctors have discovered a simple but apparently effective treatment for severe cases of the most frequently reported form of fish poisoning affecting people.


Makers of Helicopter Engine Are Sued in East River Crash
LEAD: The owner of the sightseeing helicopter that crashed into the East River on May 1 filed a lawsuit yesterday seeking at least $24.5 million in damages from two corporations involved in the manufacture of the aircraft's engine.


Soviet Survivor Relives 'Doctors' Plot'
LEAD: To wait was Yakov Rapoport's way, and his only weapon.
His memory wound itself protectively around the days in early 1953 that took him from the top ranks of Soviet medicine to a prison cell and back.
When he returned, he kept silent, he kept waiting, and he kept remembering.


Bush Finds Himself Defending Reagan's Backing
LEAD: Vice President Bush attacked the Democrats as weak on national defense today but found himself on the defensive about the strength of President Reagan's support for him.


Review/Film; Terror and Haunting, Through a Child's Eyes
LEAD: Ghosts are rarely as intriguing as the people they haunt, so ''Lady in White'' has a shrewdly chosen focus.
Its sympathetic, engaging, haunted hero is Frankie Scarlatti, a 9-year-old boy who sees the ghost of a murdered 10-year-old girl.
Frankie is locked in a spooky school cloakroom on Halloween night in 1962, when he sees the apparition of Melissa and is nearly strangled himself.


Wooing White Sox
LEAD: Gov.
Bob Martinez of Florida last night agreed to meet today in Tallahassee with Eddie Einhorn and Jerry Reinsdorf, the owners of the Chicago White Sox.
Earlier yesterday, Martinez canceled the breakfast meeting after he heard reports that the White Sox would not be moving to Florida, but would probably keep playing in Chicago.


Bradley Real Estate Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bradley Real Estate Trust (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1988
1987
Net inc
423,107
c642,000
Share earns
.13
.19
6mo net inc
b4,591,400
c1,110,500
Share earns
1.37
.33
b-Includes a gain on the sale of real estate of $3,728,000.


Sports of The Times; A Snapshot Of Jonathan
LEAD: IT'S a family snapshot like millions of others: a smiling little 4-year-old boy with his cousin and one of his sisters.


A Slow Beginning For an I.B.M. System
LEAD: Software is now being sold that is designed to run with OS/2, the operating system introduced last fall by the International Business Machines Corporation and the Microsoft Corporation, a major software publisher.
But analysts say the new products fall short of tapping OS/2's vast potential.


Market Place; Behind the Rise In Texaco's Stock
LEAD: MOST oil stocks move primarily on oil prices.
But Texaco in the last few weeks has been jumping in anticipation of a bid for control by Carl C. Icahn, its largest shareholder, as well as an anticipated round of asset sales.
Those sales seemed imminent when Texaco emerged two months ago from a year in bankruptcy, but shareholders are still waiting.


Fitchburg Gas &amp; Electric Light Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fitchburg Gas &amp; Electric Light Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,389,367
15,247,234
Net inc
2,065,390
2,052,583
Share earns
1.53
1.38
Shares outst
1,312,932
1,316,724


Washington Talk: Briefing; Looking for a Home
LEAD: Charles Blitzer, the newly appointed director of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, is already itchy to move.
He notes that the Wilson Center is being cramped by crowded quarters in the Castle of the Smithsonian Institution on the Mall.


Bid for Rowntree Arouses Anxiety
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said the Government would wait for a report from regulators before making any decisions about Nestle S.A.'s bid to buy Rowntree P.L.C., the British candy maker.
British politicians have strongly objected to Nestle's bid of $:2.1 billion ($3.9 billion) for Rowntree, which makes Kit Kat candy bars, saying they want the company to remain British.


U.S. Halts Funds to Develop Self-Contained Heart Implant
LEAD: The National Institutes of Health announced yesterday that the Federal Government would no longer finance the development of an artificial human heart.
The decision does not halt all artificial heart research, but it deals a blow to the half-century-old dream of building a mechanical pump to replace a heart that no longer functions.


Genesco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genesco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
101,807,000
92,581,000
Net loss
2,279,000
2,897,000


The Shoreham Syndrome
LEAD: New York's politicians propose cutting a deal to scrap the completed, ready-to-run Shoreham nuclear power plant on Long Island.
That folly could threaten the nation's security, not just Long Island's, by further eroding public confidence in nuclear power.
Its cost will become clear enough when brownouts or even rolling blackouts hit


Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Picks 2 Britons for Group Post
LEAD: Terry Bannister and Roy Warman, both from England, have been elected to the board of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company and have been named joint directors of operations for the Communications Group.
That group is made up of the giant company's advertising agencies, public relations firms and marketing services firms.


Fighting in South Beirut Subsides As Syria and Iran Broker a Truce
LEAD: A cease-fire brokered by Syria and Iran took hold today in southern Beirut after six days of fierce street battles between rival Shiite militiamen.


Review/Theater; The Telekinetic 'Carrie,' With Music
LEAD: Those who have the time and money to waste on only one Anglo-American musical wreck on Broadway this year might well choose ''Carrie,'' the new Royal Shakespeare Company co-production at the Virginia Theater.
If ''Chess'' slides to its final scene as solemnly and pompously as the Titanic, then ''Carrie'' expires with fireworks like the Hindenberg.


'Ridiculous' Game Just Fine With Mets
LEAD: Dave Smith, the Houston closer who couldn't finish off the Mets Wednesday night, had no problem today describing the game.


The Law; At the Bar
LEAD: The man was 58 years old, out of work and broke.
So, despite degrees from Dartmouth and New York University Law School, he found himself driving a limousine.
But as much as he hated the work, things could always be worse: the next passenger could be one of his former partners.


Devils Tap Survival Instincts
LEAD: It was a case of survival of the wiliest, and the Devils, for the first time in this Stanley Cup semifinal, outwitted the Bruins.
The Devils kept their playoff crusade intact with a 6-3 victory that was the first indication, through six games, that they might be capable of subduing the Bruins.


Jury Strips 2 Concrete Racketeers of Their Assets
LEAD: A jury decided yesterday that two businessmen must forfeit millions of dollars in assets to the Federal Government because they took part in the racketeering activities of the Genovese crime family.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Parable, by Valenti
LEAD: For some years now, Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America, has been inveighing against what he perceives as the cable television industry's perpetration of rampant evil, the common denominator of which he calls ''monopoly.'' He was doing his own version of ''Hooray for Hollywood'' again Wednesday in a hearing on the video marketplace before the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance.


Study Ties Teen-Age Suicide To Abnormalities in the Brain
LEAD: Depressed teen-agers intent on killing themselves show chemical abnormalities in the brain that appear to predispose them to suicide, according to a study released today.


The Blinding Cruelty Of Laser Weapons
LEAD: To the Editor:


N.H.L. to Discuss Game 4
LEAD: The Boston Bruins' grievance over the strange proceedings in the fourth game of their Stanley Cup semifinal series with the Devils here last Sunday will be discussed at the National Hockey League's board of governors meeting, which is scheduled for next month.


TII Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TII Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 25
1988
1987
Sales
8,296,000
9,146,000
Net loss
b12,738,000
c537,000
Share earns
-
.17
9mo sales
22,002,000
28,096,000
Net loss
12,466,000
c2,260,000
Share earns
-
.75


A New York Sound and Light Show
LEAD: Changing the spectacular array of illuminated skyscraper tops that has become a trademark of nighttime New York may fall into the category of fixing what isn't broken.
But the event planned for the opening of the American Institute of Architects convention is intended to be a one-time effort to correct what the architects feel is the only thing wrong with the city's nightly display, which is that it looks the same from the moment the buildings light up at dusk to the moment the lights go off in the middle of the night.


Prospect Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prospect Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
95,183,000
77,049,000
Net inc
b6,534,000
c1,393,000
Share earns
.30
.07
b-Includes a gain of $2,677,000 from utilization of a tax credit.
c-Includes a loss of $2,060,000 from discontinued operations and a gain of $1,128,000 from a tax credit.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.06
7.20
6.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.21
6.26
5.74
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.43
6.45
5.96
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.85
8.85
8.42
30-YR.


Black Publishing Firms Subject of Conference
LEAD: A free daylong conference on the issue of black-owned publishing houses will be held tomorrow at the City College of New York, North Academic Center, Convent Avenue and 138th Street.
It begins at 10:30 A.M. with a discussion on the history of black publishing houses over the last 70 years.
The future of such publishing houses will be the topic of a talk at 1:30 P.M.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A2-9


Units of Travelers
LEAD: The Travelers Corporation announced yesterday that it would offer its Canadian subsidiaries for sale.
The properties to be sold include Travcan Ltd. and two of its insurance subsidiaries, Travelers Life Insurance Company of Canada and Travelers Indemnity Company of Canada.
The company, which is based in Hartford, said it would concentrate on its United States insurance operations and use the capital from the sale to finance long-range business goals.


William Sunners, Author, 84
LEAD: William Sunners, who wrote more than 100 books on how to win prizes in contests, died of congestive heart failure Monday at Brookdale Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 84 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Health of Vietnam Veterans
LEAD: A Federal study finds that Vietnam veterans are as physically healthy as other veterans but that they have more emotional problems.
Page A13.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Cineplex Odeon Corp., Toronto, a film production, exhibition and distribution company, said it would form a new unit to build and acquire 100 movie screens in London.
It said the unit would spend about $:50 million ($94.2 million).


Systems Engineering &amp; Manufacturing Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Systems Engineering &amp; Manufacturing Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,867,000
5,869,000
Net loss
8,000
b78,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo sales
13,506,000
10,746,000
Net inc
97,000
171,000
Share earns
.06
.10


Durakon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Durakon Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
31,473,000
22,416,000
Net inc
734,000
692,000
Share earns
.12
.11
The company said that if the operations of DFM Corp., acquired Sept. 1, 1987, had been included in the first quarter 1987 results, net income and sales on a pro forma basis would have been $1,033,000 and $28,994,000, respectively.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Jordan Leads Bulls Past Pistons, 105-95
LEAD: Michael Jordan scored 36 points and Sam Vincent added a career-high 31, leading the Chicago Bulls to a 105-95 victory over the Detroit Pistons tonight in the second game of their Eastern Conference semifinal series.


Mets Wait for Aguilera to Make the Call on Return
LEAD: On Wednesday afternoon, Rick Aguilera sat at the table in the clubhouse playing cards with his teammates.
He won a couple of hands with good cards, several more with shrewd bluffs.
Aguilera's mind is a tough one to read, perhaps never more so than when the only thing he has in his hand is a baseball.


Review/Art; 2 Sides of Constable: Classic and Romantic
LEAD: Although John Constable (1776-1837) has been generally recognized as one of the giants of English art, it has not always been apparent why.
There were classic and romantic sides to him, and his attitude toward them changed.
Occasionally he reached for a synthesis, and when he succeeded, his paintings have a soaring, earthy power.


Soviet Forces Prepare for Pullout By Leaving Eastern Afghanistan
LEAD: Soviet troops have begun moving out of positions in eastern Afghanistan in preparation for their first withdrawal from a major Afghan city this weekend, Afghan and Western diplomats said today.


Shen Congwen, 85, a Champion Of Freedom for Writers in China
LEAD: Shen Congwen, a novelist, short-story writer, lyricist and passionate champion of literary and intellectual independence, died Tuesday in Beijing, his relatives reported.
He was 85 years old.


Molson Companies reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Molson Companies
Year to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,434,853,000
2,250,364,000
Net inc
78,685,000
52,320,000
Share earns
2.40
1.68
The results are in Canadian dollars.
The company is listed on the Toronto and Montreal stock exchanges.


Second Genetic Code Deciphered, Solving a Protein Synthesis Puzzle
LEAD: Scientists have deciphered a second genetic code that has eluded molecular biologists for two decades.
The code directs one of several steps in the synthesis of proteins inside cells, the basic process of life.


Brazil and Banks Seem Close to New Debt Pact
LEAD: Negotiations between the Treasury and major international banks over a restructuring of most of Brazil's foreign debt are ''close to a breakthrough,'' the banks' chief negotiator said today.


Ex-Oilman Takes On Hospital Challenge
LEAD: Kenneth S. George has developed shopping centers, run energy exploration companies and served as a top Commerce Department trade officer for the Reagan Administration.
Since 1985, however, he has concentrated on health-care administration.


Dotronix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dotronix Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,347,848
4,273,280
Net inc
155,606
336,648
Share earns
.05
.15
Shares outst
3,242,296
2,229,800
9mo rev
30,526,927
11,404,940
Net inc
1,391,649
b996,311
Share earns
.45
.45
Shares outst
3,086,740
2,229,800


2 TRANSIT OFFICERS ARE HELD BY U.S.
LEAD: Two transit police officers were arrested on Federal charges yesterday in the first cases to result from the department's false-arrest scandal.


California Intensifies Planning for the Big Quake
LEAD: Seven months after the Whittier earthquake that killed eight people, the authorities in California have redoubled their efforts to prepare this heavily populated and quake-prone state for the devastating ''big one'' that is almost certainly inevitable.


CPAC Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPAC Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,500,000
2,300,000
Net inc
70,000
54,826
Share earns
.03
.01
Yr sales
11,900,000
10,700,000
Net inc
890,000
330,411
Share earns
.43
.25


Restaurants
LEAD:  Mezzogiorno If you are addicted to the buoyant northern Italian fare at Mezzaluna on the Upper East Side but rarely find a free table in its dollhouse-size dining room, an alternative is the new SoHo branch, called Mezzogiorno.
The menu at this casually sophisticated trattoria is similar to that of the original: sprightly carpaccios and salads, vivid pastas and excellent brick-oven pizzas.


Votrax Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Votrax Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,558,000
1,796,000
Net loss
298,000
b32,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
6,737,000
5,301,000
Net inc
107,000
81,000
Share earns
.03
.03
b-Net income


Cognitronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cognitronics Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,231,000
4,041,000
Net loss
76,000
b202,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income and after a loss from discontinued operations of $28,000 and a tax credit of $64,000 and included a reduction in pension cost of $19,000 resulting from a change in accounting for such cost.


Harvard Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harvard Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
182,067,000
177,424,000
Net inc
4,610,000
7,505,000
Share earns
.26
.43
6mo sales
332,797,000
261,335,000
Net inc
6,006,000
b10,930,000
Share earns
.34
.62


Arias at Carnegie Hall
LEAD: Veronica Tyler, a soprano, is to sing arias by Handel and Verdi, songs by Strauss, Faure, Rodrigo and Poulenc, and a group of spirituals, at Carnegie Hall on Sunday at 8 P.M.
Her accompanist will be Margaret Singer.
Tickets are $7 to $17.
Information: 247-7800.


A Profane Injustice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Public Service Co of New Mexico reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Co of New Mexico (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
211,534,000
206,481,000
Net inc
20,736,000
29,151,000
Share earns
.43
.63


Davis May Make a Bid for Lorimar
LEAD: The Lorimar-Telepictures Corporation, which has agreed to be acquired by Warner Communications Inc., said yesterday that it had received a letter from the oil entrepreneur Marvin Davis stating that he is contemplating making a $15-a-share all-cash offer for the company.


Greenspan Asks Caution
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board chairman, Alan Greenspan, today urged a cautious approach to regulatory reforms in the financial markets.


Marcor Development reports earnings for Year to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marcor Development
Year to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
11,614,465
6,223,805
Net inc
b2,113,048
c2,034,545
Share earns
.21
.28
Shares outst
9,443,108
7,196,961
b-Includes a gain of $783,916 from tax credits.


Boston BancorP reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston BancorP (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,765,000
6,521,000
Per share
.60
.74
6mo net inc
9,121,000
11,827,000
Per share
1.13
1.32


CFS Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CFS Financial (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
978,000
1,300,000
Per share
.33
.43
9mo net inc
1,200,000
4,400,000
Per share
.39
1.47


Wisconsin Toy reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wisconsin Toy (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
9,609,000
8,327,000
Net inc
493,000
239,000
Share earns
.11
.06
Yr sales
34,997,000
37,466,000
Net inc
2,320,000
b2,844,000
Share earns
.53
.71
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $567,000.


On Economy, Dukakis Recasts Mold
LEAD: In planning how to manage the nation's economy if he becomes President, Michael S. Dukakis is relying on a loose and growing circle of advisers who, like the Governor, have cast aside many of the policies of earlier Democrats that allotted Government a major role that required high spending and high taxes.


Crystal Oil Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crystal Oil Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,609,000
10,694,000
Net inc
71,000
1,055,000
Share earns
.02
.19
The company said share earnings for year-ago period have been restated to reflect a 1-for-200 reverse stock split on Jan.


Integon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Integon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
147,496,000
95,016,000
Net inc
b41,000
c10,711,000
Share earns
-
.41
Shares outst
29,245,000
26,000,000
b-After realized losses of $5,878,000.
c-After realized gains of $3,734,000.


Program Trade Move Downplayed by Merc
LEAD: Top officials of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange are seeking to play down the effect on the exchange of a decision by major brokerage firms to halt a popular form of program trading for their own accounts.


Book Notes
LEAD:  Windfall for 'Old Dog'


Federal Realty Investment Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Realty Investment Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,035,000
13,347,000
Net inc
2,227,000
2,020,000
Share earns
.16
.16


Sharp-Shooting Devils Extend Series to a 7th Game
LEAD: Inspired by the return of their coach, the Devils performed with intensity tonight and prevented elimination for the second time in their first trip to the playoffs.


Money Fund Assets Fall
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 426 money market mutual funds decreased $3.2 billion, to $270.56 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 117 institutional funds decreased $3.65 billion, to $72.43 billion.
Assets of the 212 general-purpose funds were up $217.1 million, to $89.94 billion.


MAN FOUND GUILTY IN 2 OF 16 DEATHS
LEAD: A man accused of killing 16 people last December was convicted of two of the slayings today and was sentenced to death.


Pedestrian Killed by a Bus
LEAD: A Manhattan woman, Anita Escuadra, 68, was hit and killed by a bus near Eighth Avenue and 50th Street yesterday.
No summons was issued against the driver, Michael Janifer of the Gold Line bus company of Maryland.


4 Houses Seized as Drug Dens
LEAD: Federal marshals in Queens yesterday seized four private houses described as drug-sale locations, three of them in the area of a two-month-old city, state and Federal drug-enforcement program called the Tactical Narcotics Team, which is intended to curb the crack trade in southeast Queens.


TV Drama Shows Clash of Religion and Medicine
LEAD: It may not be unprecedented, but it is certainly unusual for a television drama to criticize religion.
And ''Promised a Miracle,'' which will be shown on CBS next Thursday, does raise some criticisms of fundamentalist religion.


Defense Ridicules Charges in Colombian's Cocaine Smuggling Trial
LEAD: The defense ended its closing arguments today in the cocaine smuggling trial of Carlos Lehder Rivas, ridiculing prosecutors for trying to make the Colombian appear responsible for the drug problem in the United States.


Review/Film; Australian Victory at Beersheba
LEAD: ''The Lighthorsemen'' is a technically elaborate, artistically clumsy Australian film that tries to celebrate the heroism of 800 Australian mounted soldiers who triumphed over thousands of Turks and Germans at Beersheba, in southern Palestine, on Oct. 31, 1917.
The battle was a key to the eventual Allied victory in the Middle East in World War


Possible Bidder Signals Jefferies
LEAD: Jefferies Group Inc. said today that it had received an unsolicited takeover inquiry from an unidentified third party and had adopted a ''poison pill'' defensive measure.
Jefferies is the parent of a


Traffic Agents Confront the Angry City
LEAD: Without the efforts of people like Yvonne Sanders and Maria Figueroa, the 1.7 million vehicles oozing into Manhattan each day would long ago have coalesced in motionless gridlock.
They pass out parking tickets for a living.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the fight for control of Allegheny International Inc. misstated the movement in the company's stock and investor reaction to the entry of Bennett S. Lebow.
The stock rose 25 cents on Tuesday, to $3.625, as investors reacted favorably to Mr.
Lebow's move.


DBA Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DBA Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,149,217
13,200,151
Net inc
886,805
c735,945
Share earns
.37
.25
Shares outst
2,376,244
2,932,097
9mo sales
46,633,266
38,717,357
Net inc
b3,251,001
c2,775,789
Share earns
1.15
.85
Shares outst
2,819,266
3,265,405


B. Cobbey Crisler, Biblical Scholar, 55
LEAD: B. Cobbey Crisler, a Biblical scholar, educator and author, died of a heart attack on April 25 at his home in Carmel Valley, Calif.
He was 55 years old.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I was surprised by the news reports that have said my endorsement last evening of the Vice President was 'lukewarm.' I am enthusiastic, fully committed and, as I have said, will go all out to make Vice President Bush the next President of the United States.''  - President Reagan.  [ D17:4.


Electromedics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electromedics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,145,933
3,880,410
Net inc
130,183
b118,028
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Shows Celebrate New York Architecture
LEAD: IT goes without saying that New York City, just by itself, is one of the great architectural shows in the world.
So how to add spice to it to celebrate the arrival of between 10,000 and 14,000 people expected this weekend for the annual convention of the American Institute of Architects?
The city has not played host to the nation's professional architects since 1967, and New


G.E. Wins 'Star Wars' Contract
LEAD: The Defense Department, awarding one of the largest contracts yet under the Strategic Defense Initiative, today chose an industry team led by the General Electric Company to play a leading role in the development and initial deployment of defenses against ballistic missiles.


Senate Factions Search for Way To Widen Military Role on Drugs
LEAD: Senators pressing for a major expansion of the military's role in the fight against narcotics battled with one another and the Secretary of Defense today over an acceptable approach, then moved toward agreement but broke off just short of reaching it.


Computer Network Techology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Network Techology
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,869,671
450,202
Net loss
68,099
465,246


Wall to Wall Sound &amp; Video Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wall to Wall Sound &amp; Video Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
51,347,000
44,070,000
Net inc
1,857,000
1,953,000
Share earns
.35
.37
Yr sales
132,362,000
-
Net inc
b3,393,000
-
Share earns
.64
-


Insituform of North America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Insituform of North America (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,075,495
3,200,964
Net inc
546,958
460,429
Share earns
.08
.06


Koch Budget Critics Ask Where the 'B List' Went
LEAD: Last winter, Councilwoman Miriam Friedlander stood on the steps of City Hall and looked out over hundreds of troubled faces.
A group of demonstrators was calling on the Koch administration to honor promises to finance AIDS programs included in the city budget.


Self Loses Editor Before She Starts
LEAD: Gruner &amp; Jahr, the West German publisher, has lured back Elizabeth Crow to serve as president of its American division, Gruner &amp; Jahr U.S.A., only a month after she resigned as editor in chief of Parents magazine, its flagship publication in the United States.


American Fiber Optics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Fiber Optics (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,066,000
907,000
Net loss
38,000
139,000
9mo sales
2,614,000
2,756,000
Net loss
370,000
417,000


U.S. AND SOVIET SAY MISSILE PACT ISSUE HAS BEEN RESOLVED
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union have resolved their outstanding differences over verifying the new missile accord, clearing an important obstacle to Senate approval of the pact, American and Soviet officials said today.


Occupiers Put Doubts To Shamir
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir set out to make a point today by swooping down on this Arab city and walking through the old quarter as if this were just another Israeli town.


Continental Health Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Health Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,759,660
17,164,983
Net inc
879,314
735,242
Share earns
.18
.15


Connecticut Resumes Lottery After Repairs
LEAD: About 75 percent of the state's lottery terminals were back on line today, two days after a new computer system developed a glitch that allowed tickets to be purchased after the winning numbers were announced, forcing the system to be shut down.


Central City Chorus
LEAD: The Central City Chorus is to sing Benjamin Britten's ''Hymn to St.
Cecilia,'' with a text by W. H. Auden, and Ralph Vaughan Williams's ''Dona Nobis Pacem,'' a setting of Walt Whitman's Civil War poetry, at Central Presbyterian Church, 593 Park Avenue, at 64th Street, on Sunday at 7 P.M.
Nancy Bergman, a soprano, and Richard Christopher, a baritone, will be the soloists in the Vaughan Williams work, which is to be accompanied by David Graf, an organist.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Case-Hoyt Corp., Rochester, a printer of sales promotion material and one of the BCE Publitech companies of Bell Canada Enterprises, appointed James J. Curtis president.


Actmedia Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Actmedia Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
22,039,000
18,578,000
Net loss
889,000
b1,310,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-Net income


WMS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* WMS Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
28,727,000
30,741,000
Net inc
b1,860,000
c1,289,000
Share earns
.23
.16
6mo rev
54,236,000
58,210,000
Net inc
391,000
c171,000
Share earns
.05
.02


Graham Family Power Upheld
LEAD: The Washington Post Company said yesterday that its shareholders had approved an amendment to the company's charter that affirms the power of Katharine Graham, the chairman and chief executive, and her family to accept or reject any acquisition proposal.


Hamptons Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hamptons Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
90,000
240,000
Per share
.11
.32


United Insurance Cos reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Insurance Cos (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b1,775,000
b1,768,000
Share earns
.52
.51
b-Includes realized gains of $123,000 and $195,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


Andover Controls reports earnings for Qtr to April 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andover Controls (OTC)
Qtr to April 3
1988
1987
Sales
5,171,514
4,925,684
Net inc
634,700
574,225
Share earns
.18
.16
9mo sales
17,285,443
17,003,368
Net inc
2,170,442
1,922,984
Share earns
.60
.53


Baltek Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltek Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,963,743
6,946,715
Net inc
793,748
600,168
Share earns
.31
.24


Titan Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Titan Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
29,769,000
25,249,000
Net inc
181,000
b1,346,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $116,000 and a tax credit of $476,000.


Bloomfield Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bloomfield Savings &amp; Loan
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
3,198,000
2,096,000


Knight Weighs New Mexico Job Offer
LEAD: One of the principals in the discussions between Coach Bob Knight of Indiana and officials at the University of New Mexico said yesterday that the introduction of a new Lobo basketball coach had been postponed to allow Knight more time to consider his future.


Softguard Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Softguard Systems Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
373,088
372,128
Net inc
6,757
b168,386
9mo rev
1,318,246
1,276,003
Net inc
271,511
b441,354
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


Economic Scene; Behind Rate Rise, The Fed's Hand
LEAD: THIS week's jump in the prime rate by half a point, back to the 9 percent pre-crash level of October, troubled the stock market, but it was no surprise.
The prime usually lags behind other interest rates, most of which have been climbing for the past two months, and its rise was overdue.


Teacher Tells Committee Of Ordeal by Bureaucracy
LEAD: A 24-year-old teacher who had long dreamed of teaching a first-grade class in New York City's public schools told yesterday how three months at the mercy of the Board of Education's bureaucracy and an elementary school's hierarchy forced her to quit.


Review/Art; 'Painters by Painters' at the Academy of Design
LEAD: The first thing to be said about the new exhibition at the National Academy of Design is that although everything in it comes from the Uffizi in Florence, it is not made up of masterpieces.
Of the 30 paintings on view, 2 or 3 at most deserve that appellation.


Acmat Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acmat Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,756,134
4,469,383
Net inc
400,045
b1,757,054
Share earns
.08
.59
Shares outst
5,217,215
2,937,072
b-Included a tax credit of $310,700.
The company said the year-ago quarter net from operations included a gain of $1,050,000 relating to the sale of a portion of shares held in an affiliate.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article in Business Day on May 5 about Peat Marwick Main &amp; Company's resignation as auditor of Bombay Palace Restaurants Inc. misstated the reasons for the action.


Paul Osborn, 86, the Playwright Of 'Morning's at 7,' 'Suzie Wong'
LEAD: Paul Osborn, the playwright and screenwriter, died last night at Mount Sinai Hospital, where had been for two months with several ailments.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.


INDIAN TROOPS KILL 4 SIKHS AT TEMPLE
LEAD: Government troops shot and killed at least four Sikh militants early this morning when they tried to flee a siege of the Golden Temple here by Government forces, police officials said.


First Midwest Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Midwest Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,953,000
b2,462,000
Per share
.38
.32
b-After an extraordinary credit of $89,000.


Industrial Nations Criticize U.N. Proposal on Latin Debt
LEAD: The United States and other industrialized nations criticized a United Nations proposal for easing Central America's foreign debts today at a special General Assembly meeting, saying the plan would set a dangerous precedent.


2d Officer Cleared in Hit-Run That Injured Bicycling Child
LEAD: A former New York City police officer was acquitted yesterday of charges that he ran down a bicycle-riding child in an unmarked police car, then fled the scene and tried to cover up the hit-and-run by falsifying records.


Our Towns; In Custody Case, Hiding Elephants Is the Easy Part
LEAD: For four years, Arlan Seidon and two female elephants, Tory and Duchess, have been fugitives from the New Jersey police. ''I realize this looks like a story about an old kook who took two elephants and ran away,'' Mr.
Seidon said in a rare phone interview from some place; he wouldn't say where. ''But I couldn't let my girls be abused.


Introducing Low-Alcohol Ball Parks
LEAD: Major league baseball executives, concerned and confused by the ugly episode last month at Riverfront Stadium in Cincinnati, nonetheless maintain that ball parks across the country are generally safer, more civilized and more uniformly sober than in recent years.


A Doctor Mourns His Loss of Autonomy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gerber Products Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gerber Products Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
258,956,000
233,703,000
Net loss
b3,318,000
cd3,058,000
Share earns
-
.16
Yr sales
942,610,000
808,499,000
Net inc
b21,181,000
d28,461,000
Share earns
1.07
1.42


Regan's Reagan Is Missing
LEAD: Most accounts have portrayed Donald Regan's memoir ''For the Record'' as little more than an unattractive ''kiss-and-tell'' account of Nancy Reagan's fixation with the occult.
That underestimates a book profitably read on several levels.


Textron Subsidiary Wins Airbus Contract
LEAD: A subsidiary of Textron Inc. today became the first United States company to win a major airframe contract for the European Airbus, the airliner project that the United States Government says is unfairly subsidized.


Mor-Flo Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mor-Flo Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
55,375,106
55,458,951
Net loss
441,996
b2,364,363
Share earns
-
.95
b-Net income and includes a gain of $1,737,000 from an accounting change.


First Source Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Source Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,100,000
1,900,000
Per share
.55
.49


On Stage
LEAD:  New Meeting in St. Louis


AUCTIONS
LEAD:  Soviet Auction


10 Years as Practitioner, None as Lawyer
LEAD: The Chicago law firm of Sonnenschein Carlin Nath &amp; Rosenthal appeared before a Federal judge here last week with a very unusual motion.
The firm wanted to withdraw one of its partners from a civil case because the partner, a highly regarded trial specialist, had never been licensed to practice law.


Bridge
LEAD: Two partnerships who live some 5,400 miles apart are not likely to form a pickup team in a major event, but it happened Tuesday at the Cavendish Club Teams in Manhattan.


Inter-City Gas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inter-City Gas Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
540,300,000
518,500,000
Net inc
34,300,000
29,000,000
Share earns
1.39
1.36
Shares outst
22,500,000
19,000,000
The results are in Canadian dollars.


Review/Art; Nature's Influence, at the Whitney
LEAD: ''Vital Signs,'' at the Whitney Museum of American Art, bites off a small but substantial chunk of an almost ridiculously ambitious subject - the influence of nature on art.
Organized by Lisa Phillips, an associate curator at the museum, the show addresses nature's varied impact on American abstractionists.


Judge to Inquire Into Verdict In Product-Tampering Death
LEAD: A juror at the center of a dispute in the case of a woman found guilty of causing her husband's death by tampering with a product has told a local newspaper that she herself was the victim of earlier product tampering.


Bomed Medical Manufacturing Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bomed Medical Manufacturing Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
584,220
340,010
Net inc
23,640
b202,360
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Treasury's Auction Ends On an Upbeat
LEAD: The Treasury Department wound up its quarterly note and bond auctions on a modestly successful note yesterday, as investors purchased $8.5 billion of new 30-year bonds at yield levels that were a bit lower than had been expected.


Review/Ballet; Clark Tippet Premiere
LEAD: Clark Tippet, a principal dancer with American Ballet Theater, has choreographed his second ballet and named it after his choice of composer and score - ''Bruch Violin Concerto No. 1.'' There is no need to search for a verdict on the premiere: downright terrific will do.


Citrus Entrepreneur Buys a Stake in Coffee
LEAD: Randon A. Samelson may be thinking about putting coffee alongside his orange juice.


Koch Seeks New Rules On Nightclub Closings
LEAD: The Koch administration yesterday proposed sweeping changes in New York City's zoning law that would fundamentally alter how the city controls the type and amount of music and other entertainment allowed in bars and restaurants.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Huberts After the Move


F.C.C. Sets Phone-Rate Revision
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission today proposed a new method of regulating long-distance telephone rates that it said could save callers $1.6 billion in the next four years.


Devon Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Devon Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
40,648,000
35,050,000
Net inc
4,003,000
2,859,000
Share earns
.38
.25
Yr sales
148,621,000
135,176,000
Net inc
13,249,000
b13,293,000
Share earns
1.20
1.26
Shares outst
11,078,000
10,383,000


First Commercial Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,533,000
1,391,000
Per share
.43
.41


S.E.C. Studies DeBartolo
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission is seeking evidence from Edward J. DeBartolo, the nation's largest developer of shopping centers, an S.E.C. official said tonight.


Southland Posts a Loss
LEAD: The Southland Corporation, which has been privately held since a $4.9 billion transaction last December, today reported a $71.5 million loss in the first quarter, mainly because of high interest expenses and other costs related to the buyout.


Paris Gives Only a Few Posts to Centrists
LEAD: Prime Minister Michel Rocard announced the formation of a Cabinet today whose weightiest portfolios went to members of his Socialist Party.
Only a few posts were given to independents and centrists.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  CINCINNATI (NL) - Placed Tracy Jones, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Leo Garcia, outfielder, from Nashville of the American Association.
KANSAS CITY (AL) - Agreed to terms with Bill Buckner, first baseman-designated hitter.
PHILADELPHIA (NL) - Sent Mike Maddux, pitcher, to Maine of the International League for injury rehabilitation.


Dominican Police Say 4 Men Killed George Rose
LEAD: The police in the Dominican Republic said yesterday that the Tony Award-winning actor George Rose was killed last week by four men, including his adopted son.


Royal Palm Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Palm Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
3,410,172
275,056
9mo net loss
10,158,122
b330,839
Per share
-
.08
b-Net income


Vie de France CorpO) reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vie de France CorpO)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
23,289,900
21,868,337
Net inc
b260,542
c538,250
Share earns
.02
-
9mo sales
58,812,183
51,578,870
Net inc
1,659,620
682,771
Share earns
.16
.06


Lindal Cedar Homes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lindal Cedar Homes Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,955,804
6,079,594
Net inc
150,927
71,341
Share earns
.08
.04


Review/Art; From Camera to Paint: New Style for Wegman
LEAD: William Wegman has forged a major career by striking consistently minor, even off-key notes in a number of media.
In a body of work that has so far included video, photography and drawing, Mr.
Wegman has repeatedly thwarted our expectations of artistic mastery, ambition and unity.
He has drawn badly, produced videotapes that make the average home movie look like Oscar material and taken as his main photographic subject a Weimaraner in an array of strange costumes and situations.


Avery Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avery Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,559,000
8,783,000
Net loss
2,303,000
c11,284,000
6mo rev
13,855,000
14,404,000
Net loss
b45,042,000
c17,939,000
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $10,593,000.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Mike Maddux, a 26-year-old right-handed pitcher for the Philadelphia Phillies, has been sent to the team's International League farm club in Old Orchard Beach, Me., to rehabilitate a sore arm and shoulder. . . .
The Cincinnati Reds put Tracy Jones, an outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list with a sprained knee and recalled Leo Garcia from Nashville.


Lintas:Campbell-Ewald Resigns Rockwell Work
LEAD: Lintas:Campbell-Ewald resigned yesterday as the companywide agency for Rockwell International a week after Rockwell said it was reassessing its advertising program.


Cubs Top Padres in 10 Innings
LEAD: Damon Berryhill, a rookie, doubled home the winning run with two out in the 10th inning today, and the Chicago Cubs beat the San Diego Padres, 2-1.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


Other Merrymaking
LEAD: In addition to the Ninth Avenue Food Festival and You Gotta Have Park, outdoor celebrations will be found elsewhere in New York City and its environs.
On the Upper West Side, three schools will be holding street fairs tomorrow.
The McBurney School brings 100 vendors to West 75th Street, between Central Park West and Columbus Avenue, from noon to 6 P.M.


Wal-Mart Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wal-Mart Stores Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,308,140,000
3,230,588,000
Net inc
153,551,000
110,390,000
Share earns
.27
.19
Shares outst
567,588,000
567,340,000
Share earnings for 1987 are adjusted to reflect the 100-percent common stock dividend paid on July 10, 1987.


Wyse Technology reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wyse Technology (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1988
1987
Sales
141,687,000
81,279,000
Net inc
7,737,000
5,216,000
Share earns
.49
.37
Shares outst
18,456,000
15,654,000
Yr sales
456,571,000
272,348,000
Net inc
27,978,000
18,575,000
Share earns
1.80
1.44
Shares outst
17,676,000
13,509,000


Grenada Sunburst Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grenada Sunburst Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b2,823,980
b3,276,819
Per share
.32
.37
b-Included securities gains of $480,461 for the latest first quarter and $822,788 for the year-ago period.


Concurrent Computer reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concurrent Computer (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
69,235,000
64,133,000
Net inc
3,599,000
2,423,000
Share earns
.31
.21
9mo sales
201,848,000
179,174,000
Net inc
10,888,000
4,861,000
Share earns
.95
.41


HMG-Courtland Properties reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HMG-Courtland Properties (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,631,437
2,998,178
Net inc
b12,990,747
c845,247
Share earns
10.72
-
b-After a gain on the sale of real estate of $10,664,879 and a tax credit of $2,340,000.


Washington Talk: Federal Charters; Noncoms Finally Get A Voice in the Capital
LEAD: Sergeants, corporals and petty officers usually come equipped with loud voices.
But in the high-decibel environment of the capital, the noncoms found they were not getting much of a hearing for their needs.


Vietnam Veterans' Health: No Worse Than Others
LEAD: Extensive medical examinations show that the physical health of veterans who served in Vietnam is not significantly different from that of soldiers stationed elsewhere, according to a major Federal study released today.


Dukakis Builds Congress Ties
LEAD: Behaving very much like the Democratic Presidential nominee, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts today picked up two major endorsements on Capitol Hill and tried to present himself as a executive who knows how to work with legislators.


First American Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
3,176,000
b11,846,000
Share earns
-
2.14
b-Net income and included a one- time transitional tax benefit of $8,996,000, or $1.62 a share.


Groff Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Groff Industries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,527,807
7,375 462
Net inc
567,276
117,209
Share earns
.61
.12


Dollar Edges Downward While Gold Prices Move Up
LEAD: The dollar finished slightly lower against most other currencies in United States trading yesterday after rising marginally in Europe.
Money brokers said there was little news to influence trading.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  4,000 Buy 'Lady'


Southwest Gas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest Gas Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
181,185,000
157,639,000
Net inc
20,736,000
16,868,000
Share earns
1.11
.93
Share earnings are restated to reflect implementation of an accounting change by the company's Nevada Savings Unit.


Tass Hails Philby as 'Heroic'
LEAD: Tass eulogized H. A. R. (Kim) Philby today as a master spy who carried out heroic and seemingly impossible feats to protect the Soviet Union from Western agents.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Wilander Upset: Ronald Agenor of Haiti shocked the defending champion, Mats Wilander, 6-3, 7-5, last night in the Italian Open championships in Rome.
In today's quarterfinals of the $825,000 clay-court tournament, Agenor will face No. 9 Andre Agassi of the United States, who beat Thomas Muster of Austria, 6-4, 7-5, for his 14th straight victory.


Moderate Inflation Seen
LEAD: Inflation in the most-developed countries is likely to remain moderate through 1989 while growth is likely to slow, the Bank of England said today.
In its quarterly bulletin, the British central bank predicted consumer prices in major nations would rise 3.2 percent this year and 3.7 percent in 1989.


Power Plant Bond Ruling
LEAD: The State of Washington's Supreme Court ruled today that purchasers of Washington Public Power Supply System bonds could sue the state for its role in the huge default on those bonds.


AL Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AL Laboratories Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
56,858,000
34,685,000
Net inc
1,825,000
1,462,000
Share earns
.20
.16
The latest first quarter included the results of Barre-National Inc., acquired in October 1987.


The Real Palace to Be Spared in Building Demolition
LEAD: The 11-story Palace Theater Building, at top, is being torn down to make way for a 43-story hotel at Seventh Avenue and 47th Street.
The Palace Theater itself, the adjoining, set-back building at left, and its landmark auditorium are to be preserved.
Workers have uncovered a bow-shaped marquee frame that had been out of view for years over the theater entrance on the facade of the office building.


Retail Sales Declined 0.6% in April
LEAD: Retail sales fell six-tenths of 1 percent in April, the first setback in six months, but economists said they were not particularly concerned because the March figure was revised upward significantly.


Horse Racing Notebook; New Triple Crown Trappings
LEAD: When the Triple Crown races were incorporated three years ago and then gained the sponsorship of the Chrysler Corporation last year, race officials promised that tradition and good taste would be upheld.
They haven't changed the name of the Kentucky Derby to the Chrysler LeBaron Derby quite yet, but the hand of big business has repainted the Triple


Scientific-Atlanta Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scientific-Atlanta Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1988
1987
Sales
128,521,000
121,121,000
Net inc
7,803,000
5,816,000
Share earns
.33
.25
9mo sales
380,752,000
354,754,000
Net inc
21,578,000
15,452,000
Share earns
.91
.66


Alexander Fried, 85, California Arts Critic
LEAD: Alexander Fried, a widely respected critic of music, dance and art in San Francisco for 51 years, died of a heart attack Monday morning at St.
Luke's Hospital in San Francisco.
He was 85 years old.
Mr.
Fried's plain-spoken, gentle, supportive criticism was practiced mainly at The San Francisco Examiner, but he also lectured and was a host of San Francisco Opera radio broadcasts and a master of ceremonies at San Francisco Symphony youth concerts.


Demolition Plays the Palace (But the Theater Plays On)
LEAD: As startling as it is to behold, the latest demolition spectacle on Broadway - involving the ''Valhalla of Vaudeville'' - is actually a little less than meets the eye.
Although the Palace Theater Building is being torn down, the theater itself is to be spared.


I.B.M.'s New Line
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation introduced a new line of high-performance products that allow customers to turn their typewriters into modified word processors.
The Wheelwriter 10, 30, 50 and 70 all include spelling aids while the 50 and 70 have 25-line screen display.
They include options to expand memory to 720,000 bytes with a diskette drive.


Ponca City Journal; Oil Town Is Consumed by Sludge
LEAD: At the moment, there are two places that Ponca City residents call home.


Mexico City Journal; Extra! Extra! A Race You Won't Hear All About
LEAD: When Manuel Clouthier, presidential candidate of Mexico's leading opposition party, was interviewed on state television recently, the event made headlines here.
The news came not so much from anything specific Mr.
Clouthier had to say, but from the fact that he had appeared at all.


AIDS Inmates Get Poor Care, Report Says
LEAD: New York State prison inmates who have AIDS often receive inadequate medical care and are segregated with little to do in overcrowded, makeshift infirmaries, a report released yesterday by a nonprofit group says.


Boston Celtics LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Celtics LP (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,102,000
11,668,320
Net inc
b6,475,117
2,887,440
Share earns
1.00
.45
9mo rev
20,725,000
19,231,120
Net inc
7,121,581
4,264,993
Share earns
1.10
-


Wesbanco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wesbanco Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,642,000
1,529,000
Share earns
.82
.72


Review/Film; Champion Couch Potato Pays Price in 'Record'
LEAD: Rico Moreno (Uwe Ochsenknecht) has dark rings under his eyes, and no wonder: he's a pathological video addict with the James Dean and Marilyn Monroe posters to prove it.
Rico and his best friend, Banana (Laszlo I. Kisch), have been busily running an ingenious movie-pirating operation, but even when he isn't working, Rico is apt to be glued to the set watching an old movie or perhaps the Academy Awards.


Pact Is Signed on Sematech Management
LEAD: The Defense Department and representatives of the semiconductor industry signed an agreement today that will clear the way for the Government to release $100 million for Sematech, the new consortium in the computer chip industry.


Kuwaiti Request for 40 F-18 Jets Gets Mixed Washington Reviews
LEAD: With a request this week for 40 F-18 warplanes, Kuwait has joined a growing list of Middle Eastern countries seeking sophisticated weapons from the United States, and the Reagan Administration has shown increased willingness to make such sales.


Plan on Noriega Assailed
LEAD: Congressmen and the Panamanian opposition criticized a proposal to drop drug charges against the general if he leaves power.
Page A2.


Jackpot Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jackpot Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,912,000
6,553,000
Net inc
1,039,000
843,000
Share earns
.22
.18
9mo rev
20,408,000
19,388,000
Net inc
3,249,000
2,395,000
Share earns
.69
.51


First National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
295,043
450,684
Net inc
b58,340
b107,471
Share earns
.03
.06
b-After tax credits of $17,000 for the latest first quarter and $32,000 for the year-ago period.


Stanford Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanford Telecommunications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,111,000
15,494,000
Net inc
952,000
1,125,000
Share earns
.20
.24
Yr rev
57,227,000
55,368,000
Net inc
684,000
2,742,000
Share earns
.15
.60


GWC Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GWC Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
28,453,000
23,789,000
Net inc
2,165,000
2,732,000
Share earns
.22
.27


Zimmer Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zimmer Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,810,000
27,153,000
Net loss
b10,621,000
6,956,000
Yr sales
98,883,000
134,638,000
Net loss
9,923,000
7,934,000
b-Includes a reversal of a tax credit or $270,000 and also includes charges of $8,740,000 from the writedown of carrying values of properties held for sale and inventories, as well as gains of $7,203,000 recognized on the sale of businesses divested during the year.


Consolidated Fibres Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Fibres Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
33,525,000
27,831,000
Net loss
b185,000
cd393,000
Share earns
-
.20
9mo sales
98,020,000
83,136,000
Net inc
b1,113,000
d1,216,000
Share earns
.56
.61


Park Weather
LEAD: Plenty of people, but no sheep, on the Sheep Meadow in Central Park yesterday as the temperature climbed to a high of 74 degrees.
Today should start sunny with clouds increasing and a threat of thundershowers by evening.
Tomorrow is expected to be the opposite: clouds followed by sunshine. (NYT/Chester Higgins


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page picture caption in some copies on Wednesday about workers leaving the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk, Poland, misidentified the portrait they carried.
It showed the Black Madonna of Czestochowa.


Elbit Computers Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elbit Computers Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
43,252,000
58,499,000
Net inc
2,540,000
5,442,000
Share earns
.18
.41


Harley's Exports Lead to Profits
LEAD: Harley-Davidson Inc., which had until recently had benefited from United States tariffs on imported motorcycles, said 20 percent of its 1987 production was exported.
Harley-Davidson's chairman, Vaughn L. Beals, in a speech to the Milwaukee World Trade Association on Wednesday, said exports were the key to the company's return to profitability.


May Department Stores Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* May Department Stores Co (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,279,000,000
2,340,000,000
Net inc
62,000,000
64,000,000
Share earns
.41
.41
Shares outst
149,700,000
152,800,000
During the latest first quarter, the company completed the sale of three parcels of excess real estate that resulted in pre-tax gains aggregating $10 million, or 4 cents a share, and also recorded a pre-tax charge of $9 million for estimated costs of relocating one of its data-processing centers and other closing costs.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  AN ANIMATION OCCASION


In Poland, a Draw and a Challenge
LEAD: Police action, church mediation and the calming counsel of Solidarity veterans have combined to halt Poland's latest labor revolt.
The last workers left Gdansk's Lenin Shipyard neither broken nor victorious.
The Jaruzelski Government bargained with them, but conceded little.


Angolans and South Africans In Congo for Talks on Peace
LEAD: Senior Angolan and South African officials arrived here tonight for direct talks to explore a regional settlement to the conflict in Angola and the dispute over neighboring South-West Africa.


TPI Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TPI Enterprises (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,004,000
701,000
Net inc
233,000
b11,624,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss and includes a loss of $13,403,000 from discontinued operations and an extraordinary gain of $750,000.


BIW Cable Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BIW Cable Systems Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,671,000
11,933,000
Net inc
617,000
b1,546,000
Share earns
.27
.68
b-Included a gain of $2.2 million from the sale of the company's corporate headquarters.


How to Neutralize Exit Polls
LEAD: Recently, NBC television began backing away from its policy of not projecting election winners until the polls have closed.
This will certainly increase pressure on the other networks to do the same thing, and will resurrect a problem that appeared in the 1980 Presidential election.
That year, the


Olympic International Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olympic International Bank &amp; Trust
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
652,000
593,000
Per share
.26
.23


American Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Health Services (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,164,142
1,268,703
Net loss
b791,698
c1,067,455
b-Included a provision for discontinued operations of $150,000 and research and development expenses of $684,194.


Trouble Still Goes With Tyson's Car
LEAD: When Mike Tyson, the heavyweight champion, crashed his $180,000 silver Bentley convertible into a parked car in lower Manhattan Sunday, two Port Authority police officers offered to help.
And Tyson offered them the car, saying, ''I've had nothing but bad luck and accidents with this car.''


Mixing Ballet With the Blues Of Ray Charles
LEAD: AS the New York City Ballet's American Music Festival draws to a close this weekend, the final two evenings will feature an audacious collaboration that brings together the formality of ballet with the spontaneity of rhythm-and-blues.


Judge Denies Lilco Bid for a July Rate Hike
LEAD: An administrative law judge today rejected the Long Island Lighting Company's request that the State Public Service Commission act on its application for a rate increase by July.


Hewlett-Packard Strategic Alliance
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company said it had formed a strategic alliance with Northern Telecom Inc. to provide corporate-wide networking systems incorporating distributed computing and telecommunications.
The new organization, known as the Corporate Networks Operation, will be based in Santa Clara, Calif., and will be financed and managed equally by the two companies.


Specialist Rule Gains Approval
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today approved a New York Stock Exchange rule requiring specialists on the exchange floor to maintain a higher permanent level of capital to make markets in stocks.


Andre-Michel Schub
LEAD: Andre Michel-Schub, the pianist, is to be the soloist with the Queens Symphony Orchestra in the Beethoven Piano Concerto No. 4 tomorrow at 8:30 P.M. at the Colden Center, Queens College, at Kissena Boulevard and the Long Island Expressway, in Flushing.
The program, to be conducted by Arthur Fagen, will also include Beethoven's Symphony No.


Bulgarian Instruments And Vocals
LEAD: To American ears, the sound of Bulgarian music can be bracing - or shocking.
Voices peal out in full-throated, penetrating tones, developed through the centuries to carry for miles across open fields, or they harmonize in close intervals that are dissonant in Western music.
The melodies follow exotic scales, elaborately ornamented with quavers and yelps; the dance tunes are in odd, asymmetrical meters.


TV Weekend; Beryl Markham, a Wonder in Kenya
LEAD: In ''Out of Africa,'' Meryl Streep portrayed the young Isak Dinesen having an adulterous affair with Denys Finch Hatton, the romantic adventurer played by Robert Redford.
Now, in television's ''Shadow on the Sun'' - a four-hour production getting under way Sunday at 9 P.M. on CBS - Stefanie Powers can be seen as Beryl Markham, still another remarkable woman on the Kenyan landscape, who apparently lured Finch Hatton away from Dinesen.


Medex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medex Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,026,000
6,001,000
Net inc
739,000
564,000
Share earns
.19
.14
9mo sales
19,692,000
16,802,000
Net inc
1,930,000
1,496,000
Share earns
.49
.38


Soybeans' Advance Ends As a Rainy Period Begins
LEAD: A five-day rally that had pushed prices of soybean futures to four-year highs ended yesterday as forecasts of rainy weather persuaded traders to take profits.
Grain futures also closed lower on the Chicago Board of Trade.


'Moore, Not Less,' For W.R.G.
LEAD: WELLS, RICH, GREENE WORLDWIDE, billing $760 million through six United States offices, yesterday announced the selection of Mary Moore, president and creative director of HBM/ Creamer, Boston, as its new vice chairman and chief creative officer.


WR Lazard Acquisition
LEAD: WR Lazard &amp; Company, a minority-owned securities firm, announced yesterday that it would acquire Kuhns Brothers &amp; Laidlaw and create a new firm, Lazard &amp; Kuhns.


Proposal to Dismiss Charges Against Noriega Is Assailed
LEAD: An Administration proposal to drop all drug-related charges against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega if he leaves power in Panama was sharply criticized today by members of Congress, law-enforcement officials and Panamanian opposition leaders.


A Food-Filled Festival, And Larks in the Park
LEAD: A MILLION strolling gourmands on Ninth Avenue and several parks full of celebrators can mean only one thing: New York's festival season has begun.
The appearance of the Ninth Avenue International Food Festival, You Gotta Have Park Festivals in Central and Prospect Parks and a host of smaller outdoor festivities this weekend are as telltale signs of spring as the crack of a bat at Yankee Stadium or the year's first warm breeze over a newly green lawn.


Service on Channel Ferries Restored as Picketing Ends
LEAD: Most Channel ferry services were restored today as the National Union of Seamen told its members to stop picketing in support of workers staging a 14-week strike against one company.


Bellevue's Prison Ward Requires Psychiatric Professionals
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wellco Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wellco Enterprises Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Revenue
7,189,000
5,427,000
Net inc
767,000
687,000
Share earns
.89
.80
9mo rev
17,133,000
15,372,000
Net inc
1,615,000
b2,167,000
Share earns
1.86
2.53


Prison Term in Abuse of Boys
LEAD: A former New York City teacher who pleaded guilty to sodomizing and sexually assaulting numerous young boys was sentenced today to 10 to 30 years in prison.
Judge Abby Boklan in Nassau County Court said the defendant, Arnold Friedman, 56 years old, of Great Neck, L.I., was a ''menace to society.'' Mr.


Nordstrom Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nordstrom Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
432,098,000
369,350,000
Net inc
19,205,000
15,213,000
Share earns
.24
.19
Shares outst
81,399,210
81,758,666


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Austin Rover Group Ltd., Coventry, England, said it had acquired the 51 percent interest in Austin Rover Cars of North America held by Norman Braman Enterprises, which, with the 49 percent previously held, gives it total ownership.
Terms were not disclosed.


PRODUCER PRICES SHOW MODEST RISE OF 0.4% FOR APRIL
LEAD: The likelihood of a sharp rise in the inflation rate in the next month or two has lessened, the Government reported yesterday.
But longer term, an acceleration of the inflation rate seems more of a threat than ever.


Corporate Intrigue and Colorful Characters at CBS
LEAD:  Who Killed CBS?
The Undoing of America's Number One News Network  By Peter J. Boyer  361 pages.
Illustrated.
Random House. $18.95.


Microbilt Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microbilt Corp
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,857,000
3,916,000
Net inc
1,125,000
727,000
Share earns
.27
.13
The company said year-ago first quarter has been restated to reflect an accounting change.


Risky to Heat Liquids in the Microwave
LEAD: To the Editor:


As Airport Delays Decrease, Jet Noise Infests the Suburbs
LEAD: More than a year after aviation officials increased the number of flight paths into and out of the metropolitan region's major airports in an effort to ease airline delays, the roar of jetliners over Katherine Cowperthwaite's home here is echoed by an uproar on the ground.


Review/Music; Stern Plays Maxwell Davies Concerto
LEAD: Sir Peter Maxwell Davies composed his Concerto for Violin and Orchestra with a specific soloist and a specific performance milieu in mind.
In that respect, at least, it is in the tradition of the great Baroque, Classical and Romantic masterpieces.


Kulicke &amp; Soffa Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kulicke &amp; Soffa Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
19,434,000
16,071,000
Net inc
b708,000
c2,295,000
Share earns
.09
-
6mo sales
36,665,000
32,521,000
Net inc
b718,000
c3,861,000
Share earns
.09
-


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD:  Questions appear on page 16.


Officers Chose Not to Give Aid At Shooting Site
LEAD: Six white police officers who responded to the fatal shooting of a black Haitian immigrant in Brooklyn this week decided against administering first aid during the 24 minutes it took for an ambulance to arrive ''because they were afraid they might cause more harm to the victim,'' a Police Department spokesman said yesterday.


And Him a Gramps!
LEAD: Certain sportswriters are propounding the silly proposition that grandfathers should stay out of topless bars.
I assume they are very young sportswriters, for only a very young man would presume to think he knows something about life that grandfather doesn't.


Joseph Shipley, 94, Drama Critic And the Author of Many Books
LEAD: Joseph T. Shipley, a drama critic in New York for more than 60 years, a writer, an editor and a member of the first faculty of Yeshiva College, died of a stroke Wednesday on a visit to London.
He was 94 years old and lived in New York.


Energynorth Inc reports earnings for 12mo to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energynorth Inc (OTC)
12mo to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
62,961,000
62,892,000
Net inc
3,398,000
2,970,000
Share earns
2.21
2.20
Shares outst
1,534,207
1,347,251


THE HIGH PRIEST OF HOOP HYSTERIA
LEAD: About a year ago some people connected with Indiana University sought to obtain use of the basketball arena for a charity function one night, a night that would not confict with the basketball season.
The school administrator in charge of sanctioning such arrangements listened and said, ''Sounds fine to me, but we'll have to get Coach Knight's blessing.


Troops in Punjab Enter Sikh Temple Complex
LEAD: Indian paramilitary forces entered the Golden Temple complex tonight and took over two strategic buildings a few hours after scores of Sikh militants besieged in the complex rejected an appeal to send out more than 20 women and children staying with them.


SENATE VOTES 83-6 TO GIVE MILITARY ANTI-DRUG POWERS
LEAD: Responding to election-year pressure, the Senate voted overwhelmingly today to expand the military's role in efforts to reduce the flow of narcotics into the United States.
The vote was 83 to 6.


New Exchange Head
LEAD: John J. Wallace, the president of a brokerage firm, Park Avenue Securities, has been elected chairman of the Philadelphia Stock Exchange.
Mr.
Wallace was named acting chairman on March 22 to replace Martin L. Longstreth Jr., who died of cancer on March 7.


Pickens Asks Mesa Changes
LEAD: T. Boone Pickens has proposed a series of amendments that would broaden the rights of unit holders of the Mesa Limited Partnership, the billion-dollar oil and gas concern of which he is general partner, and also greatly increase the compensation he could earn.


Envoy's Account on Noriega Surprises Three He Briefed
LEAD: An American Ambassador who has said he did not have the evidence to tell Vice President Bush of drug allegations against Panama's military leader at a meeting in 1985 briefed a Congressional delegation about the charges 17 days later, according to three witnesses to the later meeting.


Family Hints Brawley Might Talk
LEAD: Acting on a hint that Tawana Brawley might finally cooperate with his investigation, the chief state prosecutor looking into her claims that she was sexually assaulted has asked her lawyer to clarify the circumstances under which the Dutchess County teen-ager would break her five-month silence.


Bonray Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bonray Drilling (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,108,000
1,418,000
Net loss
83,000
6,000
9mo rev
3,513,000
4,258,000
Net loss
116,000
b53,000
Share earns
-
.12
b-Net income


NBC, Back in First, Has Top Nine Shows
LEAD: NBC returned to first place in the ratings last week and became the first network in more than seven years to claim the top nine shows, according to figures released by the A. C. Nielsen Company.


Criticism Over Dukakis Is Softened by Jackson
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson said today that his criticisms of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis were part of a fight for control of the Democratic Party's approach to policy and did not mean that he believed Mr.
Dukakis was a philosophical ''twin'' of Vice President Bush.


Famous Players
LEAD: Famous Players Inc., a unit of Gulf and Western Inc., said it would spend $50 million (Canadian), or about $40.5 million (United States), over the next three years to build eight movie theater complexes in the Toronto area.
The company said it had chosen three sites in downtown Toronto and was negotiating for additional locations.


Water Only On Request: That Could Be an Order
LEAD: Even with the reservoir system nearly full, getting a glass of water at a restaurant in New York City this summer could take a little more effort.


Most of Big Plane Order Seen Going to Boeing
LEAD: The Boeing Company has been able to gain most of a plane order worth more than $4 billion that is expected to be announced by the International Lease Finance Corporation on Monday.


Chrysler Price Rise
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said it had raised the price of its imported 1989 Eagle Medallion cars by an average of 4.2 percent over comparably equipped 1988 models.


Year-Old Mystery Solved as Police Identify Body Found in East River
LEAD: From the detective's standpoint, it was one of the toughest kinds of mysteries: the body of a nameless man found floating in the East River, badly decomposed after months in the water, without fingerprints or a face or other identifying characteristics.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 54.


U.S. Aides Optimistic on a Noriega Deal
LEAD: Senior Administration officials today sounded a new note of optimism over prospects for a deal to remove Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega from power in Panama.


Digital Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Solutions
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
969,626
798,254
Net inc
38,642
59,572
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo sales
1,861,477
1,561,621
Net loss
11,780
b146,901
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Atlantic-Prism Merger
LEAD: Atlantic Entertainment Group, the largest private independent film and television company in the United States, said today that it had agreed to merge with the Prism Entertainment Corporation, a publicly owned video distributor.
The merger will create a $70 million full-service entertainment company.


Capitol Federal Savings &amp; Loan (Denver) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capitol Federal Savings &amp; Loan (Denver) (O)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
1,932,000
c746,000
Share earns
-
.24
9mo net loss
b6,955,000
c2,371,000
Share earns
-
.76
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $1,468,000 from the extinguishment of debt.


Canadian Sentenced for Holocaust Booklet
LEAD: A Canadian court today imposed a nine-month jail term on Ernst Zundel, a 49-year-old German-born graphics artist charged with spreading false news in a pamphlet that described the Holocaust as a hoax.


Philby, British-born Master Spy, Is Buried in Moscow
LEAD: Rufa Philby weeping over the coffin of her husband, Kim, the Soviet double agent who came close to being appointed head of British intelligence in the late 1940's.
Mr.
Philby was buried at Kuntsevo military cemetery with full honors, lending credence to reports that he died as a K.G.B. general. (Agence France


A Red-Light District Loses Its Allure
LEAD: Difficult times have fallen on Hamburg's red-light district.
All along and around the Reeperbahn, the mile-long stretch of sex establishments near the teeming harbor, the fear of AIDS has sent business plummeting.


Review/Critic's Notebook; Jack Lang: Star of Cannes Festival
LEAD: The big news at the 41st Cannes International Film Festival this morning was not Patty Hearst, who is here, or Clint Eastwood, who is arriving any day, but the appointment of Jack Lang as the Minister of Culture in President Francois Mitterrand's new Government.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.19
7.10
6.84
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.18
6.21
5.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.43
6.43
6.25
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.80
8.85
8.63
30-YR.


Ex-Argentine Officer Denies Role in Deaths
LEAD: A former Argentine Army general extradited from the United States this week has declared in court here that he was not responsible for political murders committed under his command a decade ago.


Versar Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Versar Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,739,000
10,107,000
Net loss
1,294,000
b167,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
40,088,000
30,252,000
Net loss
684,000
b802,000
Share earns
-
.25


Israeli Patrols Keep West Bank Quiet
LEAD: The Israeli Army had predicted major demonstrations in this Arab city and other spots around the occupied territories today, the last Friday of the monthlong Moslem holiday of Ramadan.


Red Wings Apologize
LEAD: Saying the incident was a blemish on the entire organization, Coach Jacques Demers issued an open letter to the fans yesterday as a public apology for the six Detroit Red Wing players he said he and his assistants caught drinking long after curfew hours last Tuesday.


Staley Accepts Offer by Tate &amp; Lyle
LEAD: Successfully ending a five-week pursuit, Tate &amp; Lyle P.L.C., the large British sugar refiner, said tonight that it had reached an agreement to buy Staley Continental Inc. for $36.50 a share, or $1.48 billion.


ICOT Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ICOT Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,251,000
13,024,000
Net loss
b3,633,000
c1,768,000
Share earns
-
.16
9mo sales
27,352,000
38,932,000
Net loss
2,583,000
c5,819,000
Share earns
-
.54


Method of Delivering Money, Unregulated, Up to Company
LEAD: No regulations governing how armored-car or payroll services transport money are on the books in New York, New Jersey or Connecticut, officials for all three states said.


Orion Capital Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orion Capital Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
148,759,000
132,711,000
Net inc
b6,564,000
8,038,000
Share earns
.81
1.04
b-After a loss of $491,000 because of the cumulative effect of a change in accounting for taxes.


Rocard Hints Strongly at Assembly Election
LEAD: Prime Minister Michel Rocard indicated strongly today that the National Assembly would soon be dissolved in order to give France a Government with a stable parliamentary majority.


Color Systems Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Color Systems Technology Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,064,931
1,269,755
Net loss
1,876,810
2,577,156
9mo rev
7,331,772
2,825,372
Net loss
5,501,219
7,235,242


Telephone &amp; Data Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telephone &amp; Data Systems Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
45,034,000
39,752,000
Net inc
2,062,000
2,651,000
Share earns
.12
.17


Taiwan Shift Jolts U.S. on Trade
LEAD: The United States may preach the virtues of democracy, but in its efforts to push Taiwan to reduce its trade surplus, Washington is finding that the people's will can be more difficult to deal with than a family dynasty.


Japan Trade Surplus Falls
LEAD: Japan's trade surplus decreased in April for the 12th straight month, the Government announced today, but private economists said further reductions would be harder to achieve because of surging exports.


Iceland Currency Halt
LEAD: Iceland's central bank stopped all foreign currency transactions today as the Government began talks on a devaluation, Government officials said.
They said the freeze was necessary because of increasing currency speculation amid rumors that the currency, the crown, would be devalued.


In Face of AIDS, a Chorus Stands Taller
LEAD: Stooped and thin, shivering despite a bulky winter coat, Dennis Haney was barely recognizable to his friends in the San Francisco Gay Men's Chorus when he auditioned last week for the new season.


Devils Eager for Showdown
LEAD: The Devils are in the seventh and deciding game of the National Hockey League semifinals after never having made the playoffs before this spring.
But when they gathered here this morning to depart for Boston, they acted like an experienced playoff team.


Chet Baker, Jazz Trumpeter, Dies at 59 in a Fall
LEAD: Chet Baker, a jazz trumpet player who was also a whisper-voiced, romantic singer, died Friday after falling from the second-floor window of a hotel in Amsterdam.
He was 59 years old.


Acceptance Insurance Holdngs reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acceptance Insurance Holdngs
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,869,889
7,591,889
Net inc
b990,533
c1,358,019
Share earns
.55
.76
b-After realized investment losses of $25,991.
c-Includes realized investment gains of $462,564.


The Promise of a 'Citizens Corps'
LEAD: Can a generally prosperous America at peace with the world be roused to service, sacrifice and civic obligation?
The Democratic Leadership Council thinks so and last week offered a plan of national youth service.


Giants Shut Off Mets, 3-2
LEAD: The Mets brought their rousing act to the West Coast tonight, but this time it didn't play.


Cooper Adds To Its Board
LEAD: The Cooper Companies said today that it had agreed to let certain major shareholders join its board and the special committee that has been formed to pursue the sale of the company's principal businesses.
Cooper, which is pressed for cash, last week announced its intention to seek a buyer after the Federal Trade Commission moved to block its plans to sell its contact lens business to a unit of the Schering-Plough


Cuomo Panel to Refer Extortion Case of a Former Thruway Official to U.S.
LEAD: Saying it had found evidence of ''a conspiracy to commit extortion,'' the State Investigation Commission said today that it would refer to Federal prosecutors a case involving actions by Alexander A. Levine while he was executive director of the State Thruway Authority.


Business Sales Up 1.9% As Inventory Rise Slows
LEAD: Business sales climbed by 1.9 percent in March, the largest increase in more than a year, while the buildup of business inventories slowed.


Chinese Music Is Topic Of Columbia Conference
LEAD: Twenty Chinese composers - 10 from Taiwan and 10 from China - will take part in a weeklong conference at Columbia University in August on the history and future of Chinese music.


8 Killed in a Bombing In Afghanistan Capital
LEAD: A truck bomb exploded early this morning near reviewing stands being prepared for farewell ceremonies for Soviet troops.
The police said at least 8 people were killed and 20 injured.


Tyranny Yields to Democracy in Central America
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  India Advances on Sikhs


Review/Pop; The Brazil Projects Opener Has Songs of Global Reach
LEAD: Caetano Veloso, one of the world's great singers and songwriters, opened the Brazil Projects concert series with a winning concert Wednesday at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street.
Mr.
Veloso and his band played pop songs with a global reach, embracing and personalizing musical ideas from both hemispheres, and putting across complex emotions with a particularly


Integrated Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Integrated Resources Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
290,848,000
234,794,000
Net inc
9,332,000
8,845,000
Share earns
.21
.20


Settlement in Arborcide: $100,000 in Young Trees
LEAD: A verdant settlement has been announced by Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern in one of the ''arborcide'' cases that have been plaguing New York City.


American National Insurance Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American National Insurance Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
237,263,000
219,942,000
Net inc
b21,150,000
b23,590,000
Share earns
.75
.82
b-Includes realized investment gains of $1,229,000 for the latest quarter and $1,704,000 in the year-earlier period.


National Intergroup Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Intergroup Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
756,316,000
1,281,172,000
Net loss
b30,361,000
c15,401,000
Yr sales
3,355,293,000
4,473,674,000
Net loss
b21,895,000
c44,957,000
b-Included a pre-tax loss of $24 million on a provision for the sale of the Luxembourg plant for the quarter and year; the quarter also included a pre- tax charge of $7,637,000 to eliminate a deferred gain previously recognized in income on the sale of a 55.3 percent interest in Permian Partners L.P.


VSE Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VSE Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
29,491,280
26,568,357
Net inc
917,417
303,019
Share earns
.51
.17


Treaty Postscript: Dotting i's and Crossing t's
LEAD: In diplomacy as in other sports, it's not over until it's over.
And, as it turned out, one of the verification disputes over the new missile treaty was not quite over Thursday night, as American and Soviet officials had said early in the evening.


Novo Industri A/S reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Novo Industri A/S (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
200,000,000
189,000,000
Net inc
25,000,000
19,000,000
Share earns
.99
.75
The results are in U.S. dollars and were translated at the March 30, 1988 exchange rate of U.S.


Texas Bank Halts Payment
LEAD: The First Republicbank Corporation, the Texas banking company that is receiving emergency Federal aid, said today that it had suspended payments on $1.3 billion in long-term debt, which will save $78 million in annual interest costs.


Federated Lays Off 92 at Home Office
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation yesterday laid off 92 members of the headquarters staff of Federated Department Stores, in Cincinnati.
Those let go ranged from senior management to clerical staff members.


Decide Civil Rights From Facts, Not Ideas
LEAD: To the Editor:





Southern Indiana Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Indiana Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
87,364,279
70,697,443
Net inc
11,951,147
9,979,075
Share earns
.94
.76
The company said share earnings for period ending in 1987 have been restated to reflect the 4-for-3 stock split effective March 11, 1988.


Hershey Oil Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hershey Oil Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,146,000
1,320,000
Net loss
219,000
b54,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Ex-Reagan Aides Draw Fire From Shultz on Disclosures
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz today sharply criticized kiss-and-tell books by former Reagan Administration officials, calling them violations of Presidential trust.


Perkin-Elmer Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Perkin-Elmer Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
351,400,000
337,000,000
Net inc
19,200,000
18,200,000
Share earns
.44
.40
9mo sales
1,028,300,000
969,800,000
Net inc
51,000,000
b41,300,000
Share earns
1.15
.91
Shares outst
44,503,929
45,514,177


Collapse of Mexican Factory Kills 14 and Injures Dozens
LEAD: At least 14 people were killed and about 70 were injured on Thursday when a furniture factory collapsed in central Mexico, the Red Cross said today.


The Best Way to Punish Illegal Building
LEAD: New York City's Board of Standards and Appeals must decide whether to legalize a new 31-story building on Park Avenue and 96th Street, where the zoning law limits height to 19 stories.
The developer has no serious claim to a variance, even if one accepts his assertion that the 12 excess floors resulted from an honest mistake.


More Tennis Fame
LEAD: Althea Gibson and Arthur Ashe, both winners of United States and Wimbledon singles championships, headed the first group induction in the Eastern Tennis Association Hall of Fame last night at the Marriott Marquis Hotel.
Gibson won the women's singles crown at Wimbledon in 1957 and 1958 and the United States women's championship in the same years.


U.S. Says It Will Deliver Cash to Contras for Food
LEAD: The Reagan Administration will begin providing the contra guerrillas inside Nicaragua with food and cash to buy food, the Agency for International Development announced today.


Starting Off on the Right Foot
LEAD: Students from Public School 26 in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn marching near the school yesterday to protest the rampant drug abuse in their neighborhood.
The children, including kindergartners, carried signs proclaiming ''Just Say No'' and ''Crack Kills.'' (NYT/Linda M. Baron)


Gould Investors L P reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gould Investors L P (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,404,000
5,485,000
Net loss
b721,000
680,000
6mo rev
11,893,000
11,326,000
Net loss
b346,000
c383,000
b-Included a gain of $595,000 from the disposition of properties, mortgages and investments for the quarter and $1,689,000 in the 6 months.


Philadelphia Hospital Is Restricted by State
LEAD: The State Health Department has closed all but two units of a Philadelphia hospital, saying inadequate care might have caused 12 deaths in the last year.


Universal Medical Buildings L P reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Medical Buildings L P (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,907,755
8,596,234
Net inc
2,502,344
2,124,293
Share earns
.09
.10
Shares outst
27,231,078
20,475,783
The share earnings are in cents a unit.


Williamsburg Bridge To Open in 3 Phases Starting in 3 Weeks
LEAD: The Williamsburg Bridge will remain closed at least three more weeks and will then gradually reopen - first to cars, then to subway trains and, finally, in August, to trucks, transportation officials said yesterday.


Gunnar Nicholson, 94, Paper Industry Leader
LEAD: Gunnar W. E. Nicholson, a chemical engineer and paper industry executive for more than half a century, died of heart failure Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 94 years old.


Twists and Turns Of the Knight Story
LEAD: These were professionals in Marianne Mitchell's graduate-level counseling class at Indiana University, not 18-year-olds whose mission in life includes the frequent humiliation of Purdue.
Mitchell was conducting an evening class this week in Indianapolis, about 40 miles from the Bloomington campus, when a television report was erroneously interpreted to mean that Bob Knight had resigned as the basketball coach.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 3-7, 32  Debate on the new missile accord on intermediate-range nuclear weapons may begin in the Senate as early as next week.
The Senate leadership gave all but final approval to the agreements reached in Geneva.
Page 1  Soviet officials reopened verification terms on the missile accord after Secretary of State George Shultz said all problems had been worked out.


Robbery Suspect Ordered Freed
LEAD: A Federal appeals court yesterday ordered the release of a defendant held without bail for 32 months on charges involving a 1983 Wells Fargo robbery in Connecticut.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, MAY 14, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Gordon D. Sterling, 53, Chairman of Formica
LEAD: Gordon D. Sterling, chairman of the Formica Corporation, died after a heart attack Wednesday at Walkill (N.J.) Borough Hospital.
He was 53 years old and lived in Vernon, N.J.


Basic American Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Basic American Medical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
56,100,000
67,900,000
Net inc
b5,200,000
c6,200,000
Share earns
.66
-
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $1.5 million.
c-Net loss


Offer Is Made For Amfac Unit
LEAD: In another step toward completing its restructuring, Amfac Inc. said a group including management and an unidentified financial instituition plans to buy the company's wholesale pharmaceutical business for $120 million.
The hospital and chain store distributor is the fifth of eight operations that Amfac, based in Honolulu, plans to sell.


Navistar Plan Cited at Trial
LEAD: The Navistar International Corporation's sale of its money-losing Wisconsin Steel unit in 1977 was part of a strategy to leave the steel business, not an attempt to avoid pension obligations to workers, according to a company lawyer.


Corporate Leaders Toast Good Times, and Fret a Bit
LEAD: Business is good and getting even better, say the heads of the nation's biggest corporations.


A Death Penalty Bill Is Vetoed by Cuomo
LEAD: Governor Cuomo yesterday vetoed restoration of the death penalty in New York, making it 12 straight years that capital punishment has been blocked by the state's chief executive, six by Mr.
Cuomo.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on May 4 about reports of a worldwide increase in development of biological weapons characterized a Defense Department research program incorrectly.
The research is intended to develop defenses against biological warfare, not to develop weapons.
The United States has forsworn the development, possession or use of biological weapons.


James Bliss Dies at 85; Ex-Window Designer
LEAD: James Albert Bliss, the former head of the Bliss Display Company, died of complications from cancer of the pancreas Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 85 years old and had residences in Manhattan and on Fire Island.


P&amp;F Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* P&amp;F Industries Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,671,291
9,151,730
Net loss
88,658
b594,754
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


Soviet Nuclear-Powered Satellite Expected to Hit Earth in Summer
LEAD: A crippled Soviet nuclear-powered satellite is expected to fall to Earth in August or September, threatening to spread radioactive debris.
Yesterday both Soviet and American officials said they were monitoring the situation.


3 Southern States Seek Progress Together
LEAD: The Governors of Arkansas, Louisiana and Mississippi, aboard a barge floating in the sluggish Mississippi, today signed wide-ranging agreements to coordinate their efforts to improve conditions in one of the nation's poorest areas.


Failure to Clarify in Denmark
LEAD: Frustrated by years of parliamentary nitpicking about Denmark's membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Prime Minister Poul Schluter called Tuesday's general election in the hope of forcing a clear up-or-down verdict.
Instead, the vote leaves Denmark's relations with NATO as unclear as ever.


Sea Containers Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sea Containers Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
155,175,000
121,611,000
Net inc
b30,515,000
c12,917,000
Share earns
2.25
-
b-Included a $40 million gain on the sale of the company's office development property in London.


Larry Coryell Quartet
LEAD: Larry Coryell, a guitarist, is leading a quartet with Stanley Cowell on piano, Buster Williams on bass, and Billy Hart on drums tonight and tomorrow at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South below 11th Street (255-4037).
Sets begin at 10 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is a $12 cover and a $6 minimum.


Big Gains in Treasury Issues Pared
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices posted sharp early gains yesterday that were pared by afternoon bouts of profit taking.
Dealers attributed the early gains to relief that the Producer Price Index rose an unexpectedly moderate four-tenths of 1 percent in April.


Two Party Insiders to Lead Jackson's Convention Drive
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson plans to make major changes in the structure of his Democratic Presidential campaign, giving new responsibilities to two black Democrats who have excellent relations with the party's leadership.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Doug Smith, a center for the Buffalo Sabres, faced surgery yesterday at Ottawa Civic Hospital for injuries he suffered in an automobile accident May 8.
He has fractures in his left shoulder area, the most serious being a fractured scapula, a wing bone in his back. . . .
Joe Sakic, voted Canada's outstanding junior hockey player for the 1987-88 season, has signed with the Quebec Nordiques.


The Russians, Too, Embrace 'Secret Silliness' of Astrology
LEAD: In a one-room clinic a few paces from Moscow's most popular pedestrian mall, Dzhuna Davitashvili, celebrity psychic healer, gesticulates over the head of a deaf and blind man, as if pulling invisible weeds from his cranium.


About New York; Noteworthy Improvement On School Song
LEAD: Many, many years ago they held a contest to find an alma mater for Brooklyn College, and the winning composer, hands down, was a young woman named Sylvia Fine, who didn't get along with the head of the music department, who decided he would accept her music but not her lyrics, and therein lies a bitter tale that worked out sweetly more than a half century later, which is to say the other day.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Late Home Run Sinks Yankees
LEAD: The one bad pitch that Cecilio Guante threw last night, a fastball down the middle, hung over Billy Martin like a dark cloud.
He thought long and hard about it, and then he finally said he could not fault the pitcher.
It was simply the wrong pitch at the wrong time, nothing more.


Avatar Holdings Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avatar Holdings Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
37,499,000
267,426,000
Net inc
3,466,000
1,667,000
Share earns
.45
.21


The Elastic Price Tag: Why Clothes Cost More
LEAD: This is no time to need clothes, especially if you're a woman.
Not only are the fashions confusing, but prices are giving shoppers a case of sticker shock.
If you're a man, stock up now; experts say the price of men's wear is headed up the same path.


Soybeans Soar on Forecast Of Less Rain Than Normal
LEAD: Soybean futures prices soared yesterday and grain futures also advanced after the National Weather Service predicted a month of drier-than-normal growing conditions.


I.C.H. Is Seeking Partnership Deal
LEAD: The I.C.H.
Corporation, an insurance holding company with about $8.7 billion in assets, said that its senior managers would seek partners to buy all of the company's outstanding stock and take it private.
I.C.H., which in December backed away from a planned merger with the Southmark Corporation, a Texas real estate and financial services company, reported a first-quarter loss of $16 million, compared with a profit of $10.8 million a year earlier.


Celtics Take a 2-0 Lead Despite Bird's 16
LEAD: Scott Hastings, an Atlanta Hawks' forward, watched the Boston Celtics run off 6 consecutive points in 50 seconds tonight to break open what had turned into a close game.
He shook his head and said, ''These guys just have too many weapons.''


Drugs, and Death, Ride the Rails
LEAD: Evidence of drug abuse by an engineer who died in a Metro-North crash last month further strengthens the overwhelming case for routine drug testing of rail employees.
Yet their unions, with surprising sympathy from an appellate court, stand in the way of a sensible testing policy.


South Africa and Angola Agree to More Talks
LEAD: After 13 years of hostilities, South Africa and Angola met for three hours here today and agreed to another meeting with Cuban and American representatives in attendance.


Girl Fatally Struck; Driver Is Arrested
LEAD: A 7-year-old girl died last night after being struck by a van as she crossed a street near her home.
The driver of the van was arrested on a charge of driving while intoxicated.


Barry E. Gell, Watch Executive, 56
LEAD: Barry E. Gell, senior vice president of the Citizen Watch Company, died of a heart attack Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 56 years old and lived in Fort Lee, N.J.


Watch Your Toes
LEAD: Now, when the grass is growing rapidly, mowing is a weekly chore.
Most homeowners use power mowers, and the Outdoor Power Equipment Institute, a trade group, wants them to be used safely.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission reported that 70,000 injuries associated with outdoor power equipment were treated in emergency rooms in 1986.


Bush's Fight Against G.O.P. Committeeman Heats Up
LEAD: An embarrassing fight among New York Republicans that could affect the Presidential campaign in the state is heating up.


Bridge
LEAD: If Rip Van Winkle had been an expert rubber bridge player when he fell asleep, and been faced with duplicate competition a century later, he would have had trouble adjusting to the march of bidding.
One can assume, however, that his card play would rescue him in some unfortunate contracts.


Review/Jazz; Dorothy Donegan, Unclassifiable Mixture
LEAD: As the members of Dorothy Donegan's trio were taking their bows at the end of their first set at Sweetwater's, 170 Amsterdam Avenue, at 68th Street, on Thursday evening, Miss Donegan's veteran bassist, Arvell Shaw, stirred by the steady billowing waves of enthusiastic applause, proclaimed her ''one of the world's greatest pianists - without category.


G.O.P. Lawmakers Worried Over Meese
LEAD: Senior Republicans on Capitol Hill say they are increasingly alarmed that Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d is undermining the operations of the Justice Department and damaging party prospects for the fall.





Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Just see what kind of friendship will blossom between Reagan and Gorbachev.
They will be like brothers.
That's what the stars show me.
It's my prediction.
Mark my words.'' - Dzhuna Davitashvili, who reads the stars from Moscow.  [ 4:4. ]


For Some Shoppers, A Purchasing Backlash
LEAD: Shoppers don't need the Consumer Price Index to tell them that clothing prices have gone up.


Inquiry Is Widened Into Epileptic's Death
LEAD: A spokeswoman for the New York City Medical Examiner's office said this week that a severe neck injury found during an autopsy of a man who died in police custody could have been caused by medical workers, rather than by police officers.
But she stressed that a final determination was weeks away.


Iran-Backed Shiites Gain Ground on Syria's Allies in South Beirut
LEAD: After gaining control of two-thirds of Beirut's southern suburbs in nearly a week of bitter clashes, Shiite Moslem fundamentalists of the Party of God made new advances today, seizing additional positions from Amal, the rival Shiite militia.


Harold Gordon, Publishing Executive, 61
LEAD: Harold Gordon, vice president of business operations for Simon &amp; Schuster Inc., died of cancer Tuesday at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 61 years old and lived in Fort Lee, N.J.


Lopez on Target Despite Putting
LEAD: Dee Darden, a 58-year-old retired Air Force lieutenant colonel, has been Nancy Lopez's caddie for the last four years.
Before he picked up her golf bag, Darden watched Lopez play a lot while he caddied for other pros, like Beth Daniel.


Orioles End Stewart's Streak
LEAD: It took the Baltimore Orioles to prove that Dave Stewart can be beaten.


Pope Urges Bolivian War on Drugs
LEAD: Preaching at a major crossroads of cocaine traffic, Pope John Paul II pleaded urgently today for Bolivians to combat a drug trade destroying their society with corruption and murder.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Crenshaw Takes Lead: Ben Crenshaw shot a five-under par 65 yesterday to take the second-round lead at the $750,000 Byron Nelson Classic in Irving, Tex.
Crenshaw had a six-birdie, one-bogey round for a 36-hole total of nine-under-par 131.
He had a two-shot lead over Jeff Sluman and Mark Wiebe and was three shots up on Craig Stadler and John Cook, who had the day's best round with a 64.


Lillian Vernon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lillian Vernon Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 26
1988
1987
Revenue
28,969,000
32,662,000
Net inc
391,000
154,000
Share earns
.06
.03
Shares outst
6,149,000
5,000,000
Yr rev
126,088,000
115,503,000
Net inc
6,976,000
4,436,000
Share earns
1.25
.89
Shares outst
5,600,000
5,000,000


Harlem Troupe Captivates Moscow
LEAD: The fairy tale of the firebird is told over and over here, the fabled bird's magical powers to bring lovers together recounted by many writers.
Tonight that story was told anew to a Moscow audience that came to see the Dance Theater of Harlem's Soviet premiere.


Atlanta Banks Offer Loans Aimed at Blacks
LEAD: Atlanta banks, acting to counter reports of racial bias and to head off a Federal investigation into lending practices, announced a series of programs Friday to provide $65 million in low-interest, low-cost loans to borrowers on the city's predominantly black South Side.


DeBartolo and Bilzerian Under S.E.C. Scrutiny
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating whether Edward J. DeBartolo Sr., the nation's largest developer of shopping centers, secretly aided takeover bids by the Florida investor Paul A. Bilzerian by buying shares on his behalf and providing other support.


Le Peep Restaurants Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Le Peep Restaurants Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,974,880
2,809,026
Net loss
934,234
982,085


Sotheby's Listed Again
LEAD: Sotheby's Holdings Inc., the world's largest art auctioneer, once again became a public company yesterday when its shares began trading in New York and London.


Mistrial in Agent's Case
LEAD: A mistrial was declared today as attorneys tried to work out a settlement in the case of Norby Walters, a New York sports agent charged with illegal dealings with University of Alabama basketball stars.


Why Give Crooks New York Pensions?
LEAD: A rash of investigations of public officials in New York State and New York City has drawn attention to a practice that allows corrupt public officials to continue cheating the public long after they are out of office.


Atari Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atari Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
169,232,000
65,133,000
Net inc
5,674,000
b15,258,000
Share earns
.10
.26
b-Includes a tax credit of $5,893,000.
Results for the latest quarter includes Federated Group Inc., which Atari acquired on Oct.


Don't Wound Branch Libraries
LEAD: Since the fiscal crisis in the 1970's, the New York Public Library has periodically suffered budget cuts that have forced service reductions at some of its 81 branches.
Mayor Koch has now proposed another cut, of more than $2.4 million, from the branches.
This retrenchment would cause even shorter library hours and other service reductions and ignores the important value branch libraries play in the city.


Your Money; More People Seek Credit Counseling
LEAD: When Luther R. Gatling opened a credit-counseling service in New York City 11 years ago, most of his clients had blue-collar jobs and earned relatively low wages.


COPING/With Traffic Tie-Ups
LEAD: Whether because of road crews repairing the ravages of winter or weekenders crawling bumper-to-bumper toward beaches, now is the season for traffic tie-ups.


Lower East Side Housing: Plans and Conflict
LEAD: The buildings, both vacant, stand side by side on East Ninth Street between Avenues C and D, symbols of the contrasts and complexities of housing on the Lower East Side.


Dukakis Shrugs Off Jackson Views
LEAD: Campaigning almost serenely in California and Oregon this week, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis brushed off a barrage of criticism from the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, chided the White House for its reported reliance on astrology and assailed the Reagan Administration for contemplating a deal with Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega of


Ex-School Employees Charged in Sex Case
LEAD: A Roman Catholic priest and a Marist brother are facing charges involving sexual abuse of students at a parochial preparatory school in the Bronx with which they were formerly connected, the Bronx District Attorney, Paul T. Gentile, announced yesterday.


K Mart Overseas
LEAD: The Australian retailer Coles Myer Ltd. said it would bring K Mart discount department stores to New Zealand.
Coles's chairman, Brian Quinn, said the first store was expected to open in the Auckland area later this year.
Coles acquired sole rights for New Zealand from the K Mart Corporation, the second-largest retailer in the United States.


Blockers Gets Permit
LEAD: CA.
Blockers Inc. said today that the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms had granted the company's Keeney Tobacco Corporation a tax permit allowing it to make and sell cigarettes.
The company said it would now be able to start production of its cigarette containing the additive N-Bloctin, which is intended to block the cancer-causing action of nitrosamines from cigarette smoke.


Elron Electronic Industries LTD (Israel) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elron Electronic Industries LTD (Israel) (O)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
43,431,000
58,179,000
Net loss
735,000
14,304,000
The company said the loss in the year-ago quarter includes a $13,500,000 provision for the investment in Elscint Ltd.


Reviews/Film; Troubled Charter Voyage Of a Blind Ophthalmologist
LEAD: Of all the infirmities that actresses can suffer on the screen, blindness is one of the best.
It affords the chance to be nobly cheerful even when, say, the star's husband is embracing one of his cute young employees right before the star's unseeing eyes.
And the potential for suspense can be boundless, as ''Wait Until Dark'' made clear.


I.R.S. Eases Rules on Deductions After Artists and Writers Protest
LEAD: In response to a storm of protest from authors, painters, photographers and other creative artists, the Internal Revenue Service today eased the rules on deduction of freelance artistic expenses that were imposed under the Tax Reform Act of 1986.


Germ Warfare Research Safe, Pentagon Says After a Study
LEAD: After what it called a comprehensive review of environmental risks, the Pentagon has concluded that its research into defenses against biological weapons is virtually free of significant danger to people or the environment.


Painting The Lilies: Cosmetics For Babies
LEAD: Cosmetics companies are going after a new market: young children.
The industry is courting the upscale cradle set with fragrances, soaps, mousse baby shampoos, sun blocks and even a scent for those born yesterday.


Atari Profits Decline 62.7%
LEAD: The Atari Corporation today reported that first-quarter earnings had a steep decline, which the company attributed primarily to the consumer electronics retailing unit it acquired last summer.


Honor for Jordan
LEAD: By leading the N.B.A. in scoring with an average of 35 points a game, Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls won recognition for the second consecutive season as the league's top offensive player.
Yesterday, he was also named the league's 1988 Defensive Player of the Year.


Expansion Set For Thrifty
LEAD: In a bid to expand into the Pacific Northwest, the Thrifty Corporation, a drugstore and sporting goods chain that is owned by Pacific Enterprises, said today that it plans to acquire 110 Pay'n Save drugstores and 37 Bi-Mart discount department stores for stock worth $232 million.
The deal provides for an added $225 million cash payment to Pay'n Save Inc.


Navy Will Not Appeal Ruling Freeing Doctor
LEAD: The Navy decided today to forgo an appeal in the involuntary manslaughter case of Dr.
Donal M. Billig, making the former heart surgeon a free man once and for all.


Cup Challenger Leaves
LEAD: New Zealand's challenger for the America's Cup left here today after its departure to the United States had been delayed for two days by a strike of British seamen.
The container ship Discovery Bay left this afternoon with the yacht New Zealand on board.


Tony Bird
LEAD: Tony Bird, a songwriter from Malawi, will perform at 8 and 10 o'clock tonight at the New York Open Center, 83 Spring Street (219-2527).
Tickets are $10.


Review/Dance; City Ballet Acts as Host To Paul Taylor's Troupe
LEAD: There was no dearth of guest artists at the New York City Ballet's American Music Festival on Thursday night at the New York State Theater.
The entire 18-member Paul Taylor Dance Company dropped in for a visit to perform the premiere of Mr.
Taylor's ''Danbury Mix,'' an eerie and affecting modern-dance work to Charles


Conviction of Queens Judge For Wire Fraud Is Dismissed
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday dismissed 9 of the 26 counts on which William C. Brennan, a former State Supreme Court justice, was convicted and sentenced.
The nine counts dealt with making interstate telephone calls to commit fraud, and the dismissal was in line with a 1987 United States Supreme Court ruling.


Two Are Shot In Robbery Of a Payroll
LEAD: At least three gunmen, apparently lying in wait at a lower Manhattan office building yesterday morning, robbed a payroll service of nearly $400,000 in cash and shot a security guard and a cashier, the authorities said.


Brazil's Blacks Feel Bias 100 Years After Slavery
LEAD: The descendants of African slaves make up half of this vast and racially mixed nation, and the religions, food and music brought by their ancestors have molded a vital part of today's Brazil.


Resorts International Hotels Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Resorts International Hotels Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
107,409,000
116,075,000
Net loss
3,863,000
2,809,000


Quixote Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quixote Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
13,862,000
9,195,000
Net inc
104,000
cd680,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
38,590,000
31,682,000
Net loss
b880,000
d1,613,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $2,060,000.


Continental Information Sysems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Information Sysems Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
217,346,000
90,649,000
Net inc
4,834,000
3,866,000
Share earns
.38
.30
Yr rev
547,497,000
300,544,000
Net inc
16,070,000
13,030,000
Share earns
1.26
1.02


ZG Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ZG Energy Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,089,747
844,325
Net loss
253,025
354,119


Tone in the Senate Turns Upbeat As Obstacles to Arms Treaty Fade
LEAD: The Senate leadership and key committee chairmen gave all but final approval today to the agreements reached this week in Geneva on the treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forces, essentially clearing the way for the Senate to begin debate on the treaty early next week.


Bruins Are Talking Tough
LEAD: The Boston Bruins, in bewildered tones, said all the right things late Thursday night after suffering the 6-3 defeat that sent their Stanley Cup semifinal series with the Devils back to Boston for a sudden-death finale tonight.


GUIDEPOST: FLASHLIGHTS
LEAD: Vacation equipment often includes a flashlight.
Today's models range from disposable plastic ''squeeze'' lights that can be attached to key chains and carried in a purse or pocket to Mag-Lites, aluminum flashlights with rechargeable batteries, adjustable beams, belt clips and Krypton bulbs.
The Mag-Lites are the costliest, but they are versatile and provide a bright light.


Khomeini Votes in Iran's Parliamentary Election
LEAD: Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, second from right, the Iranian leader, voting in the second round of parliamentary elections in Teheran.
Photograph was released by the official Iranian news agency IRNA. (Agence France-Presse)


Sales of Domestic Vehicles Climbed 36.3% in Early May
LEAD: Sales of new American-made cars and light trucks were up 36.3 percent in early May from the comparable period in 1987.


Lancaster Colony Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lancaster Colony Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
109,259,000
106,876,000
Net inc
5,001,000
4,465,000
Share earns
.40
.34
9mo sales
332,072,000
326,137,000
Net inc
15,927,000
13,804,000
Share earns
1.25
1.06


A Strong Man Runs Amok
LEAD: There was an intriguing half-minute during a showing of ''Maniac Cop'' yesterday, when the film broke.
The flaring orange on screen at least livened up this amateurish effort about a monstrously strong uniformed policeman - or is he a civilian in costume? - who roams the streets of New York killing innocent people.


Delaware Otsego Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delaware Otsego Corporation
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,206,000
4,767,000
Net loss
179,000
b548,000
Share earns
-
.42
b-Net income


Mediq Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mediq Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
64,708,000
50,783,000
Net inc
b1,598,000
c2,540,000
Share earns
.07
.10
6mo rev
123,540,000
98,094,000
Net inc
b7,037,000
c4,700,000
Share earns
.29
.19


Chapman in the Draft
LEAD: Rex Chapman, who led Kentucky in scoring for the last two seasons, announced yesterday he would forgo his final two years of college eligibility and make himself eligible for the National Basketball Association draft June 28.
The deadline for underclassmen making that declaration is midnight tonight.


Ford Unit's Records Sought
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that its aerospace division had received a subpoena in late April for records of its dealings with consultants as part of a Government investigation of former executives at Intelsat, the communications satellite consortium.


Tokyo Cabinet Official Resigns Amid Furor
LEAD: A Cabinet minister who had repeatedly minimized Japan's wartime aggression succumbed tonight to intense Government pressure and submitted his resignation.


Symphony Milestone for Brahmins
LEAD: There are certain things that proper Bostonians simply do.
They are born, they go to school, they get married, and they go to Symphony, not necessarily in that order.


6 Guatemala Officers Seized In a Coup Plot That Failed
LEAD: The Guatemalan Defense Ministry announced today that it had arrested six officers and sanctioned four others implicated in an aborted coup this week.


11-Hour Concert to Mark Atlantic Records' 40 Years
LEAD: By any standard, the 11-hour celebration of Atlantic Records' 40th anniversary, starting at 1 P.M. today at Madison Square Garden, is an extraordinary convention of American and British music.
Ranging from the urbane 1950's soul of Ruth Brown (Atlantic Records was once known as the House That Ruth Built) to the blow-dried conventionality of the teen-age pop singer Debbie


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher; Gold Prices Up a Bit in U.S.
LEAD: The dollar finished slightly higher against most major currencies in dull trading yesterday.
No significant developments emerged to move the currency market and the British pound stole the spotlight.


Citadel Holding May Revise Bid
LEAD: The Citadel Holding Corporation, constrained from buying a 39 percent interest in Valley Federal Savings and Loan Association by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, said it was considering revising its months-old $18.50-a-share, or $107 million, takeover bid for the thrift institution.


Franklin Telecommunications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Telecommunications Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,935,000
4,782,000
Net inc
201,000
b462,000
9mo rev
19,093,000
14,401,000
Net inc
353,000
b720,000
b-Net loss  The company said all net income figures are equal to less than one cent a share.


After 27 Years, The Sky's the Limit
LEAD: Willie B. sitting in his cage at Zoo Atlanta, and, top right, looking warily through its open door.
The 30-year-old lowland gorilla had not been outside since he was captured in 1961.
A new exhibit has given Willie access to the sky and grass, and, after hesitating for about an hour, he finally tried the outdoors.


When Animals and Humans Are Coequal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Robert H. Lehman, Philanthropist, 79
LEAD: Robert H. Lehman, a retired investor and philanthropist, died of complications after heart surgery Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old.


Growing Benefit Seen in AIDS Drug
LEAD: Evidence has mounted that the drug AZT, on the market in the United States for a year, prolongs life for patients with AIDS and related conditions, researchers with the company that developed the drug said today.


Frontier Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frontier Insurance Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b1,765,000
b852,000
Share earns
.48
.24
b-After losses from sales of investments of $108,000 and $87,000 for the latest quarter and year-ago period, respectively.


Atkinson, Guy F Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atkinson, Guy F Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
216,100,000
210,700,000
Net inc
1,890,000
1,870,000
Share earns
.22
.21


IN THE NEW YORK REGION: Westchester; Marriott Taps No-Frills Market With Two Hotels
LEAD: A COZY Spanish-style hotel opened in Tarrytown in January and one just like it opened in Rye in March, even though established hoteliers have complained that there are already too many hotel rooms in Westchester County.


Off the Beaten Track to Study Law
LEAD: Jonathon Chase, the late former dean of Vermont Law School, liked to joke that this was the only town in America ''with a law school and no stop light.''


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a report in the Northeast Journal column last Sunday about a conflict over the anthem of the University of Maine at Orono referred incorrectly to the university president, Dale Lick.
He is a man.


Worker-Owned Company Celebrates Its 3d Year
LEAD: TOM KLIMOVICH paused, looked at his boss and made sure he was not revealing secrets when he recalled his toughest decision as a director of Seymour Specialty Wire.


THE MYSTERY OF MARIO CUOMO
LEAD: MARIO CUOMO LIKES TO play games, and on this day in April the game is baseball, the opening of Pilot Field in Buffalo.


Yugoslavia's Leader Rejects Call to Resign Over Economy
LEAD: Prime Minister Branko Mikulic today defied calls for his resignation made by Yugoslavia's two most Westernized republics.


Sounds of Youth, Salutes to the Old
LEAD: ''YOUTH is full of pleasance, age is full of care,'' Shakespeare said.
Westchester audiences will find several engaging young people's events this week, along with two thoughtful salutes to musicians in ''the golden years.''


PATTERNS OF ADDICTION
LEAD: Doesn't it occur to the biologist James W. McKearney that the animal he concludes is racing toward the anticipated shock is, instead, frantically trying to speed past it?
After failing to do so, it is wearied by its extra efforts and by the shock itself, so it rests before it has to go through the whole tortuous routine again.


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


IDEAS AND TRENDS: Can Machines Learn to Think?; The Artificial Intelligence Industry Is Retrenching
LEAD: WHEN the computer scientist John McCarthy coined the term artificial intelligence in the late 1950's, he did not mean to imply that there would be anything second rate about mechanical minds.
However, three decades later computers still do not think.
Is this because of the technological failings of the computer industry?


GOINGS ON IN NORTHEAST
LEAD:  FOOD FESTIVAL


With Vacancies Rising, Watchword Is Caution
LEAD: A HAZE of caution has been hanging over the Manhattan office market ever since last October's stock market crash.
And the forecast for the rest of the year looks - at best - partly sunny.


ASTROS' KNEPPER (5-0) STOPS CUBS
LEAD: After perhaps his most frustrating year in baseball and a controversial spring training, Bob Knepper of the Astros, a left-hander, is at peace with himself and has forgotten the past.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  ON A WOMAN'S PLACE  A new translation of ''Tutta Casa, Letto e Chiesa,'' a 1970's feminist play by Dario Fo and his wife Franca Rame, is to be presented at 9 P.M.
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday in the Frances Ann Cannon Workshop Theater of Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers.
The title, ''All House, Bed and


SAVED BY THE TV CREW
LEAD:  THE DAY OF CREATION  By J. G. Ballard.  254 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


MEESE REPORT SAID TO REVIEW INQUIRY
LEAD: The independent prosecutor's report on Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d is not likely to make broad conclusions about Mr.
Meese's conduct but instead will offer an exhaustive review of the evidence gathered, according to people with knowledge of the yearlong inquiry.


Bush as Heir Underlines a Paradox for Republicans
LEAD: WHEN the leader of a democratic society lays his hands on the person he would have as his successor, the gesture can mean everything or nothing.
For Vice President Bush, it could end up meaning both.


A Bribe's Tale
LEAD: DESPITE A RATHER healthy dose of doubt where marriage was concerned, I had always had a fairy-tale image of weddings.
Satin shoes at the Drake Hotel, or mossy bliss beneath a waterfall.
Of course, I'd always assumed that someone else would take care of the plans.
I was mired in the sweet innocence of youth, when weddings seemed to spring forth mysteriously through spontaneous generation.


For the Tropicana, A Long Mambo To a U.S. Tour
LEAD: On a lush tropical estate outside Havana, there's an open-air extravaganza six nights a week at the Tropicana, one of the world's best-known nightclubs.
Two thousand people regularly jam the place to dine and dance, to hear mambos, cha-chas and newer Cuban music and to watch more than a hundred dancers in feathers and sequins as they strut through glittering routines.


Nancy Adams, an Editor, To Wed Bruce Dexter Jr.
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Winn Adams of Scarsdale, N.Y., of the engagement of their daughter Nancy Lee Adams to Bruce P. Dexter Jr., a son of Mrs.
Dexter of Prairie Village, Kan., and the late Mr.
Dexter.
The couple plan to marry July 9.


Subaru Series Begins
LEAD: A field of 85 men and 85 women, including many racers who will compete this summer for positions on the 1988 United States Olympic cycling teams, is expected to start today in the Subaru National Criterium Championships in White Plains.
The races are the first in a series of seven Subaru-sponsored events over five months.


Controlling Our Population Growth
LEAD: Susan S. Gold's giddy joy over her third pregnancy (''The Magic of Babies Makes Three a 'Perfect Number,' '' April 10, Opinion page) should not blind her to the demographic consequences of her actions.


What's at Stake Is Control Over the Building Process
LEAD: Beginning this afternoon, some 3,000 architects will descend on New York for the 120th annual convention of the American Institute of Architects.
It is expected to be the largest gathering of the profession ever - not a bad way, perhaps, to make up for the fact that the association has not chosen to meet in New York since 1967, preferring instead to gather in such architecturally significant cities as San Antonio, Kansas City and San Diego.


Ann P. Duffy Married To Nicholas C. Hanna
LEAD: Ann Peters Duffy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Duffy of Westhampton Beach, L.I., was married yesterday to Nicholas Cooke Hanna, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William John Hanna Jr. of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles A. Lennon performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Immaculate Conception in Quiogue, L.I.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Ferries to Link Vineyard And Boston


WIRED FOR STRESS
LEAD: LAST OCT. 19, A DAY THAT ONLY A stress researcher could savor, a 48-year-old stockbroker named Gianni Fidanza happened to be wearing a little metal box on his waist when he went to his Park Avenue office.
It was wired to a cuff on his arm that measured his blood pressure and pulse every 15 minutes.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: MAY 15, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
(Warner, $4.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis
among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
2
THE HAUNTED MESA, by Louis L'Amour.
(Bantam, $4.50.) Unraveling the mystery of
Indian cliff dwellers who vanished centuries ago.


LEGISLATION AND FAMILY MATTERS
LEAD: THE Reagan Administration has long emphasized its dedication to the family.


Giants Perk Up Against Mets As Krukow Outduels Darling
LEAD: There are some things apparently that not even the mighty Mets can control.
The strange fate that stymies Ron Darling.
The strange spell that makes Mike Krukow the master of the Mets.
The swirling winds of Candlestick Park.


Review/Opera; 'Giulietta e Romeo,' a Riccardo Zandonai Rarity
LEAD: It was Riccardo Zandonai's bad luck to have been a successor in an age that preferred revolutionaries.
The publisher of his operas, Ricordi, proudly announced him as Puccini's heir,and so perhaps he was.
In a long life that ended in 1949, Zandonai took Puccini-esque declamatory style and prettied it up considerably, but never discarded its character.


Franklin Stone Weds David Howard Wenk
LEAD: Franklin Harvey Stone, a daughter of Franklin Brockinton Stone of Richmond and the late Robert Lecky Stone, was married yesterday to David Howard Wenk, the son of Mr. and Mrs Howard Arthur Wenk of Mountain Lakes, N.J.
Judge Michael Bernard Mukasey of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York performed the ceremony at the Westbury Hotel in


IS AMERICA IN DECLINE?
LEAD: If the argument for the decline of the United States were based only on historical analogy and recent economic and political facts, then Senator Bill Bradley's response that ''decline'' is ''needlessly provocative'' would have considerable force (''Taking Stock: Is America in Decline?'' by Peter Schmeisser, April 17).


Michael Weller's Landscape of the Heart
LEAD: Since 1971, when ''Moonchildren'' had its premiere at the Royal Court Theater in London under the title ''Cancer,''


Souvenir
LEAD: To the Editor: While snorkeling off the Beach Club in Grand Case, St.
Martin, recently I spotted what looked like a piece of play money on the ocean floor.
Removing my mask, I dove down and retrieved it.
Sure enough, it was a real $10 greenback.
Dried out, it looks as good as new - if a little pale - and I expect to keep it as a treasured liquid asset.


Q and A
LEAD:  Co-op Parking Garage


Tuition Rise Asked at Massachusetts Schools
LEAD: The Massachusetts Board of Regents of Higher Education has voted to raise tuition 8.5 percent this fall for the 180,000 students at the state's 29 public colleges and universities.


Talks Are Held on Settling Backlog Of Violations Against Supermarkets
LEAD: In an unusual move to clear up a backlog of thousands of disputed food-packaging violations by supermarkets, a New York City agency is negotiating a mass financial settlement with a supermarket trade association.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE RISE OF AMERICAN AIR POWER: The Creation of Armageddon.
By Michael S. Sherry. (Yale University, $29.95.) It is a sobering idea Michael S. Sherry pursues in this book, which won the 1988 Bancroft Prize in American history.
In the 1920's and 30's it was assumed that the prospect of bombing cities was so horrifying it might make war obsolete.


Lendl Cruises Into Italian Open Final
LEAD: Top-seeded Ivan Lendl, looking sharp after a rain delay that lasted more than five hours, powered into the final of the Italian Open tennis tournament tonight by beating fifth-seeded Kent Carlsson of Sweden, 6-3, 6-3.


DANCING, EATING AND OTHER PATRIOTIC ACTS
LEAD:  FESTIVALS AND THE FRENCH REVOLUTION  By Mona Ozouf.
Translated by Alan Sheridan.
Illustrated. 378 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press.


Review/Recital; Chilean Anthem Variations
LEAD: After an initial rush of attention, Frederic Rzewski's hourlong pianistic tour de force ''The People United Will Never Be Defeated!'' (1975) seemed to settle into a sort of limbo rarely encountered in recital programs.
But this season Barry Hannigan did it in February at Merkin Concert Hall, and on Wednesday night David Holzman - coatless, with a bandanna from the Spanish Civil War around his neck to honor his father and ''all those who fought against Fascism'' - made it the climax of his program at Weill Recital


New Rules for New Genes
LEAD: The Environmental Proctection Agency is preparing new rules for field tests of genetically altered microorganisms that are expected to relax restrictions on certain tests.
The power to approve tests is expected to be moved from the E.P.A. to regional Environmental Biosafety Committees.
How will these changes affect commercial genetic engineering?


Miss Cook Weds Lawrence J. Platt
LEAD: The marriage of Carleen Durand Cook, the daughter of Laurens Irving Cook and Elizabeth Cook McCabe, both of Boston, to Lawrence Jay Platt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mervyn Platt of Trenton, took place yesterday at King's Chapel in Boston.
The Rev.
Dr.
Forrester Church, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony.


Leasing Brokers
LEAD: To The Editor:


Special Today; Commercial Property/Section 13
LEAD: * Foreign investors step up the pace.


Victory Cigars For the Knicks
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Bridge Hed; A Bear Wins at the Cavendish Invitational
LEAD: FOR many years the Russian Bear has been a cause of concern to the United States.
In the past decade there have been problems with Swedish bears.
First Bjorn Borg, whose first name means ''bear,'' arrived to plague our tennis courts and now Bjorn Fallenius is doing well at our card tables.
A week ago he and his partner, Magnus Lindquist, became the first players from another continent to win the Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs in the 14-year history of the event.


Tuned In
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Full-Fledged Alternative in Newark
LEAD: ALTERNATIVE spaces are proliferating so rapidly in the tri-state area that it may be time to find an alternative to the term alternative.


Review/Dance; Film Clips to Celebrate Irving Berlin's Birthday
LEAD: Continuing its American Music Festival at the New York State Theater, the New York City Ballet celebrated Irving Berlin's 100th birthday Tuesday night with a cinematic tribute to this great songwriter.
It was a day for celebrations, for Tuesday also happened to be Martha Graham's 94th birthday.


Frank Hixon Jr. Marries Ms. Lee
LEAD: Marguerite Lammot Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis V. Lee of Charlestown, R.I., and Frank Perkins Hixon Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hixon of Franklin, Tenn., were married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn., by the Rev.
V.
Alastair Votaw.


Lucky Streets of Moscow Dressing for Reagan Visit
LEAD: President Reagan, the residents of Vorovsky Street thank you.
They salute you on Voyevodin Lane, too, and on the roads leading to the Danilov Monastery.


Apartheid Isn't Sporting
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Giants Are Having Trouble Backing Up Craig's Prediction
LEAD: As difficult as repeating has become, Roger Craig might have made the task of the San Francisco Giants even harder.
In so doing, he created comparisons of his team with the 1986-87 Mets.


IS AMERICA IN DECLINE?
LEAD: Paul Kennedy expounded the same thesis he pushes in ''The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers'' in a conversation on my patio in West Berlin in the summer of 1984.
His book ignores or misrepresents the most basic facts.
Our defense budget today is 7 percent of the gross national product.
In 1961, it was 9 percent.


On Critics: Dialogue Or a Diatribe?
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Brideshead Revisited  Starring Jeremy Irons, Anthony Andrews, Diana Quick, Laurence Olivier, John Gielgud, Claire Bloom, Mona Washbourne.
Directed by Charles Sturridge and Michael Lindsay-Hogg. 1982.
Virgin Vision.
Six cassettes of 98 minutes each;  Not rated.


Kae E. Konen to Marry
LEAD: Kae Ellen Konen, the assistant vice president of sale promotion for Sotheby's, and Charles Robert Ledford Johnsons, a senior analyst at Salomon Brothers, are planning a June wedding.
The parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Elvin R. Konen of Naples, Fla., and Lincoln, Mich., have announced the engagement.


Denver Judge Sentences Rapist to 376-Year Term
LEAD: A man who served as his own attorney and confronted victims on the witness stand at his trial has been sentenced to 376 years in prison on 14 counts of rape and burglary.


Allison Waring Cutler And Francis Fox Wed
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr, Pa., Allison Waring Cutler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Newton Cutler Jr. of New Vernon, N.J., and Francis Edward Fox, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Fox of Ardmore, Pa., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Timothy Pickering performed the ceremony.


Too Slippery to Characterize
LEAD: TO give a logical description in general terms of the strategy of any opening without getting involved in rank contradiction is impossible because each comprises possibilities for diverse strategies.


Dizzy Dames on a New Whirl
LEAD: There's a brief scene in ''Sticky Fingers'' in which a woman is tinkering with a shelf on a window ledge that already holds a row of flowerpots.
She's the kind of woman who giggles and shrieks and chatters too much while this job is being done.
When it's finished, she steps back to admire her handiwork and, of course, the expected thing happens.


Few Clues Left in Wake Of Pair's Disappearance
LEAD: A secret marriage, an abandoned car that was out of gas, a telephone that rings but no one speaks when an anquished mother answers: these may be clues, but so far they have led nowhere in the disappearance of two college students.


Replying to Statements On Diabetes Treatment
LEAD: On May 1 you published a letter by Dr.
Herbert Ross which challenged much of the material in Penny Singer's article about me  [ ''Diabetic Doctor Offers a New Treatment,'' April 3 ] .
The purpose of my letter is to clarify some of Dr.
Ross's distortions and inaccuracies point by point. 1.


DATA UPDATE: May 15, 1988
LEAD:
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
Mar. 88
Mar. 87
Change
New York
504.0
585.1
-14%
New Jersey
396.9
387.2
2%
Connecticut
208.8
193.2
8%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.85
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.33
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.68
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
8.84
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
13.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
17.75


U.S. Prepares To Cite State For Violating Clean-Air Act
LEAD: FEDERAL officials have taken the first step toward putting the state on a list of areas that have not met clean-air standards, a move that could result in sanctions this year.


I.B.M. Offers Reassurance to Town
LEAD: In ''A Town Pays a Price for Indifference'' (April 24, Opinion page), Southbury resident Alvin Laster expressed concern about the impact I.B.M.'s new Southbury facility will have on the ambiance of the town.
We want to assure Mr.
Laster that the International Business Machines Corporation cares about Southbury, too.


Sade's Offences
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tainted Water Supply: A Way Out
LEAD: I HAD gone to Sanibel Island, on the Gulf Coast of Florida, to look at its potable-water processing plant.
Sanibel and adjacent Captiva share a narrow strip of land divided into two islands by a small river.
Together, they are shaped like Long Island and are, in many ways, a microcosm of it.


Sade's Offenses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shortage of Nurses Worsens
LEAD: The nation's nursing shortage worsened last year, temporarily closing some emergency rooms and delaying admissions and operations, the American Hospital Association says.


Sergei Gorshkov Dies at 78; Admiral Built Soviet Navy
LEAD: Adm.
Sergei G. Gorshkov, who transformed the Soviet Union into a global sea power during 29 years as chief of the Soviet Navy, died on Friday in Moscow, the official Tass press agency said on Saturday.
He was 78 years old.


Was Pete Rose's Suspension Fair?
LEAD: Not only was it fair, it was important.


Prince Edward Island
LEAD: AS our family discovered last summer, there is an island gem north of Maine.
It is the Canadian province of Prince Edward Island, and although it is relatively isolated, we reached it easily by driving to New Brunswick and taking a 45-minute ferry ride across the Northumberland Strait from Cape Tormentine, to


The Magic of Attaining Art Collector Status
LEAD: Life in an ''art store'' - not always prominent in the news - has received some notoriety  [ Opinion Page, April 24, ''Art or Not?
Anyway, Now It's Mine'' ] .
Letter writers to the Arts and Leisure section were 3 to 1 in favor of the recent Department of Consumer Affairs ruling requiring posting of prices in art galleries.


Surf's Up!
LEAD:  LEGENDS OF MALIBU  Music by The Beach Boys, Surf Raiders, Surfaris Frontline Video. 45 minutes. 1987. $24.95.


Gandhi's Arms Buildup Is Questioned At Home
LEAD: FEW dissenting voices were heard in recent years as India undertook an ambitious military buildup.
Many Indians seemed to agree with Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi that questioning the need for more spending was unpatriotic.


Jai Alai Players to Vote on Joining a Union
LEAD: The National Labor Relations Board has granted striking jai alai players in Hartford and Newport, R.I., the right to conduct union representation elections.


Headliners; Post-Retirement
LEAD: It is no insult to Beverly Sills to say that her retirement from the stage a decade ago was one of the best things that ever happened to the New York City Opera.
As general director of the company, Miss Sills proved to be as talented a fund-raiser as she was - and remains - a soprano.
By all accounts, her fund-raising abilities were the main factor in the growth of the City Opera budget from $9 million in 1978 to a projected $26 million in the 1988-89 fiscal year.


Deer Isle: Granite, Spruce And the Sea
LEAD: DEER ISLE looks on a map, in the words of a local historian, Vernal Hutchinson, ''like a figure eight drawn by a very shaky hand.'' At high water the sea all but meets at Long Cove and Northwest Harbor and divides the island.
Countless coves and inlets run along the island's jagged coastline.
Scores of smaller out islands, some no more than pink granite outcrops where cormorants spread their wings to dry, whorl about the shore.


Reassessments Hit Homeowners Hard
LEAD: NOT even in gentrifying Hoboken can Henry Wurtz imagine that his quirky little rowhouse - only 10 feet wide - is worth $212,200, the value recently put on it by a firm doing the city's new tax assessments.


Hispanic-Americans Are Part of Society Too
LEAD: With reference to the April 10 Opinion Page article ''A Divided Society Is an Unjust Society,'' I was keenly disappointed that Stan Lipton referred only very peripherally to our large and growing population of Hispanic-American ancestry.
We may talk with a bit of an accent, but I would reassure your readers that we are also part of God's human family, and wish to live in peace and brotherhood with all other Americans.


Patricia Meagher Weds T. C. Davis
LEAD: At St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien, Conn., Patricia Ann Meagher, a daughter of Martha E. Meagher of Darien and the late Thomas R. Meagher, was married yesterday to Timothy Converse Davis, the son of Joan V. Davis of Darien and the late Donald B. Davis.


THE NATIONAL CONVENTIONS IN 1948
LEAD: Reuven Frank's article brought back a flood of memories, as I was an ABC-TV director at that time.


Accord Viewed as Near on Medicare Bill
LEAD: House and Senate conferees have reported significant progress on a bill to protect 32 million Medicare beneficiaries from exposure to financial catastrophe because of illness.
They say they hope to complete their work in the next two weeks.


STREETSCAPES: Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive; Institutions Use Air Rights Over a Multilevel Marvel
LEAD: NEW YORK CITY and the state are jointly rehabilitating the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, a project expected to be completed by the mid-1990's.
Widely known as the East River Drive, it is certainly one of Manhattan's great public works, particularly the section between 53d and 92d Streets, a dizzying stretch of dips and rises, views and tunnels, sun and shadow.


Recapturing The Spirit Of Steamboats
LEAD: In the late 1800's thousands of passenger boats powered by steam plied America's waterways; today there are only a handful, according to David Crockett, president of the Steamship Historical Society of America.
Happily, nostalgic travelers can still sample the flavor of the era in the Northeast.
Short excursions are available on vintage boats (some now converted to run on diesel fuel) or recently built steamboats in a few locations; more common are replicas that aim to recapture the spirit of the steam age.


Review/Piano; Berenice Lipson-Gruzen
LEAD: Fragments of satisfaction and fragments of disappointment - placed side by side - made up Berenice Lipson-Gruzen's piano recital at Merkin Concert Hall Thursday night, and one's piecemeal response to her playing was actually a metaphor for the playing itself.
Its highest moments were the Debussy pieces - the three ''Estampes'' and the isolated Prelude from Book One called ''What the West Wind Saw.


It's a Bad Time To Cut Consumption
LEAD: ''LET'S cut consumption'' has taken on the sound of an idea whose time has come although its practicality has yet to be examined.
This catch phrase has jelled into the consensus for remedial action to fix all that's gone wrong with the economy.
Prof.
Paul Kennedy, in his New York Times response to complaints that his best-selling book, ''The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers,'' expressed a passivity toward America's decline, replied that we could always cut consumption.


Dr. Mabee Wed To Timothy Bell In Washington
LEAD: Dr.
Marcia Sprague Mabee, a daughter of Martha B. Mabee of Lexington, Mass., and the late Irving H. Mabee, and Timothy Harwell Bell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
B.
Tartt Bell of McLean, Va., were married yesterday at the Woodrow Wilson House in Washington.
The Rev.
Harry Quiett, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony.


ALL THE COMFORTS OF DICKENS
LEAD: If I were stranded alone on a desert island and had to choose one author's works for company, I would take not the collected plays of Shakespeare, but the Oxford Illustrated Dickens in 21 volumes, which was published a few months ago by Oxford University Press.
While Shakespeare is certainly the greater writer, I would choose Dickens because on a desert island I would wish for, more than anything else, a teeming, colorful evocation of the world


Mice and Men in The Bronx
LEAD: The Bronx Zoo, one of the best things that ever happened to New York, has opened a Mousehouse.
A Mousehouse is a place where a visitor may observe 28 varieties of rodent at play.


Pamela Fried Is Wed At Temple Beth-El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
LEAD: Pamela Gail Fried, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart J. Fried of Stamford, Conn., was married last evening to David Alan Picon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur M. Picon of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Gilbert S. Rosenthal officiated.
The bride, a sales manager at Dynamic Designs, a clothing manufacturer in New York, graduated from Emory University.


Program Trading
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dining Alfresco, New York Style
LEAD: FOR ALL THEIR POTENTIAL PLEASURES, outdoor cafes have their distinct perils - especially in such congested urban centers as New York City.
They include everything from flies performing kamikaze dives into your gazpacho to exhaust fumes, gawking passers-by, airborne napkins, cold food, street noise, sudden weather shifts and confused canines who mistake table legs for spindly shrubs.


Double Vision' Examines the Cultural Identity of Artists
LEAD: THE questions seemed never to have come up in Paris during the 19th and early 20th centuries, but today seem never to stop coming up in New York and other American cities: Can minority artists make the mainstream and keep their cultural identities?
Is it possible or even desirable to cultivate these identities in what amounts to a hothouse atmosphere?


Art School Apologizes for Painting of Mayor
LEAD: An art school apologized in advertisements appearing in Sunday newspapers here for exhibiting a student's portrait of the late Mayor Harold Washington in lingerie.


Deciding Which Profits Should Be Tax Exempt
LEAD: TAX-EXEMPT organizations such as museums and universities have been ill at ease for almost a year over issues being explored by a House subcommittee.
But it is one thing for a few Congressmen to talk about taxing a wider range of the profit-making ventures of not-for-profit organizations and quite another when the White


A Cinch in Time
LEAD: COLORFUL six-inch suspenders called Mini-Grips are spanning the generations in popularity.
Mothers wear them to clasp cardigans and anchor scarves, while daughters use theirs to create mock Mary Janes out of plain flats.
The suspenders also shorten hems for a scalloped effect on skirts, T-shirts and pants, and can cinch waists like a belt.


Cleaning Fireplaces
LEAD: MOST fireplace owners know the importance of having chimneys cleaned regularly.
Doing so prevents the buildup of sooty deposits inside them, which can cause a fire, and also keeps fireplaces functioning efficiently and with less smoke.


Hanzlik's Heroics Give Nuggets 1-Game Lead
LEAD: Bill Hanzlik scored 4 of his 9 points in the final 35 seconds, including the game-winner with three seconds to play, rallying the Denver Nuggets to a 107-105 victory over the Dallas Mavericks in their National Basketball Association playoff series today.


Clemens Does It Again, 3-0
LEAD: Roger Clemens pitched a three-hitter and struck out 10 today en route to his fourth shutout of the season as the Boston Red Sox beat the Seattle Mariners, 3-0.


The Price of Occupation
LEAD: The Palestinian uprising, now in its sixth month, has not moved the Government of Israel a visible inch toward any greater willingness to withdraw from the West Bank and Gaza.
To the contrary, Prime Minister Shamir has become increasingly emphatic in saying that Israel will keep those territories forever.


Centenarians Prove To Be Life of the Party
LEAD: LEON BURNESS likes to brag about his family.
One son is a doctor and one is a dentist.


Regen Horchow, Teacher, To Wed R. D. Pillsbury Jr.
LEAD: Regen Horchow and Rockwell Dole Pillsbury Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pillsbury of Dallas, plan to marry in June, the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Roger Horchow of Dallas have announced.


Program Trading
LEAD: To the Editor:


Craig Claiborne's Fail-Safe Beginner's Menu
LEAD: FOR SOME PEOPLE, ESPECIALLY THE young, the inexperienced and the super-busy, nothing provokes more anxiety than the thought of giving a dinner party.
They become exhausted merely contemplating all the chores they would have to do: shopping for decent place mats, removing the books from the living room floor, fixing the broken chair.


Celebrating a Century of Offering Refuge
LEAD: WEN Mary Fisher first proposed the idea to the fashionable ladies gathered at Mrs.
Vincenzo Botta's weekly reception in New York City one day in 1888, one guest was appalled. ''A home for old authors and artists?'' she exclaimed. ''My!
What a company of cranks!
What will you do with them?''


Bet Twice Scrambles to Capture Pimlico Special
LEAD: Bet Twice, the forgotten horse of the racing world, boldly reclaimed his stature by outfinishing Lost Code, Cryptoclearance and Alysheba to win the $600,000 Pimlico Special today at Pimlico Race Course.


Murray Will Return
LEAD: He has a respectable regular season record, 283-192-68, in seven years as coach of the Washington Capitals, but in postseason play, Bryan Murray hasn't done so well.
He has never led the Capitals past the Patrick Division final, and that has stirred periodic talk that he might be due for replacement.


Designs in Nature
LEAD: AT A CERTAIN level of speculation about the body and its diseases, medical science begins to sound like myth.
Flesh talks, blood listens.
The body wants things, genes know things, immune systems see things, diseases have secrets that go back to once upon a time in the primeval forest.


An Operatic 'Little Foxes' at the Long Wharf
LEAD: ONCE, the notion of opera in a legitimate theater was forbidding and so ''Regina,''


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-19


'Cat's Cradle,' Mystery Set in English Village
LEAD: ''CAT'S CRADLE,'' by Leslie Sands, is a psychological mystery thriller now having its New York premiere at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst.
This 1983 British drama takes place in Waverton, a small English village in which, 12 years before the time of the play's action, a 6-month-old baby boy was kidnapped.


Sports of The Times; From Little Eva to Whale Walters
LEAD: There was once a catcher for the San Diego Padres named Gwosdz, called Eyechart by his teammates, though he was known to his family as Douglas.


Bruised Year-Old Bronx Boy Dies After Police Find Him
LEAD: A bruised year-old Bronx boy died yesterday after being taken to a hospital by police responding to a report of child abuse, the police said.


Thruway Bridge To Open May 27
LEAD: MORE than a year after a bridge on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway collapsed into the rain-swollen Schoharie Creek near Amsterdam, N.Y., the Thruway officials say a replacement bridge is nearing completion and all four of its lanes will be open to traffic by May 27.


Country Houses Of a Lucky Few
LEAD: JUST as tulips are giving way to irises and the commuter traffic on the Long Island Expressway is swelled by the Friday flight to houses on the East End, the Parrish Art Museum in Southampton is presenting ''The Long Island Country House, 1870-1930.''


U.S. May Agree to Let Noriega Run for President
LEAD: An arrangement that American officials are negotiating with Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega would require the Panamanian to step down as head of his country's armed forces, but might allow him to run for president in an election scheduled for next May, Panamanian opposition leaders and senior Latin American diplomats said today.


Time to Get the Picnic Basket Ready
LEAD: WITH Memorial Day coming soon, it is time to think about foods suitable for summer picnics.
Sandwiches and salads are the obvious choices.
Tastes in sandwiches can run the gamut from the classic chicken or tuna salad, deli meats and peanut butter to stylish contemporary concepts such as mozzarella, basil and sun-dried tomatoes on crusty


Old-Style Performance Is Becoming a New Concert Hit
LEAD: MORE crumhorns and sackbuts are showing up at Connecticut concerts these days.
And audiences cannot get enough of them.


THE NATIONAL CONVENTIONS IN 1948
LEAD: Like Reuven Frank of NBC, I, too, have sweaty memories of those three political conventions at Philadelphia in 1948 - no air-conditioning in the auditorium, hotel rooms, or television ''studios,'' which were simply rooms hung with white sheets (''1948: Live . . . From Philadelphia . . . It's the National Conventions,'' April 17).


THE CLOISTERS: NEW TREASURES AND PLEASURES
LEAD: My first knowledge of a place called the Cloisters came with a part-time job in a curious picture-book school building far in mood and distance from my South Bronx James Monroe High School.
It was my ungrateful duty to soothe excited, recalcitrant children into bed moods; their older teachers were too exhausted for this last task of a long day.


New Voice Joins Debate On Auto Insurance
LEAD: FOR YEARS, the debate over how to repair New Jersey's expensive automobile-insurance system has been depicted as one between insurance companies, which blame high litigation costs, and the trial attorneys, who say insurance company greed is to blame.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Xavier McDaniel of the Seattle Supersonics will face six weeks of rehabilitation after undergoing successful arthroscopic surgery on his right knee. . . .
Felix McGrath and Tamara McKinney, both Alpine specialists, were among 33 hopefuls named to the United States Ski team for the 1988-89 season.


The Unspeakable Is Debated: Should Drugs Be Legalized?
LEAD: Exasperated by the seemingly endless deaths, crime and corruption generated by the world's illicit drug trade, a growing number of public officials and scholars in recent weeks have begun to call for debate on what for years was politically unspeakable: making drugs legal.


Hidden Issue Dates Challenge Hobbyists
LEAD: THIS is a test.


Dr. Hillary Hart Is Wed To Dr. Anthony Alofsin
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
Hillary Hart, a daughter of Louise Cadby of Northampton, Mass., and the late Richard C. Hart, to Dr.
Anthony Alofsin, the son of the late Frederick Alofsin and the late Eleanor Alofsin, both of Memphis, took place yesterday in Austin, Tex.
Judge Jon N. Wisser of State District Court performed the ceremony at the couple's home.


Morrissey's Poison-Pen Letter to the World
LEAD: In ''The Ordinary Boys,'' one of the most bluntly self-revealing songs on ''Viva Hate,'' the first solo album by Steven Patrick Morrissey, the former lead singer of the Smiths bitterly remembers being persecuted by his peers as an adolescent.
Picturing his hometown of Manchester, England, as a wasteland of ''cold small streets,'' he looks back on his schoolmates as ''empty fools, happy going nowhere in their rattling cars.


Ms. Vizcarrondo Weds T. J. Burke
LEAD: At Santa Teresita Roman Catholic Church in Santurce, P.R., Nellie Marie Vizcarrondo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julio E. Vizcarrondo Jr. of Guaynabo, P.R., was married yesterday to Thomas James Burke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Burke of Moorestown, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert Pelton performed the ceremony.


From Simplicity to Complexity
LEAD: IF something starts out simple, you can bet it will become complicated sooner or later.
So it is with point-and-shoot cameras, which were originally designed to make 35-millimeter picture taking as simple as pointing and shooting.


Newark is At the Heart of a Television Reporter
LEAD: WHEN Sandra King talks about Newark then and Newark now, the fire in her eyes intensifies and diminishes, but it never goes out.


Review/Dance; Three Pieces by Laura Dean Troupe
LEAD: Laura Dean continues to be an amazing choreographer.
She certainly demonstrated that Friday night when her company, Laura Dean Dancers and Musicians, performed at the City Center.


Capt. Williamson Planning to Wed a Fellow Officer
LEAD: The engagement of Capt.
Annesley Jeanne Williamson and Maj.
Jonathan Hunter Jaffin, both of the Army Medical Corps, has been announced by the future bride's mother, Wilmajeanne B. Williamson of Stamford, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.


OLYMPIC PROFILE: The Champion Club  Americans get finanicial help from a compnay based in South Korea; Foreign Aid for Americans
LEAD: Almost all Olympic hopefuls have the same opinion about sponsors: It's better to have one than not have one.
Take it from Mike McCarthy, a member of the United States national cycling team.


N.F.L. Officials Are Exemplary
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Everything but a Body in Murder Trial
LEAD: For the crowd that gathers inside Superior Court here each day to watch the trial of Richard B. Crafts, the lure is a crime as intriguing as a Philip Marlowe mystery and as grisly as the movie ''The Texas Chainsaw Massacre.''


6 Flee Besieged Sikh Temple and 3 Are Killed
LEAD: Six men, most of them old and shaken, fled through militant gunfire at the Golden Temple today during a half-hour cease-fire by Government security forces.


IDEAS AND TRENDS: Can Machines Learn to Think?; A Parable of Computers And Brains
LEAD: WHEN the computer scientist John McCarthy coined the term artificial intelligence in the late 1950's, he did not mean to imply that there would be anything second rate about mechanical minds.
However, three decades later computers still do not think.
Is this because of the technological failings of the computer industry?


Review/Dance; Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane &amp; Company
LEAD: The question implicit in the New Contemporary Masters festival was answered on Thursday when the series formally opened at City Center for its two-week run.
Can ''downtown'' dance, with an esthetic that is often anti-establishment, be transplanted successfully to the dance equivalent of a Broadway theater?


Jean P. McGavin, Designer, Engaged to Daniel Eldridge
LEAD: Jean Pamela McGavin plans to wed Daniel Myers Eldridge in July, her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas Alfred McGavin of Arlington, Va., have announced.
Her fiance is the son of Ronnie Myers Eldridge of New York and the late Dr.
Lawrence O. Eldridge.
He is the stepson of Jimmy Breslin, the Daily News columnist.


Behind the Blinds at Levolor
LEAD: HANS PHILIP LORENTZEN, who has been cut off from the family business - Levolor Lorentzen Inc., the window-blind maker based in Parsippany, N. J. - talks about the family feuding that led to his disinheritance and to the company's disarray.


Correction
LEAD: An article in the Sports section last Sunday about Abdi Bile, the Somalian runner, gave an incorrect world record for the 400 meters.
The record, set by Harry Reynolds of Ohio State, is 44.10 seconds.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Louisville, Ky.; More Growth For Suburbs
LEAD: PLANS are advancing for a research and office park that would bring another 1.2 million square feet of commercial space to the rapidly growing suburbs near downtown.


Women's Trial Should Be on TV
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Morisot, a Neglected Impressionist
LEAD: Why don't we know Berthe Morisot better?
That question is raised by a show drawing record crowds to the Mount Holyoke College Art Museum here.
Titled ''Berthe Morisot - Impressionist,'' it is a rare major retrospective of the work of the vanguard French painter, relatively neglected by scholars and collectors and even scanted in comparison with that of the American expatriate Mary Cassatt, Morisot's contemporary and only woman colleague in the


IS AMERICA IN DECLINE?
LEAD: I cringe every time I hear respected historians sounding alarms whenever they perceive parallels with past events.
Those who see cycles have fertile imaginations or, worse, are using history to legitimize their social agendas.
Either way, they sound more like astrologers than scholars.


Miss Shane Is Married To Joseph F. O'Dea Jr.
LEAD: The marriage of Carol Ruth Shane, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Lawrence Shane of Swarthmore, Pa., to Joseph F. O'Dea Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Dea of Rydal, Pa., took place yesterday at the Swarthmore Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
J.
Barrie Shepherd and the Rev.
David W. Givey, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.


Campaigns, Cameras and Beauty Contests
LEAD: The presidential campaign is at a lull.
The candiates are taking a breather.
They are still on television every night, but they are not being covered or reported on with the saturation, intensity and breathlessness of last winter.
Vice President Bush has won the Republican nomination; almost everyone concedes the Democratic prize to Gov.


Laughton as Quasimodo: Epic Agony
LEAD: The following excerpt about the making of the 1939 version of ''The Hunchback of Notre Dame'' is from ''Charles Laughton: A Difficult Actor,'' by the British actor Simon Callow, to be published later this month by Grove Press.


Airport Carts
LEAD: To the Editor: I recently read about the introduction of Smarte Cartes at Kennedy International Airport.
While I sympathize with the porters who are losing tips, I am delighted that their monopoly has been broken.
It is, after all, the needs of the traveling public that should come first.


Johnson Does It Again For Celtics
LEAD: Remember Game 1 of the recent Knicks-Celtics series?
It was late in the third quarter at Boston Garden and the Knicks led, 74-71, when Dennis Johnson stepped forward as he has done so often during crunch time in the playoffs.


Girl and Kite: Spirits Soar as Feet Stay Put
LEAD: A 70-pound girl whose kite took her on an unscheduled flight in March returned today to her liftoff site.
This time, she managed to stay on the ground as she flew the first kite under a new set of safety rules.


COSMIC CONNECTIONS AND EROTIC SALVATION
LEAD:  THE COLLECTED POEMS OF OCTAVIO PAZ  1957-1987.
Edited by Eliot Weinberger.
Translated by Eliot Weinberger with  Elizabeth Bishop, Paul Blackburn,  Lysander Kemp, Denise Levertov,  John Frederick Nims, Mark Strand  and Charles Tomlinson.  669 pp.
New York:  New Directions. $37.50.


Boat Owners Ahoy! Welcome Ashore
LEAD: YOU'VE seen the reports about the increasing numbers of pleasure boats along the Connecticut coast, and what they portend.
Plans to build more marinas are viewed with alarm.
Mid-channel moorings raise legal questions.
Dredging proposals threaten bottom life.
But amid the worry about all that, is a little-noticed positive factor: people like me have acted to limit the potential problem.


Images From Winogrand's Mosaic of Life
LEAD: It would be no great exaggeration to say that over the last 10 years, the art of photography has split into two irreconcilable camps.
On one side are the post-modernists and their allies, who see photography as a particularly useful and provocative means of making images that address the issues of art in our times.


B. R. Williamson Jr. Weds Caroline Crook
LEAD: Caroline Costner Crook, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Cletus Beatrix Crook Jr. of Albemarle, N.C., was married there last evening to Benjamin Robert Williamson Jr., a son of Mr.
Williamson and Mrs.
Zack Hampton Bacon Jr., both of Raleigh, N.C.
The Rev.
Harold McDonald peformed the ceremony at the First Baptist


Shalala Finds Celebrity on New Turf
LEAD: Donna E. Shalala left the presidency of Hunter College in New York City to become Chancellor of the University of Wisconsin at Madison only four months ago, but she is already one of Madison's leading celebrities.


THE F.B.I. ON THE DEFENSIVE ONCE AGAIN
LEAD: THINGS WILL NEVER GET OUT OF hand again the way they did under Mr.
Hoover, but you can believe what your suspicions tell you: there is still a conservative, right-wing mentality among some agents working security.
Paranoia is rampant.
It scares me.''


BEST SELLERS: MAY 15, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
ZOYA, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $19.95.) One
woman's story, from St. Petersburg during the
Russian Revolution to Paris in the 1920's to
contemporary New York.


14 Steps To Billy's Future
LEAD: In this new Age of Aquarius, Joan Quigley missed her big chance to analyze the nation's most debated issue: What's in Billy Martin's future and did or did not the Yankee manager punch that dogie in the Texas topless bar?
The confidante of Nancy Reagan is not listed in the San Francisco phone book.


Verbatim; Sinatra on Berlin
LEAD: ' What makes an Irving Berlin song special?


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE IMPERFECT ART: Reflections on Jazz and Modern Culture.
By Ted Gioia. (Oxford University, $16.95.) This is an unusual jazz book for two reasons: it deals with the music not just on its own terms but in a broader cultural and esthetic context, and it was written by a musician.
Ted Gioia, a young pianist who teaches jazz history and performance at Stanford University, has chosen a formidable theme for his first book: ''how peculiar jazz is in comparison with other arts'' and what makes it that way.


THE REGION: City and State Plans; For Lack of Options, New York Gets Serious About Recycling
LEAD: THERE are only three things to do with trash: Dump it, burn it or find a new use for it.
For years, New York State and New York City have relied on the first two options, paying little more than lip service to the third.
But with landfills rapidly filling up, and pollution experts finding disturbing problems with incineration, officials are looking again at recycling.


CLOSE-MOUTHED BUT FLAMBOYANT
LEAD:  THE WICKEDEST WOMAN IN NEW YORK  Madame Restell, the Abortionist.
By Clifford Browder.
Illustrated. 217 pp.
Hamden, Conn.:  Archon Books/Shoe String Press. $25.


Outdoors; Better Habitat For Woodcock
LEAD: A reclusive bird that even the most dedicated hikers rarely see, the American woodcock, is in trouble, according to the Fish and Wildlife Service, which estimates that for the last decade and a half its numbers have been declining at the rate of about 2 per cent a year.


When Guests Invite Calamity
LEAD: THE REAL PROBLEM with entertaining is that it can't be done without guests.
And the real problem with guests is that you never know what they'll get up to.
They are, after all, only human - they can't be timed like roast beef, arranged like flowers or turned off like a cassette.
Sparkling house, fabulous food, a list of friends that sounds terrific - it can all come to nought if someone drinks too much, begins an argument or monopolizes the conversation.


Five Centuries Of Exports: Oriental Notions Of Western Taste
LEAD: Asian arts and crafts made over five centuries for export to the West -porcelains, silver, ivory, lacquer, furniture and paintings - are now increasingly appreciated for their historical and esthetic value.
Just why these art works and objects are of enduring interest can be seen in the impressive displays that went on view yesterday in the new Asian Export Art Wing of the Peabody Museum of Salem here.


Sara Carrier to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas Clarke Carrier of Minneapolis have announced the engagement of their daughter Sara Louise Carrier to Robert Lanston McKeown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Anderson McKeown of Short Hills, N.J.
Miss Carrier, a graduate of DePauw University, is enrolled in the master's program in nursing administration at Loyola University of Chicago.


Extra Burden On Hockey Officials
LEAD: Hockey is the most exciting game in the world but at the same time it is one of the most potentially violent.
This is particularly so given the speed at which it's played, the equipment used and the degree of physical contact.
More importantly, hockey, unlike other contact sports such as football and basketball, regulates, instead of prohibits, fighting.


'Strange Games' in Stamford
LEAD: IT is nice that Middle America has given its name to all that's average and respectable when it has been the stomping ground of so many weird artists.
One of the earliest and weirdest was Ivan Albright, who could make anything -from flesh to flowers - look as if it was in the last stages of putrefaction.


THE ALLURE OF THE OLDER WOMAN
LEAD: Noel Perrin may believe he is singing the praises of older women in his article ''The Allure of the Older Woman'' (About Men, April 17).
In reality, his left-handed homage only objectifies women in the familiar image of the eternal nurturer.
In his view: it is the woman who is counted on to assume the role of mother, teacher and therapist; the woman is merely a way station on the road to manhood; she herself is of consequence only insofar as she can help the younger man cultivate his own inchoate sense of self.


Democracy and Disappointment in Ecuador
LEAD: AFTER the tension stirred up by weeks of campaigning and rumors of a coup, Ecuadoreans were understandably relieved that the Presidential election last Sunday proved to be an anticlimax.
There was no violence, no cry of fraud, no rumble of tanks and, above all, no surprise victory for Abdala Bucaram Ortiz, a rabble-rousing populist who had come to personify political instability here.


JOYCE, NORA AND THE WORD KNOWN TO ALL MEN
LEAD: ''Chance,'' James Joyce once said, ''furnishes me what I need.
I am like a man who stumbles along; my foot strikes something, I bend over and it is exactly what I want.''


No One Has Proved Yet That There's Nothing to Astrology
LEAD: To the Editor:


Crusty Voice Quitting After 24 Years
LEAD: After 24 years as the sole operator of the only radio station in this quaint fishing community, Simon Geller has sold WVCA-FM with considerable glee and eager visions of the apartment he hopes to buy on Manhattan's Upper East Side.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are in a struggle that doesn't have a timetable.
It is a long process.''  - Dr.
Mahdi Abdul Hadi,  on the Arab uprising  in the occupied territories.  [ 16:3. ]


Psychiatrist and Patient: How Close?
LEAD: For Betty Sprague, falling in love with her psychiatrist, with what she believes was his encouragement, was no cure for her depression and emotional distress.


IN THE NATION: Foreign Investors Step Into More Active Roles
LEAD: They came, they saw, they bought.
From the beaches of Hawaii and Florida to the downtowns of Seattle and New York, foreign companies, usually as investors but increasingly as construction partners and independent developers, are seeking new opportunities in hotels and resorts, malls and office buildings.


Correction
LEAD: An article in the Sports section last Sunday about Abdi Bile, the Somalian runner, gave an incorrect world record for the 400 meters.
The record, set by Harry Reynolds of Ohio State, is 44.10 seconds.


Correction
LEAD: An article on May 1 about an increase in self-directed blood donations misstated a statistic attributed to the Red Cross.
The statement should have read: ''The Red Cross said the rate of blood donors testing positive for the AIDS antibody is 1 in 20,000,'' not a 1 in 20,000 chance of receiving an AIDS-infected pint of blood.


COLUMBIA RECOVERED
LEAD: IN MANY WAYS IT LOOKED LIKE A TYPICAL college reunion.
People who hadn't seen each other in 20 years were embracing, trading stories of their lives, peering at snapshots of their children - or at the children themselves, for there were lots of kids along: this was a generation that had its children late.


Forecast of '89 Congress: The Democrats, Again
LEAD: Democrats seem likely to retain control of Congress this fall, whatever happens in the Presidential election.


Mecham Wins Spot at G.O.P. Convention
LEAD: Former Gov.
Evan Mecham was elected today as a delegate to the Republican National Convention in August.


School Clinic Plan Draws Opposition
LEAD: CONCERNED that Long Island adolescents are not receiving proper health care, officials are considering opening health clinics in some schools.
But many of the proposals are running into opposition, including from the Roman Catholic Diocese of Rockville Centre, because they would offer counseling on contraception.


IRAQ HITS 5 SHIPS IN PERSIAN GULF
LEAD: Iraqi planes bombed an offshore terminal in the Strait of Hormuz today and set fire to five tankers, including two of the world's largest, in a stepped-up drive to destroy Iran's oil lifeline.


Cost of Reviving Draft Put at $1 Billion a Year
LEAD: A consulting company advising the Defense Department has concluded that it would cost the United States more than $1 billion a year to return to military conscription while maintaining a force as qualified and effective as that of today.


Cleaning Fireplaces
LEAD: MOST fireplace owners know the importance of having chimneys cleaned regularly.
Doing so prevents the buildup of sooty deposits inside them, which can cause a fire, and also keeps fireplaces functioning efficiently and with less smoke.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  O'KEEFFE PORTRAYED  Eileen Heckart portrays one of America's most celebrated artists in ''A Conversation With Georgia O'Keeffe'' on Friday in Westport.


Syrians Appear Ready to Move Into Southern Beirut
LEAD: A column of Syrian tanks heading toward Beirut yesterday on the coastal highway.
Armored forces gathered on the approaches to the southern suburbs, apparently preparing to move in to try to end nine days of fighting between the Shiite Amal militia and the Iranian-backed Party of God. (AP) Page 16.


French Telepolitics Lessons
LEAD: Francois Mitterrand's strategy has never changed, says Claude de Kemoularia, a French banker, former ambassador and astute political observer.
He analyzes the plan in four stages: first, to create an electable alternative to the old Gaullist majority; then to smash the Communist Party; then reform a Socialist base into a non-Marxist social-democratic party; and finally, to smash the right, leaving a solid foundation for France to be governed from left-center.


No Headline
LEAD:  We gotta get out while we're  young  'Cause tramps like us baby  we were born to run.  - Bruce Springsteen, ''Born to Run''


Time to Get the Picnic Basket Ready
LEAD: WITH Memorial Day coming soon, it is time to think about foods suitable for summer picnics.
Sandwiches and salads are the obvious choices.
Tastes in sandwiches can run the gamut from the classic chicken or tuna salad, deli meats and peanut butter to stylish contemporary concepts such as mozzarella, basil and sun-dried tomatoes on crusty


More Monkey Business
LEAD: The yacht Monkey Business, which ferried Gary Hart to the Bahamas with Donna Rice, was seized today when Coast Guard officers found a gram of marijuana on it, officials said.
The 82-foot yacht was boarded in a routine search about 22 miles northwest of the Bahamian island of Bimini, said Petty Officer Dan Vogeley.


Israel Opens Gaza After 29-Hour Blockade
LEAD: The Israeli Army reopened the occupied Gaza Strip today after a 29-hour closing imposed to prevent Palestinians from reaching Jerusalem for prayers on the last sabbath of Ramadan, the Moslem holy month.


Halpin Steers a Middle Course
LEAD: THE Democratic administration of Suffolk County Executive Patrick G. Halpin is taking shape after four months and is leaving an impact on a government of 12,000 civil servants and a county population of 1.3 million.


Political Marketing; Quest for Ideal Campaign: No Tears , No Domestic Spats, No Candidate
LEAD: For many political consultants in the age of electronic politics and constant questions about the character of candidates, the perfect campaign is one with a fat budget, a compelling message and no candidate.


After 12 Days, Righetti Reappears and Gets Save
LEAD: In the days that passed between games in Chicago and New York - between his last failed pitching appearance and yesterday's shining success - Dave Righetti sat in the Yankee bullpen and wondered.
There had been a string of lost chances, a succession of nights without work, and a tender left elbow that had left him unavailable for a time.


Diana McCabe Is Married
LEAD: At St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York, Diana O'Rourke McCabe and Mark Boyd Jacoby, who are partners in Philip Colleck of London Ltd., a New York antiques firm specializing in English furniture, were married yesterday by the Rev.
Andrew J. W. Mullins.
The bride is the daughter of Thomas O'Rourke of Naples, Fla., and the late Ann L.


Yes, the County Still Has Land for Sale
LEAD: LAND, the lack of it, the price of it, the restrictions on it, is the major cause of the soaring cost of new construction in the county, say the brokers who deal in land sales.
The most frequently heard aphorism when land is discussed is ''when it's gone, they can't make anymore.'' That sentiment was recently voiced by Anthony Cassetta, head of Cassetta Frank, a Hawthorn-based concern that specializes solely in land sales.


Affair of State Is Captivating Venezuelans
LEAD: With Venezuelans as transfixed as they might be by a steamy television soap opera, a long-running drama of passion, politics and power set in the Presidential Palace of Miraflores here is at last building towards its denouement.


PATTERNS OF ADDICTION
LEAD: By divorcing addiction from the circumstances in which it occurs, James McKearney's research does a disservice to addicts and to those who try to help them.
There are understandable reasons why people may turn to drugs when they feel unable to cope with economic hardship, stress, psychological or physical abuse or discrimination.


Repairs to Be Made on Two Key Bridges
LEAD: REPAIRS on the George Washington Bridge and the New Jersey Turnpike's Laderman Bridge over the Passaic River will restrict late-night traffic this week.


How Good Is Medicine?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pope Begins Visit to Peru; Guerrillas Stage Offensive
LEAD: Pope John Paul II began a 40-hour visit to Peru today amid a rising wave of political violence by Maoist guerrillas who have opened a terrorist offensive to exploit the Pope's presence.


Answering The Mail
LEAD:  Q. We removed the wallpaper from our bathroom ceiling and walls, then painted with a water-base semigloss.
Almost immediately the paint started cracking and peeling.
We hired a painter who scraped and sanded, then painted with an oil paint, but now the walls and ceiling are flaking again.
Can you help me solve this problem?


Homey Italian Fare in Darien
LEAD: EVERY diner likes to have in his repertory a pleasant, inexpensive restaurant as a cozy retreat for an informal meal with the family.
Alla Bettola in the Goodwives Shopping Plaza in Darien is such a place.


Flavor Lives In His Barbecue
LEAD: WHEN the 80-year-old founder and namesake of Arthur Bryant's Barbecue, a landmark restaurant in Kansas City, Mo., died in December 1982, devoted customers across the nation wondered what would happen to the restaurant they had come to love for its hickory-smoked ribs, beef, ham, mutton and renowned spicy sauce.


PERSPECTIVES: The 10-Year Plan; Broadening the City's Housing Agenda
LEAD: IN contrast to the paltry role of the Federal Government and New York State in housing, New York City has an ambitious long-term housing production program.
It relies on a modest amount of state support, assumes no Federal contribution and depends upon huge amounts of spending from the city's capital budget.


Albany Board Seeking a Law Barring Brokers as Assessors
LEAD: To prevent conflicts of interest, the State Board of Equalization and Assessment is pressing for legislation that would bar real-estate assessors from holding jobs as real-estate brokers or appraisers in their home towns.


Giamatti Chose to Ignore Rose's Sacred Right
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel Tube Is Closed After Truck Mishap
LEAD: The westbound tube of the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel was closed for more than six hours yesterday after a dump truck ripped down about 200 feet of ceiling tiles, the authorities said.


Lilias Bostwick Married on L.I. To J. S. Noesen
LEAD: At St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I., Lilias Margarite Bostwick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Bostwick Jr. of Locust Valley, was married yesterday to John Stanley Noesen, a son of Nancy Noesen of Flat Rock, N.C., and the late Stanley J. Noesen.
The Rev.
Charles G.


Was Pete Rose's Suspension Fair?
LEAD: One of the purposes of a referee in a sports event is to establish and maintain order on the field.
Mr.
Giamatti is well founded in his refusal to tolerate ''any potentially injurious harassment of any kind of the umpires.'' However, the same sense of order which protects an umpire must restrain him.


50 Radio Stations to Join in an AIDS Broadcast
LEAD: IN SUPPORT of an effort by 50 of the state's more than 80 radio stations to simultaneously broadcast a phone-in AIDS television show, Governor Kean has declared Thursday as ''New Jersey AIDS Helpline Day.''


Killer Bees? They're No Joke in Texas
LEAD: Three or four times a day, panicked residents here telephone local pest control agencies with a chilling message: the killer bees have arrived.


Russians Uncertain
LEAD: For two star hockey forwards who have spent their careers as low-paid members of the Soviet Army, Vladimir Krutov and Igor Larionov should presumably be eager for the chance to make $1 million playing in the National Hockey League.


Amnesia, of a Sort, Is Widespread
LEAD: AT the height of the Spring Comdex computer show in Atlanta last week, officials of AST Research Inc. discovered, to their horror, that they had forgotten to lock up their memory boards.
Sometime during a cocktail reception in the AST showroom Tuesday night, someone walked up to a display of the memory cards and slipped out eight slender banks of memory chips, each about the size of a cigarette.


Mamet's Hollywood Is a School for Scoundrels
LEAD: In an essay entitled, ''A Playwright in Hollywood,'' David Mamet said that he was not asking for altruism on the part of movie producers, ''just a little creative venality.'' His uproarious new play, ''Speed-the-Plow,'' makes it clear that hypocrisy and greed are no assurance of profit and that art is less than a by-product in Hollywood.


Cleaning Fireplaces
LEAD: MOST fireplace owners know the importance of having chimneys cleaned regularly.
Doing so prevents the buildup of sooty deposits inside them, which can cause a fire, and also keeps fireplaces functioning efficiently and with less smoke.


THERE WAS NO 'INDIAN SIDE'
LEAD:  EMPIRE OF FORTUNE  Crowns, Colonies, and Tribes in the  Seven Years War in America.
By Francis Jennings.
Illustrated. 520 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $27.50.


In Russia, Some Ideas Are Still More Equal Than Others
LEAD: THEY are leftists and libertarians, democrats and anarchists, believers in God or the avant-garde, in Hare Krishna or simply in human rights.
They are divided by generational gaps and personal rivalries, tactical disputes and political inspirations, not to mention a vast geography and unreliable telephone service.


Safety in Childbirth
LEAD: ADVOCATES for a more natural birth experience have had a major impact on the hospital care of mothers and newborns in the last decade.


Honoring the Phonautograph
LEAD: Edison's ''talking machine'' with its tinfoil cylinder uttered its first croaking words in 1877.
But the flat phonograph record as it is known today came a little later.
It was first heard a hundred years ago, almost to the day.


The Lost Skyscrapers of Bygone New York
LEAD: IT is easy to point out the important skyscrapers on the New York skyline - like the Woolworth (1913), tallest in the world until 1930; the Chrysler (1930), the Art Deco masterpiece, and the Empire State (1931), which superseded the Chrysler as the tallest.
But there are also buildings significant in the history of the skyscraper that one never sees on a walking tour or a Circle


Correction
LEAD: An article on page 9 of the Travel section today about the steamer Mount Washington, which sails on Lake Winnipesaukee in New Hampshire, omits the address and telephone number for information about the vessel's summer schedule and fares.
It is available from Winnipesaukee Flagship, Post Office Box 367, Weirs Beach, N.H.


A Farewell to Toyland
LEAD: I REMEMBER VIVIDLY the last time I played with my toy soldiers.
It was a wet summer afternoon a week or two before the start of eighth grade, and I was 12 years old.
Most of that summer had been spent playing baseball, exploring Philadelphia's vast Pennypack Park and pedaling my bicycle wildly through the neighborhood streets playing ''ball tag on bikes.


TALKS IN MANAGUA FRUITLESS, INDIAN REBELS SAY
LEAD: Leaders of Miskito Indian rebels failed to reach agreement with the Sandinista Government after six days of talks here and the negotiations were called off on Saturday night.


WHEN GOD INTERRUPTS THE BARBECUE
LEAD:  REVELATION  By Peggy Payne.  314 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


POSTING: Stamford Condos; Victorian Gables Among Glass Boxes
LEAD: A few blocks north of the jumble of glass boxes in the office district of Stamford, Conn., says Leonord W. Cotton, Grove Street was once lined with Victorian gingerbread.
Not all the houses were lost.
Mr.
Cotton, president of Cotlyn Enterprises, patterned the nine buildings of his $7.3 million Cambridge Court, a 25-unit condominium colony he is building at No.


Price Tags on Art
LEAD: To the Editor:


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Illusion and Reality  We travel not to places, but to illusions, which make every arrival both an anticlimax and a beginning.
Here is Mary Morris in Mexico, from ''Nothing to Declare: Memoirs of a Woman Traveling Alone'' (Houghton Mifflin).


Miss Coles, Stage Manager, Marries Matthew Aldredge
LEAD: Alison Reed Coles, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael H. Coles of Larchmont, N.Y., and Shelter Island, L.I., and Matthew Warren Aldredge, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
George N. Aldredge of Dallas, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady of the Isle in Shelter Island by the Rev.
Virgil


Step by Step, Lendl Moves Out of the Shadows
LEAD: For almost 11 years now, Ivan Lendl has been known mostly for his demeanor on a tennis court, brutally efficient and businesslike, lacking real passion, those terms all becoming synonymous with his name.
They painted a one-dimensional portrait, but it was all that Lendl was comfortable revealing about himself, the only personality traits the fans and news media were allowed to see.


What's a Spa For? Keeping in Shape or Yakking Away
LEAD: ''DO YOU have varicose veins in your legs?'' a fellow middle-aged spa member asks as she enters the whirlpool.
I am submerged up to my neck in hot, swirling delight.
Flustered and annoyed, I mutter: ''Well . . .
I do have a few little spidery veins around the knees.''


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: A Welter of Weeklies ''IT'S the talk of the industry,'' said a former editor of a Long Island weekly newspaper.


DATA BANK: May 15, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
I Q'88
IV Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,902.6
$3,880.8
$3,735.2
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.3
4.8
4.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
IV Q'87
III Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$144.2
$141.9
$144.2


'Voice of the Prairie' At Becton in Teaneck
LEAD: REMEMBER radio?
Sitting around the console was a time of listening, of paying sustained attention.


Headliners; Post Time
LEAD: The New York Post, which has had several editorial incarnations in its 187-year history, will now be aiming for ''the highest possible journalistic standards and practices.'' So said the newspaper's new owner, Peter S. Kalikow, last week in announcing the appointment of Jane Amsterdam as the Post's new editor.


For the Adventurous Griller
LEAD: SINCE MANKIND HAS BEEN cooking food over glowing embers at least since Prometheus, the technique, by all rights, should be at a very high level.
But there is one major impediment to achieving this degree of skill - that typically American failing, lack of patience.


Gallaudet U. Praised for Successful Protests
LEAD: For the first time in the 124-year history of Gallaudet University, a deaf president and a deaf chairman of the board presided over commencement exercises for the graudates at the nation's only college for the hearing impaired.


No-Lead Gas
LEAD: To the Editor: I have noticed in several letters that many readers are going to Europe via Icelandair to Luxembourg.
We have just returned by this routing and enjoyed it very much.


Ford's Presidency: Brief but Well Run
LEAD: Throughout this summer, Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis will strive to define the kind of Presidency they would create if given the chance.
While voters undoubtedly have their own ideas about the ideal Presidency, I would like to suggest a standard of comparison: the Ford Administration.


Congress Plans Sanctions to Force Change in Haiti
LEAD: Six months after a massacre halted presidential elections in Haiti, United States officials and lawmakers say that there has been no progress toward democracy in the impoverished Caribbean country and that Congress will take new steps to force change.


TALKING: Refinancing; Bigger Is Better For Co-ops
LEAD: THE refinancing of a co-op building's mortgage poses some tricky issues for its board - when to do it, how to find a good lender, how much to borrow and for how long.


Miss Mullen Has Wedding
LEAD: At St.
Bridget's Roman Catholic Church in Cornwall Bridge, Conn., Elaine Patricia Mullen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter P. Mullen of Bronxville, N.Y., and Warren, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Thomas McCreanor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas C. McCreanor of London.
The Rev.
Randall Blackall performed the ceremony.


IF YOU'RE THINKING OF LIVING IN: Pearl River
LEAD: A YOUNG boy parks his bicycle and enters a pizza parlor on Central Avenue in Pearl River, but does not lock the bike.
In fact, he does not even have a lock. ''What do I need a lock for?'' he says in response to a question.


Time to Get the Picnic Basket Ready
LEAD: WITH Memorial Day coming soon, it is time to think about foods suitable for summer picnics.
Sandwiches and salads are the obvious choices.
Tastes in sandwiches can run the gamut from the classic chicken or tuna salad, deli meats and peanut butter to stylish contemporary concepts such as mozzarella, basil and sun-dried tomatoes on crusty


Transporting Hazardous Material
LEAD: BEHIND today's headlines, the difference between a 10-line story about a tie-up on the turnpike and front-page coverage of a major disaster often is determined by the ability of local emergency service personnel to respond quickly.


Preston Bastress Weds
LEAD: Jane Preston Bastress, a daughter of Dr.
E.
Karl Bastress of Washington and Anne Wasson Harney of Lincoln and East Chop, Mass., was married yesterday to Johan Pieter Westenburg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Johannes Westenburg of Windsor, Conn.
Betty A. Bryant, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at Lambert's Cove Inn in West Tisbury, Mass.


Barbara McClenahan Weds Evan Sheppard
LEAD: At St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York, Barbara Leith McClenahan, the daughter of Marilyn Van Syckel McClenahan of New York and the late Richard L. McClenahan Jr., was married yesterday to Evan Hays Sheppard, the son of Sarah Frances Hays of Madison, Va., and Michael Bazel Sheppard of Washington.


Cost of Borrowing Is Heading Upward
LEAD: The prime rate went up by half a percentage point, to 9 percent.
After weeks of increases in other rates, the move by banks to raise their base lending rate was no surprise.
Nevertheless, the financial markets took it as confirmation of a discouraging trend.
At 9 percent, the prime is where it was before the stock market crash of October.


The Supermole
LEAD: A suitable epitaph for H.A.R. (Kim) Philby was written long ago, in 1947, by Rebecca West.
In ''The Meaning of Treason,'' she wrote of the peculiar allure of the world of spies and counterspies:


For Summit Planners, Image Counts
LEAD: During the four-day summit meeting in Moscow later this month, President Reagan is expected to leave the confines of official government buildings at least three times to mix with Soviet citizens who reflect the country's changing religious and intellectual climate.


Dating Services Surge in a Busy Age
LEAD: DEBORAH and Leonard, Leigh and John and Sue and Mark met through dating services in Connecticut.
Deborah and Leonard are to be married in June; Sue and Mark, in October, Leigh and John were wed a few years ago and now have a toddler.


Leasing Brokers
LEAD: To the Editor:


John C. Bullitt, 62, an Ex-Treasury Official
LEAD: John C. Bullitt, an Assistant Secretary of the Treasury under President Kennedy, died of cancer yesterday at his farm in Princeton, N.J.
He was 62 years old.


School Ruling Challenged
LEAD: THE TOWN of Englewood Cliffs, which wants to stop sending students to the heavily black and Hispanic Dwight Morrow High School in neighboring Engelwood, has filed with the state's Commissioner of Education its objections to a decision recommending that it not be allowed to pull out.


Judith Landzberg, A Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Judith E. Landzberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham H. Landzberg of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., and Laurence Matthew Friedman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Friedman of Bedford Hills, N.Y., and St.
Croix, V.I., were married yesterday.
Judge Kenneth H. Lange of Westchester County Court performed the ceremony at the Estherwood estate in Dobbs Ferry, N


Miss Vincent to Wed William F. Gerry
LEAD: Gay Caroline Vincent and William Farrish Gerry, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward H. Gerry of Mill Neck, L.I., plan to marry in September, the future bride's parents, Elizabeth von Furstenberg Reynolds of New York and Guy A. Vincent of Sherman Oaks, Calif., have announced.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Brokers' Surveys; Why Vacancy Rates Vary Widely Within Markets
LEAD: REAL ESTATE BROKERAGES that publish office-market surveys are an unruly bunch - setting their separate rules, crunching their separate numbers and releasing a jumble of conflicting market indicators.


Temple Is Upset In Regatta Final
LEAD: Florida Institute of Technology ended Temple University's five-year reign as the men's varsity heavyweight rowing champion of the Dad Vail Regatta, defeating the Owls today in the eight-oared final to win the Tom Conville Cup.


Georgia's Onion Without Tears
LEAD: DUE west of coastal Savannah, among pine forests and dusty crossroad towns with names like Santa Claus, Stanleys Store, Jordan, Ohoopee and Daisy, the flat, flourishing fields yield a mild, succulent delicacy.
The Vidalia onion - promoted as having a higher sugar content than Coca-Cola, another famous product of


Laborers Learn the Hazards of Asbestos
LEAD: MIKE DILLON remembers the last time he handled asbestos.


THE ALLURE OF THE OLDER WOMAN
LEAD: Noel Perrin's article omitted all the reasons that my husband married me.
Twelve years my junior, he succumbed to my ''beauty, wit, awesome sexuality and joyous nature'' (his words, not mine).
LUCY GARNETT  New York, N.Y.


Nantucket's Lightship Baskets
LEAD: OF COURSE you've seen them, hanging casually from the arms of fashionable and stylish women on the Cape, in the Hamptons, on Fifth Avenue and in Palm Beach.
To most people in America these curious little rattan handbags with woven covers and swinging handles are known as Nantucket baskets, but to people on


'Custom Tailored' for Immunity Without Side Effects
LEAD: THE new generation of genetically engineered vaccines, unlike their earlier counterparts, does not contain live or killed disease organisms, which have been linked to side effects.
Instead, they make use of only portions of infectious organisms, like surface proteins called antigens, which arouse immunity but seldom cause side effects.


Holocaust: Repetition Dulls the Horror
LEAD: Often the very person who deplores the depiction of violence in movies and on television endorses the vivid recounting of the ghastly horrors of the Holocaust to children.
Cui bono?
What would we have done to prevent the Holocaust if we had remembered the Inquisition?


Hanoi, Citing Famine Fears, Seeks Emergency Aid
LEAD: As many as three million people in northern Vietnam may be facing starvation, according to Hanoi's official radio and to reports from international aid organizations, which have been asked for emergency food supplies.


Savoring the Season's Fresh Tastes: In Desserts
LEAD: EVEN AT THEIR SIMPLEST, DESSERTS are especially dazzling in summer, thanks to an abundance of fresh fruit.
For decoration and seasoning, there is also a generous harvest of delicate blossoms and feathery herbs.


Mears Moves To Pole Spot
LEAD: Rick Mears muscled into the pole position for the 72d Indianapolis 500, setting one- and four-lap speed records today as he mastered a slippery track.
The team owned by Roger


25% OF RUSSIANS IN AFGHAN FORCE WILL LEAVE IN MAY
LEAD: The commander of Soviet military forces in Afghanistan said today that a quarter of Soviet troops would be pulled out of the country by the end of this month, and he vowed that their withdrawal would not be greatly impeded by attacks from insurgents.


SHE CONSIDERED BOYS FOR ABOUT 5 MINUTES
LEAD:  AFTER DELORES  By Sarah Schulman.  158 pp. New York:  E. P. Dutton. $16.95.


A Fall Wedding For Ruth Lebed
LEAD: The engagement of Ruth Lebed to Peter Kevin Rofes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Rofes of Commack, L.I., and Boynton Beach, Fla., has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Meyer Lebed of Woodbourne, N.Y., and Delray Beach, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.





Jazz Festival Tickets Are to Go on Sale Today
LEAD: Tickets go on sale today for the JVC Jazz Festival New York, which is to run from June 24 through July 3, with more than 800 artists taking part in over 40 events.


Book Discloses That Reagan Planned To Kill National Endowment for Arts
LEAD: The Reagan Administration planned to eliminate the National Endowment for the Arts when it came into office in 1981, but dropped the plan when its special task force on the arts and humanities discovered ''the needs involved and the benefits of past assistance,'' according to a forthcoming book by Livingston


Amy Avellone to Wed Dr. Jeffrey J. Viscardi
LEAD: Amy Barrett Avellone, an assistant account executive with Kallir, Philips, Ross in New York, and Dr.
Jeffrey Joseph Viscardi, a resident in ophthalmology at the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn, plan to be married in September.


Ris Miller Is Wed To James Howard
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of St.
Stephen the Martyr in Edina, Minn., Marissa Harris Miller, a daughter of William R. Miller of New York and Lawrence, L.I., and the late Nancy McClain Harris Miller of Paris, Ill., was married yesterday to James William Howard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Howard of Gill, Colo.


A Fan's Note
LEAD: To the Editor:


Liza Donnelly, an Artist, Is Wed to Michael Maslin
LEAD: Liza Donnelly, a writer and illustrator of children's books for Scholastic Inc., was married yesterday to Michael Maslin, a cartoonist for The New Yorker, at the Oswego Friends Meeting House in Moore Mills, N.Y.


Strategy for a Weekend of Easy Meals
LEAD: THERE ARE TWO KINDS OF COUNTRY-house hosts: the worriers, who plan every last detail in order to be calm when the guests arrive, and the naturally relaxed, who prefer to plan menus as they're pushing their shopping carts down the supermarket aisles and their friends are pulling into the driveway.


100 Years Old, And the Ship's Still Steaming
LEAD: ''BEAUTIFUL water in a high place'' - the most commonly accepted translation of the Indian name Winnipesaukee -is on target in describing the sprawling New Hampshire lake.
With its lovely vistas of mountains and 274 habitable islands, Lake Winnipesaukee has been attracting vacationers for two centuries.


The Wrong Villains on Wall Street; Quick Fixes Distract From Real Reforms
LEAD: Pressed by corporate clients, Salomon Brothers and Morgan Stanley &amp; Company finally caved last week.
They announced that they, along with three other large firms, would give up program trading for their own accounts.
This delighted Wall Streeters, desperate for ways to prove that the demon had been slain and that it's safe for investors to test the market waters again.


Lackawaxen's Favorite Sons
LEAD: IN Lackawaxen, Pa., an unprepossessing little town on the banks of the Upper Delaware River, stand monuments to two very different kinds of genius.
Downstream from the pebbly point where the Lackawaxen River tumbles through a murmuring riffle and is lost into the broad Delaware, there looms a bridge of obvious antiquity and anomalous design, its three midstream stone piers draped with a graceful sweep of cables and spanned by wood framing for high side walls.


High Inflation Is Weakening Turkish Chief
LEAD: The newspapers here are no friends of Prime Minister Turgut Ozal, and so it seemed the norm when an editor compared the Turkish leader's fortunes to those of a fairy-tale magician well past the hour when miracles turn to mush.


Sharing a Passion to Make Things
LEAD: TWO artists I knew and respected died recently.
One was internationally known, Louise Nevelson, age 88; the other, little known but much appreciated, Charles Balth, 95.


Gay Rights Groups Question Dukakis on Foster Care Issue
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis was sharply questioned and at one point was hissed in an appearance before members of a gay rights political coalition here today.


Rare Film Said to Be Imperiled
LEAD: When the American Film Festival is held in Manhattan May 23-28, a film conservator from this Bergen County borough will be there, as he says, ''yelling,'' ''waving red flags'' and ''putting up signs.''


Pentagon Agrees to Curtail Electromagnetic Experiment
LEAD: The Defense Department has settled a lawsuit brought by two environmental groups by agreeing to curtail research into a high-power electrical phenomenon, electromagnetic pulse.


POSTING: Urban Food Court; 5-in-1 Downtown
LEAD: In six months, the former American Bank Note building will be a ''department store restaurant.'' The five-story Corinithian-columned structure at Broad and Beaver Streets in lower Manhattan will be gutted to make way for four fast-food outlets on the ground floor and a full-service restaurant on the second and third floors.


THE NATION: Chrysler and the U.A.W.; A Union Pact to Restrict Executive Privilege
LEAD: MANY corporations have tried to become more efficient by imitating Japanese management techniques, but the rules for compensating executives have remained strictly American.
In the United States auto industry, top executives were paid 12 to 18 times as much as the average blue-collar worker, according to a University of Michigan study published in 1984.


Croquet, A Parade And Food: A Fair Day
LEAD: The Ninth Avenue Festival is the time when a New Yorker's fancy turns to strolling up and down the street, eating messy food from a flimsy plate.


Irish and British End An Extradition Dispute
LEAD: After a five-month disagreement over procedures, Ireland has agreed to resume extraditing people suspected of terrorist acts to Britain, the British Attorney General's office said Friday.


Caribbean
LEAD: To the Editor: In your ''Summertime: Savings Time'' box about off-season rates in the Caribbean (Travel Advisory, March 27), 9 out of 12 of the hotels listed were over $100 a night.
My wife and I would like to point out that there are quite a few small hotels in the Caribbean, including ours, the Waves at Cane Bay on St.


U.S. Opens a New Center for Homeless Veterans
LEAD: The Veterans Administration formally opened in Brooklyn the city's first Federally financed drop-in center for homeless veterans, stepping up its commitment to the former servicemen.


On Exhibit: Example of Grass Roots Restoration
LEAD: Margaret Mead Green is a scraggly strip of city-owned parkland on Columbus Avenue between 79th and 81st Streets, a sort of side yard to the American Museum of Natural History.
Its grass has been rubbed bare by the dozens of dogs and their owners who use it regularly.
Tree roots are exposed.
The soil is so compacted that when it rains the park becomes a huge mud puddle.


Family Finds Cocaine In a Box of Macaroni
LEAD: A box of Kraft macaroni whose cheese packet contained a pink balloon filled with cocaine was found by a Watertown family in what officials believe is an isolated incident.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  'MACK AND MABEL'


Pamela Webb Married To Matthew B. Dawson
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Epiphany in New York, Pamela Webb, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bryan Webb of New York, was married yesterday to Matthew Brayton Dawson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Dawson of Dover, Mass.
The Rev.
Ernest E. Hunt 3d performed the ceremony.


A City Clambake
LEAD: THE TRADITIONAL NEW ENGLAND-style clambake is a labor-intensive but rewarding ritual that I usually perform once a year on the beach at my home on eastern Long Island.
City dwellers, of course, do not have the opportunity to stage this oceanside event.
But there is no reason why the essence of a clambake cannot be simulated by assembling the ingredients in a deep pot or steamer and cooking them on a stove top.


Ex-Justice in Vermont Cited for Misconduct
LEAD: The State Judicial Conduct Board has asked the Vermont Supreme Court to discipline a retired Associate Justice of the court for five instances of judicial misconduct, all involving a colleague.


Was Pete Rose's Suspension Fair?
LEAD: The excessiveness of Pete Rose's suspension is appalling.
Mr.
Giamatti has demonstrated that he is not qualified to serve as league president.
PETER MOUND  Secaucus, N.J.


Becca Davies Has Wedding
LEAD: Dorothy Rebecca Stewart Davies, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Davies of New York and Redding Ridge, Conn., was married yesterday to Jeremy Rafael Kramer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Kramer of West Hartford, Conn.
The Rev.
Heidi Hudnut-Beumlen, a Presbyterian minister, and Rabbi Charles D.


James S. Mooney, 66, Ex-Police Inspector
LEAD: James S. Mooney, a retired New York City Police Inspector, died after a heart attack Tuesday at North Shore Hospital on Long Island.
He was 66 years old and lived in Bayside, Queens.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: IT'S not the most wonderful feeling in the world, but it's pretty great.
It happens after a morning, afternoon or complete day of what is loosely called free time, or even after several hours stolen at the end of a workday.
You've finally done a lot of things that you've been meaning to do for months and put off for various reasons or that you knew you'd hate to do and therefore didn't.


No One Has Proved Yet That There's Nothing to Astrology
LEAD: To the Editor:


Counselors Have Fun On the Job
LEAD: Derrick Lopez, a tall, brawny 22-year-old teacher at a private boarding school in Westchester County, cried in front of some of his own students as he led a recruiting session this year for Fresh Air Fund camp counselors.


Joy and Fear at an Eighth-Grade Graduation
LEAD: NEXT month, I will attend the eighth-grade graduation of my 265 sons and daughters.
They will march ceremoniously before the crowd and receive diplomas.


Affirmative Action Upholds Academic Values; Small World
LEAD: To the Editor:


Devils Absorb Painful Lesson
LEAD: After a season of hurtling past obstacles that had stymied them before, suddenly all that really mattered to the Devils tonight was the one leap they failed to make.


IN THE NATION: Wilmington, Del.; An All-Suite Hotel to Meet Needs Of a Growing Bank Community
LEAD: WORK is progressing here on the city's first major hotel construction in a decade, the Pickett Suite Hotel, a $28 million, 230-suite accommodation just three blocks from the reigning hostelry, the Hotel du Pont.


BACKUP WHERE IT BELONGS
LEAD: A musical arrangement in pop is like air: It's necessary for survival, and it's usually only noticed when it's bad.
The topography of a composition, propped up by varying rhythms, dynamic changes, instrumental combinations or a vicious, prominently displayed bass line is constantly overlooked, rarely questioned and laden with significance.


Newark's New Terminal: Relief Is in Sight
LEAD: LIFE at Newark Airport may never be like an afternoon in the lounge of a deluxe hotel, but the opening of a new terminal should be a first step toward taking the airport out of the bottom of the class.
It has been lodged there for 15 months or more because of the pressure on the main terminal used by Continental Airlines.


Elizabeth Scott to Marry David B. Allison in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Frederickk Corya Scott of New Cannan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizeabeth Anne Scott, to David Bowers Allison, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Leslie Allison of New Canaan.
A June wedding is planned.


Just Distinctions
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  GOOD-BYE, MY WISHING STAR  By Vicki Grove.  128 pp.
New York:  G. P. Putnam's Sons.
BORROWED CHILDREN  By George Ella Lyon.  154 pp.
New York:  Orchard Books/  Franklin Watts. $12.95.  (Ages 10 to 12)


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  STORMING THE MAGIC KINGDOM: Wall Street, the Raiders, and the Battle for Disney, by John Taylor. (Ballantine, $9.95.) Almost from the beginning, the Disney entertainment empire was bitterly divided as the disciples of Walt lorded it over the followers of his lesser-known brother, Roy.
John Taylor's story of how Roy's son took revenge in the early 1980's, with the help of Ivan Boesky and other financiers, is ''a tale of raw corporate power,'' David McClintick said in The Book Review last year.


PERSONAL FINANCEA Cautionary Look at Affinity Cards
LEAD: FOR about a year now, banks and other financial institutions that issue credit cards have been pushing cards with a cause.
These so-called affinity cards are issued in conjunction with a nonprofit organization, everything from the League of Women Voters to the National Rifle Association.
Under the typical arrangement, the nonprofit group gets a small cut each time the cards are used to charge a purchase.


Upholding Haute Italian Standards
LEAD: JERICHO'S Capriccio Restaurant shattered stereotypes 18 years ago when it burst upon the Long Island dining scene.
It became the rage, receiving rave reviews and introducing a type of Italian cooking unknown to many.
This was no homey Italian family restaurant awash in red sauce.
Rather, it was haute


ALL THE PRESIDENTS MEN
LEAD:  SPEAKING OUT  The Reagan Presidency From Inside  the White House.
By Larry Speakes with Robert Pack.
Illustrated. 322 pp.
New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $19.95.
REVOLUTION  By Martin Anderson.
Illustrated. 486 pp.
San Diego:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $19.95.


Earthy Attitude
LEAD: He grew up on a tobacco farm in North Carolina, so it should come as no surprise that Todd Welborn takes a chaw on a plug now and again.
But Welborn, a relief pitcher for the Mets' Class AA farm club in Jackson, Miss., insists that tobacco never passes his lips.


Lopez Establishes One-Stroke Lead
LEAD: Nancy Lopez got up and down from a bunker alongside the 18th green today to save par and preserve a one-stroke lead over Alice Ritzman going into the final round of the 13th annual Chrysler-Plymouth Classic.


Headliners; Posthaste
LEAD: ''There is nothing in the record that says this man is entitled to a break, nothing,'' said the prosecutor in the case of Ronald Gene Simmons, accused of killing 14 members of his family and two other people in Russellville, Ark., last December.
Concurring with the prosecutor last week, after a jury had convicted the 47-year-old retired Air Force master sergeant of two of the murders, were the judge, who sentenced him to death, and Mr.


A Beach to Revere
LEAD: TODAY my idea of a sophisticated beach is an intimate little stretch of sand or shingle tucked into a cove beneath Mediterranean mountains, but when I was a kid I had different ideas.
In those days Revere Beach, just north of Boston, a New England counterpart of Coney Island, was the height of sophistication for me.


GUATEMALAN ARMY ARRESTS 6 OFFICERS
LEAD: The Guatemalan Army high command appears to be moving quickly to suppress the internal dissent in the military that diplomats say led to a failed coup attempt on Wednesday.


Splashy Settings
LEAD: ENTERTAINING BY THE POOL OR on the patio no longer means plain paper plates and boring plastic cups.
The newest stars on the outdoor entertainment circuit are vibrantly colored, innovatively textured and often sturdy enough to be used over and over again.


The French Agree to Be Centrist - More or Less, for Now
LEAD: WHEN a humbled Jacques Chirac submitted his resignation last week to President Francois Mitterrand, France formally ended two novel years of ''cohabitation'' between a Socialist head of state and a Prime Minister chosen by the rightist majority in the National Assembly.
In the aftermath of Mr.
Mitterrand's stunning re-election to a second seven-year term, the two years of cohabitation are looking less like an odd parenthesis and more like the springboard to an even bolder political experiment.


Man Wounds His Wife, Then Kills Himself
LEAD: A man wounded his wife with a shotgun blast at their Queens home and then killed himself with the same gun yesterday, the police said.


Savoring the Season's Fresh Tastes: In Wine Drinks
LEAD: SUMMER FRUITS COMBINE beautifully with wine to make elegant cocktails, refreshing coolers and punches and even seductive dessert drinks.
The possibilities are infinite.


POSTING: Visiting the Past; Williamsburg Tour
LEAD: The people of Williamsburg never did want that bridge.
The operator of the ferry between Manhattan and Brooklyn said it would kill his business, and genteel residents on the Brooklyn side said they would be overrun by immigrants from the Lower East Side.
For a time, it seemed they were right, but now the ferry is running again, the neighborhood is rebounding and it is the bridge that is ailing.


Port Villages With a Past Preserved
LEAD: IN the middle of the 18th century, while traveling and preaching in the ''ungospelized wilds'' of North Carolina, the evangelist George Whitefield made several visits to the busy port town of Bath.
As legend has it, Whitefield ended one of his stays with ill feelings toward Bath's residents.
He walked out of the town, shook the dust from his feet and laid a curse on


Music; Summer Music Festivals Throughout the Land
LEAD:  Alaska  BASICALLY BACH FESTIVAL: Anchorage, July 7-17.
One concert basically Bach; the other four offer no Bach.
Fiora Contino conducts Handel's ''Samson.''  FAIRBANKS SUMMER ARTS FESTIVAL: July 24-Aug. 6.
America's northernmost arts festival gives concerts on the University of Alaska-Fairbanks campus, both jazz and classics.


A New Look At Taking A New Look
LEAD: Musical tastes ebb and flow, though not nearly so predictably as the tides.
There is no telling just when it will again be seriously argued, for instance, that the blander music of Telemann is as relevant to our times as that of the great artificer Bach.
The last serious Telemann revival that I recall came in the 1950's, when the arrival of the long-playing record permitted us to hear a representative selection of his immense but on the whole mediocre oeuvre.


Victoria Moran Weds Dr. Juan C. Echevarria
LEAD: Victoria M. Moran, a daughter of M. Frances Hubert of Ridgefield, Conn., and the late George B. Moran Jr., was married yesterday to Dr.
Juan Carlos Echevarria, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Juan Antonio Echevarria of Lima, Peru.
Diane M. Crehan, a Connecticut justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother and her stepfather, Ralph Hubert.


Review/Rock; Happy Political Reggae
LEAD: Three songs into her first set at S.O.B's on Wednesday, Sister Carol, dressed in a silver dress and dark glasses, pointed to various audience members and sang ''This song's for you.'' She meant it: the Jamaican singer, who made her first impression in America by singing a reggae version of ''Wild Style'' in the movie ''Something


3 Targeted Suburbs Fight a Novel Plan to House Westchester's Homeless
LEAD: Last October, Andrew Cuomo, the Governor's son, and Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Westchester County Executive, introduced a plan to ease the county's growing homeless problem that they thought communities would quickly accept.


A Different View Of 'Doubles'
LEAD: My wife and I spent a very enjoyable evening at the Studio Theater viewing the play ''Doubles.'' This play was as good a presentation as any we have seen in suburbia.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Cranford  $166,000  15 Cayuga Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; c/a, rec room with bar, 1-car garage; taxes $1,703.
Neptune  $160,000  1009 Old Corlies Road  6-bedroom, 2-bath, 58-year-old Cape Cod; patio, dining room, partially finished basement; taxes $1,956.


Ms. Rosner Weds John G. Klimchuk
LEAD: The marriage of Marianne Rosner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan L. Rosner of Hartsdale, N.Y., and Becket, Mass., to John Garth Klimchuk, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Klimchuk of Houston and Calgary, Alberta, took place last evening at the Tappan Hill restaurant in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Peter Rubinstein performed the ceremony.


Was Pete Rose's Suspension Fair?
LEAD: Umpires should be respected.
In the court of law of baseball, the umpire is the judge, the manager the lawyer.
If he isn't persuasive in his argument, a shove or push could mean a contempt citation.
Surely this law will be upheld after its strict interpretation.
SYLVAN STRETCH  Stamford, Conn.


Answering The Mail
LEAD:  Q. We removed the wallpaper from our bathroom ceiling and walls, then painted with a water-base semigloss.
Almost immediately the paint started cracking and peeling.
We hired a painter who scraped and sanded, then painted with an oil paint, but now the walls and ceiling are flaking again.
Can you help me solve this problem?


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Lake Moxie, Me.; Preservation, With Houses
LEAD: A DEVELOPMENT partnership is selling large tracts for single-family houses overlooking several scenic lakes near here, and is taking the unusual step of imposing land-use restrictions more stringent than those required by state law.


PATTERNS OF ADDICTION
LEAD: Traditional theories of addictive personalities, disease models of drug abuse and claims of genetic involvement have not brought us much closer to understanding, treating or preventing addictive behavior.
Dr.
Bennett has admirably suggested that the problem may be the addictive behavior itself.
A considerable advance can be made by studying how addiction is influenced by the variables Dr.


Longer Seasons and Shorter Fuses
LEAD: WHENEVER there is an unusual run of violence or near-violence in professional sports, it attracts the anguished attention of various moralists and concerned parents.
Their worry is that sports is reflecting the worst in our national character - the itch to kill thy neighbor - or providing nasty role models for Little Leaguers.


Home, a Stop on a Collegian's Itinerary
LEAD: ONE Thursday I answered the phone and was greeted with, ''Mom, there's no school tomorrow and I thought I'd come home for the weekend.
I really want to see you guys.''


Panny Thomas and Mac King Are Wed in Jersey
LEAD: Leeanne M. Thomas, a daughter of Leeds Mitchell Jr. of Barrington, R.I., and Mrs.
Guy B. Mercer of Bristol, R.I., was married yesterday to Richard M. King, a son of Phillis Mader of Bismarck, Ark., and the late Richard M. King of Glastonbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Meredith Hutchison performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in Rutherford, N.J.


Hated Numbers
LEAD: To the Editor:


After the Tag Sale, the Garbage
LEAD: REAL men like me don't brake for garage sales.
We don't hop to flea markets.
Real men pick trash, and we're proud to admit it.
Spring is our season.
We feed off everyone else's ritualistic desire to shed the household clutter that accumulates all winter.


Foes of Shoreham to Continue Struggle for Lilco Board Seats
LEAD: EVEN if a settlement between the state and Lilco is announced before the utility's annual shareholders' meeting Tuesday, the Long Island Power Authority will continue its proxy battle for three seats on Lilco's board.


Amy Beth Marion to Wed D. J. Bobley in September
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot Marion of Jericho, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Beth Marion, to Douglas J. Bobley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter M. Bobley of Old Brookville, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.


Time to Get the Picnic Basket Ready
LEAD: WITH Memorial Day coming soon, it is time to think about foods suitable for summer picnics.
Sandwiches and salads are the obvious choices.
Tastes in sandwiches can run the gamut from the classic chicken or tuna salad, deli meats and peanut butter to stylish contemporary concepts such as mozzarella, basil and sun-dried tomatoes on crusty


'95 Percent of the Victims Are Women'
LEAD: ANNE MENARD is executive director of the Connecticut Coalition Against Domestic Violence, which was formed in 1976.
The coalition represents 18 programs across the state that provide services to women, who are the primary victims of domestic violence.


Suspended Probation Chief Blames Lack of Funds
LEAD: THE first department head to be suspended in the five and a half years of the O'Rourke Administration said last week that problems in the Probation Department had resulted from the county's failure to provide enough financial support, not from a lack of leadership on his part.


THE ALLURE OF THE OLDER WOMAN
LEAD: It is true, as Noel Perrin says, that Benjamin Disraeli and Mary Anne Wyndham Lewis had a happy marriage.
It is true that he became Prime Minister, and that they ''lived devotedly together. . . .''


The Cruel Face of Genius
LEAD:  SELECTED LETTERS OF RICHARD WAGNER  Edited and translated by  Stewart Spencer and Barry Millington.  1,030 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $35.


New World's New Order
LEAD: LIKE their competitors throughout Hollywood, the top executives of New World Entertainment Ltd. will be sitting fretfully by the phone this week and next, awaiting word from the television networks on which of their current shows and pilots will be picked up for the coming season.


On Land, Sea and Ice
LEAD:  Evening Cruise


Review/Film; Animated 'Light Years'
LEAD: In the itty-bittiest print imaginable, the ads for ''Light Years'' indicate that Glenn Close, Christopher Plummer, Jennifer Grey and John Shea appear only in ''starring the voices of'' capacities.
In other words, this is an animated film, and it wasn't made with these particular actors in mind.


Urgent Call From the Wild to Boycott Ivory
LEAD: Warning that the elephant population in Africa is declining at an alarming rate, the African Wildlife Foundation has called on Americans to help save the great mammals by refusing to buy ivory or ivory products.


America's New Regional Brews
LEAD: One OF THE MORE INTERESTING attractions in the wine country of Mendocino County, Calif., has nothing to do with wine at all.
It's an unprepossessing-looking tavern in the appropriately named town of Hopland, about 90 miles north of San Francisco.
An old-fashioned sign announces that it is the Hopland Brewery.


Little Engine
LEAD: To the Editor:


ART FOR MONEY'S SAKE
LEAD:  REMBRANDT'S PORTRAIT  A Biography.
By Charles L. Mee Jr.
Illustrated. 336 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Cleaning Fireplaces
LEAD: MOST fireplace owners know the importance of having chimneys cleaned regularly.
Doing so prevents the buildup of sooty deposits inside them, which can cause a fire, and also keeps fireplaces functioning efficiently and with less smoke.


City Plan to Sell TriBeCa Tract Protested
LEAD: NEGOTIATIONS to sell a tract of municipal land in lower Manhattan to Drexel Burnham Lambert have triggered a fresh round of complaints about the New York City policy that encourages large scale real estate development in the TriBeCa area.


Marriage and Other Astonishing Bonds
LEAD:  WHERE I'M CALLING FROM  New and Selected Stories.
By Raymond Carver.  393 pp.
New York: Atlantic Monthly Press. $19.95.


Reducing Liability Risks
LEAD: THE liability issue ''is a tremendous cloud'' hanging over vaccine developers, said Mr.
Rotheim, the analyst.
Certainly, companies have good reason to be wary.
The average award paid out in the 1970's for injury claims stemming from the swine flu vaccine was more than $100,000.
Injury awards for the D


PATTERNS OF ADDICTION
LEAD: Dr.
Bennett's comparison of ''the absolute amount of pleasure anyone can get from gulping a cup coffee . . with having an orgasm . . . '' brings to mind the celebrated anecdote about Lady Astor's temperance speech: ''I would rather commit adultery than drink a glass of beer.''


Phantoms of the Philharmonic
LEAD: THE guests were arriving in limos rather than gondolas, but their destination did look like a ballroom in Venice.
Actually, it was Lincoln Center, which was all gussied up last Wednesday night for a masked ball.
The occasion was a benefit for the New York Philharmonic, to whose music a dazzingly bedecked group of about 900 swirled the evening away.


Hynes Seen As Candidate, But for What?
LEAD: Charles J. Hynes, the state's special prosecutor who handled the Howard Beach case, is increasingly being mentioned as a potential challenger to Mayor Koch, but some politicians believe he would prefer to be the district attorney in Queens or Brooklyn.


Correction
LEAD: An article on page 19 of the Travel section today about Cooperstown, N.Y., omits the location of the Glimmerglass Opera House.
It is on Route 80, on the west side of Otsego Lake, about eight miles north of the village.


Allen Keyes Eastman; Stockbroker, 69
LEAD: Allen Keyes Eastman, a stockbroker, died of a heart attack Thursday at Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 69 years old and lived in South Norwalk.


Pistons Apply Some Muscle to Bulls
LEAD: After playing two uncharacteristically polite games with Chicago, the Detroit Pistons, who have become known for their brutish style of play, took off the kid gloves this afternoon and handed the Bulls one of the worst losses in their playoff history.


IDEAS AND TRENDS: Can Machines Learn to Think?; Pentagon Plan: The Battle to Mechanize the Military Mind
LEAD: WHEN the computer scientist John McCarthy coined the term artificial intelligence in the late 1950's, he did not mean to imply that there would be anything second rate about mechanical minds.
However, three decades later computers still do not think.
Is this because of the technological failings of the computer industry?


Was Pete Rose's Suspension Fair?
LEAD: Pete Rose's suspension was 100 percent fair.
Pushing and shoving belong in hockey, not in baseball.
ALEX TIRSCHWELL  Brooklyn


In the Philippines Today, Marcos Is No Longer an Issue
LEAD: AN informal poll was printed in a newspaper last week asking whether former President Ferdinand E. Marcos should be allowed to return to the Philippines from exile for the burial this week of his mother, who died 11 days ago at the age of 95.
Few people supported his return, which has been barred by President Corazon C.


Vast Parched Stretches of U.S. Await Hot Summer
LEAD: In southwestern Texas, the streams have turned to dust and the grass to tinder, and ranchers are knocking thorns off prickly pear cactus so cattle can get to the moisture inside.


Q and A
LEAD:  Touring China


Suburbs Losing Ground In Battles for Tenants
LEAD: THESE are not the best times for developing suburbs.
Conceived as havens from the ailments of crowded central business districts, the suburban office centers, from riverside to corporate countryside, are going through a period of adjustment in which they are becoming more like urban centers.


Mamaroneck Day Care
LEAD: Plans are under way to begin the county's first municipally run, all-day child-care facility for working parents.
With the aid of $10,000 appropriated by the Trustees of the village of Mamaroneck, the day-care center will open in January 1989.


Designating Landmarks: Beware Hidden Agendas
LEAD: THE city of White Plains is reportedly in the process of drafting historic landmark-preservation legislation, and I want to offer a few personal thoughts on the subject.
The rush to place plaques in front of so-called historic sites in Westchester about a century ago left us with some rather strange heritage, including a number of markers to events that did not even occur here.


Affirmative Action Upholds Academic Values; Autonomy of Ideas
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on April 24 with a listing of bicycle tours misidentified the French chateau shown.
It is the Chateau d'Usse.


Miss Kelley Weds Thomas Witschi
LEAD: Gretchen Sue Kelley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Kelley of Saddle River, N.J., and Thomas Phillip Witschi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin B. Witschi of Bern and of Norwich, Vt., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Stephen Geckeler performed the ceremony at the Westside Presbyterian Church in Ridgewood, N.J.


Affirmative Action Upholds Academic Values
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Top Soviet Admiral Dies


Bruins Win Series to Halt Devils' Ascent
LEAD: The Devils' dream season came to an end tonight after 20 playoff games.
They fell one victory short of the Stanley Cup finals by losing to the Boston Bruins, 6-2, in the seventh game of their National Hockey League playoff series.


SPEEDY SOLUTIONS
LEAD: The alarm blares at 6:30, and the morning hustle begins - the half-hour for exercise, the five-minute shower, the quick strokes of moisturizer, mascara and lipstick.
Then, a bowl of cereal and a dash for the door.


Bruins Retire the Devils
LEAD: The puck flying past Sean Burke, the Devils' goalie, for a goal last night in Boston as the Bruins won, 6-2, to capture a hectic National Hockey League semifinal series, four games to three.
The Bruins will face the Edmonton


An Antiquing Picnic
LEAD: IT WAS 7 ON A SPLENDID MANHATTAN MORNING, and the five young fashion and arts professionals who arrived at Lyssa Horn's East Side apartment were greeted with the welcome aroma of steaming coffee and hot muffins.
Despite the early hour and a yawn or two, Ms.
Horn's friends were in high spirits and ready for adventure.


Bush Denies Being Told in 1985 Of Noriega Role in Flow of Drugs
LEAD: Vice President Bush today denied that a United States Ambassador told him in 1985 about drug trafficking by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, Panama's leader.
But Mr.
Bush said he could not recall exactly what was discussed at the meeting, held in December 1985 with Everett Ellis Briggs, then the United States Ambassador to Panama.


Dirty Laundry Takes to Road
LEAD: TOURISTS visiting Cape Cod this summer may wonder: who are those angry-looking motorists whizzing down Route 6 with piles of dirty socks in their back seats?


In a Hotel Ballroom, A Dressy Boxing Card
LEAD: IT was a far cry from the basement arenas where a fighter could hardly see his opponent because of the thick cloud of cigar smoke.


Susan Reiner Marries Jonathan Albert Berg
LEAD: In the chapel at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in Manhattan, Susan Ann Reiner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Reiner of Mount Carmel, Pa., was married yesterday to Jonathan Albert Berg, a son of Noyon Berg of Atherton, Calif., and the late Daniel E. Berg.
The Rev.
Margot Gross performed the ceremony.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Soccer  Wimbledon Captures Cup: Lawrie Sanchez scored in the 36th minute yesterday as Wimbledon upset Liverpool, 1-0, in the final of the Football Association Cup before a crowd of 98,000 at Wembley Stadium.
Sanchez, a member of Northern Ireland's national team, headed a free kick from Dennis Wise and sent it past Bruce Grobbelaar.


Michelle DeMuth to Wed William W. Gay Next Fall
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Dennis L. DeMuth of Ida, Mich., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Michelle Denise DeMuth, to William Wingate Gay, a son of William K. Gay of Mahwah, N.J., and Mrs.
E.
Virgil Conway of Bronxville, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.


John Ahrens Wed To Robin I. Riley
LEAD: Robin Isabel Riley, a daughter of Isabel Cooper Riley of Manhasset, L.I., and the late John Bennet Riley, was married yesterday to John Christopher Ahrens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Charles Ahrens of Toledo, Ohio.
The Rev.
Thomas Lamont performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in Manhasset.


A Former Reagan Press Aide Named Ambassador to Syria
LEAD: President Reagan intends to nominate Edward P. Djerejian to be Ambassador to Syria, the White House announced Friday.


Boy, 10, Is Suspended From School for Preaching
LEAD: A 10-year-old preacher who said he would rather be rewarded in heaven than get an education on earth was suspended from school Friday after refusing to stop proselytizing and go to class.


J. S. Swensen, Banker, Weds Cynthia Sharrah
LEAD: The marriage of Cynthia Kay Sharrah, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Marion L. Sharrah of Naples, Fla., to J. Scott Swensen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Swensen of Denver, took place yesterday at the United Methodist Church in New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
James Jay Benson performed the ceremony.


Greensward Care Without Pesticides
LEAD: FINISH planting crops such as lettuce, chard, beets, carrots; harvest peas just before cooking for best flavor.
Check ornamentals for immature insect pests and control, if found.
Prepare soil well before planting young shrubs and perennials.
Snap off faded flowers from daffodils and tulips to prevent seed pods.


U.S. Neglecting Economies Of Latin Nations, Study Says
LEAD: A University of Miami study has asserted that the Reagan Administration, Congress and the two political parties have neglected Latin America's growing economic difficulties ''to the detriment of our national objectives and well-being.''


Largent Staying Put
LEAD: At the age of 33, Steve Largent of the Seattle Seahawks is getting a bit long in the tooth for a National Football League receiver.
Because he has already made his mark - he holds the league receiving record with 752 career catches - it would seem to be time for Largent to start thinking about retirement.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''Investors are frightened.
They don't know when the other shoe is going to drop.
Myself, I'd be in C.D.'s.'' - Lawrence Weiss, president of Odd-Lot Securities, a discount broker.


Syrian Troops Appear Poised to Try to End Fighting in South Beirut
LEAD: Syrian armored troops gathered at the approaches of Beirut's southern suburbs today, apparently preparing to move in to try to end nine days of bitter fighting between the Shiite Amal militia and the Iranian-backed Party of God.


Review/Dance; Mark Taylor and Friends
LEAD: Mark Taylor, an assured and accomplished modern-dance choreographer, seemed to strive primarily for neatness in a program of new and recent dances presented by Mark Taylor and Friends on Wednesday at the Joyce Theater.
Neat joins and interlocking body parts were the order of the night, part of the ongoing 3-D at the Joyce festival, as well as neat small surprises and neat abstractions.


Bonnie Teschemacher Wed in Jersey
LEAD: Bonnie Eyring Teschemacher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick William Teschemacher of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday to John Alfred Hamilton Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hamilton of McLean, Va.
Msgr.
William F. O'Donnell performed the ceremony at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Short Hills, N.J.


There's Opera, And Art, Too, In Cooperstown
LEAD: CULTURE in the country is always an appealing proposition.
Add to that an exceptionally pretty little town on the edge of a lake, two small museums dissimilar in everything except quality, and the newest opera house in the United States, and it will become clear that Cooperstown, N.Y., the home of the Baseball Hall of


Grumman: Experience Counts for Something
LEAD: I would like to comment on the letter of James McNicholas  [ Letters to the Long Island Editor, March 20 ]  concerning Grumman and the A-6 program.


Jun Makihara, an Investment Banker, And Mimi Oka Plan to Marry on July 9
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Takashi Oka of Tokyo and Boston have announced the engagement of their daughter Megumi Oka to Jun Makihara, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Minoru Makihara of Tokyo and New York.
A July 9 wedding is planned.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  FESTIVE SUNDAY  From Freeport to Yaphank with a stopover in Huntington, today's the day for Long Island festivals.
In Freeport, to celebrate the opening of its new preserve, complete with bird-watching tower and marked trails through the marshland, Cow Meadow Park has a Family Nature Festival on tap.


Good Medicine, Better Business
LEAD: THE SMITHKLINE BECKMAN CORPORATION was looking for just the right advertising symbol to sell physicians on new diagnostic equipment to use in their offices.
It chose a goose with a golden egg.


Nursing Must Be Made More Attractive as a Profession
LEAD: NEW JERSEY is a rich and prosperous state.
However, it is becoming a state in which quality health care will be available only to the rich and prosperous.


Bettina Dabney to Wed
LEAD: Bettina Bigelow Dabney and George Allan Abe, graduates of Trinity College in Hartford, plan to marry Aug. 20.
Mrs.
William R. Waters of Miami and Hyannis Port, Mass., and Lewis S. Dabney of Boston have announced their daughter's engagement to Mr.
Abe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold K. Abe of Westport, Conn., and Tokyo.


A Clarifying Word, Literary Division
LEAD: I must commend Lynne Ames on her article on The Hudson Group of freelance writers in Westchester  [ ''Freelance Writers Find Familiarity Breeds Contentment,'' April 24 ] .
Her article in general catches the flavor of this unique group.


THE NATION: Pro &amp; Con - Extending Welfare's Reach; Should Government Aid the Two-Parent Family, Too?
LEAD: THE overhaul of the nation's welfare policy that is working its way through Congress reflects agreement on the part of both parties that work is the solution to dependency, and training and job placement are the way for long-term welfare recipients to break out of the cycle.
But as always, efforts to define how and how far the Government should help the poor arouse fierce debate.


HOW ANTIQUE IS ANTIQUE?
LEAD: No subject is of greater interest to antiques collectors than how to detect fakes and repairs in period furnishings.
In FAKE, FRAUD, OR GENUINE?
Identifying Authentic American Antique Furniture (New York Graphic Society/ Little, Brown, $29.95), Myrna Kaye, a former consulting curator of furniture at the Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities in Boston, describes scores of ways in which American antique chairs, tables, chests and sideboards are not all that dealers and auctioneers claim them to be.


Dr. Ilona E. Karka Wed at Columbia
LEAD: At St.
Paul's Chapel of Columbia University yesterday Dr.
Ilona E. Karka and Dr.
Louis Guy Cornacchia 3d, who both received medical degrees last year from New York University, were married by the Rev.
Philip Fabiano, a Roman Catholic priest.


'Interesting Numbers' for the Manufacturers
LEAD: NEW technology, particularly genetic engineering, is reviving interest in vaccines - agents that induce immunity to diseases.
After a 20-year slump that saw the number of vaccine producers shrink by half and fundamental advances slow to a crawl, the pace of development is quickening.


HER SAGA OF A GIANT ISLAND
LEAD:  THE GREENLANDERS  By Jane Smiley.  558 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Answering The Mail
LEAD:  Q. We removed the wallpaper from our bathroom ceiling and walls, then painted with a water-base semigloss.
Almost immediately the paint started cracking and peeling.
We hired a painter who scraped and sanded, then painted with an oil paint, but now the walls and ceiling are flaking again.
Can you help me solve this problem?


On Critics: Dialogue or Diatribe?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Was Pete Rose's Suspension Fair?
LEAD: The fans that night in Cincinnati made a messy problem impossible.
Pete Rose is paying for their sins as well as his.


Answering The Mail
LEAD:  Q. We removed the wallpaper from our bathroom ceiling and walls, then painted with a water-base semigloss.
Almost immediately the paint started cracking and peeling.
We hired a painter who scraped and sanded, then painted with an oil paint, but now the walls and ceiling are flaking again.
Can you help me solve this problem?


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Elmont  $147,500  147 Circle Drive East  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 16-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, finished basement; taxes $2,200.
Farmingdale  $190,000  42 Miller Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; fireplace, basement, pool, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.


A Billion Potential Customers at Risk for Malaria
LEAD: SOME of the greatest opportunities for new vaccines will be in developing countries.
There could be up to a billion potential customers for a malaria vaccine alone in the years following its introduction.
The problem, said Mr.
Ratafia, the market researcher, is ''third world countries just can't afford to pay much for vaccines.


Review/Film; A New 'Friday the 13th'
LEAD: The ''Friday the 13th'' series may have started as a slasher film and become a teen-age cult favorite, but somehow it has turned into a long-running serial about an odd but familiar neighborhood.
Like the evil twin of Lake Wobegon, Crystal Lake is the little town that time forgot, where all the men are dead, all the women are dead and all the teen-agers are above ground - but not for long.


An Afternoon By the Pool
LEAD: THE INVITATIONS WERE INFORMAL, delivered by telephone: ''If you're not busy, come around for lunch by the pool on Saturday.
And bring the kids.'' The occasion was nothing special, just the chance for Allan and Joan Burns and their two sons, Matthew, 20, and Eric, 23, to get together with good friends.


In Lebanon, Resistance to Iran's Agents Grows Bloody
LEAD: LIKE living marionettes locked in a dark room with unknown hands pulling their strings, the hostages of Beirut may be wondering how the savage fighting in the streets during the last week might affect their fate.


Putting Public Works in Quasi-Public Hands
LEAD: IF the 10-year capital spending plan proposed by Mayor Koch last week meets all its goals, New York City should be able to build garbage disposal plants, highways and bridges more quickly and cheaply than before.
The key to this minor fiscal miracle would be the creation of three independent authorities, one to supervise the construction and financing of each kind of project.


POSTING: Brewster Project; A Mix for Growth
LEAD: Realizing that suburbs do not grow by condominiums alone, Mark Grebler, along with David Camhi and Alvin Lefkowitz, has begun construction of a 30,000-square-foot, retail-and-office building near Brewster, N.Y.
The southeastern Putnam County village (pop. 1,650 in 1980) is part of the Town of Southeast (pop.


Three More Suspects Are Held in Payroll Robbery
LEAD: Heavily armed teams of law-enforcement officers arrested two suspects in New Jersey late Friday and early yesterday in the robbery of a payroll service in lower Manhattan Friday morning.
Another suspect surrendered last night in New Jersey.


Host's Guide to Outdoor Cafes
LEAD: IT IS OFTEN SAID THAT RESTAURANTS TODAY are part sustenance and part showmanship, not always in equal proportion.
And nowhere is the theater of dining more vibrant than in outdoor cafes, whether on a bustling urban thoroughfare, in a salt-sprayed seaside village or deep in a sylvan glade.
An outdoor terrace or garden can make an ideal setting for warm-weather entertaining.


Next Week; Do You Like the Stricter Balk Rules?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Young and Old Join for Ridgefield Concert
LEAD: ''YOUTH supplies us with colors,'' wrote Samuel Johnson, ''age with canvas.'' Put them together, and you have a portrait in accomplishment.
You also have the 17th Joint Concert by the Ridgefield Symphony and the Ridgefield Youth Orchestra today.


Tenant Drops Apartment Suit
LEAD: A TENANT whose fight to keep possession of his family's rent-stabilized apartment in Manhattan appeared likely to set an important legal precedent has agreed to give up his legal battle and leave the apartment in an out-of-court settlement with his landlord.


Tommy Lasorda's Family Tradition
LEAD: FOOD, INSISTS TOMMY LASORDA, THE well-fed manager of the Los Angeles Dodgers, is the only weakness he has not been able to conquer.
He recalls taking a pack of cigarettes from his pocket, staring at it, deciding he was stronger than the cigarettes and throwing the pack away, never to smoke again.
He quit drinking in a similar manner.


Correction
LEAD: A headline last Sunday about Vice President Bush's plans for television commercials in the Presidential campaign misstated the role of the New York advertising agency of Messner, Vetere, Berger &amp; Carey.
As the article said, two partners in the firm declined to say whether the agency would create commercials for Mr.


Pushing the Envelope
LEAD: ''I ALSO WANT TO FIND the edge,'' said the comedian Will Durst to Stephen Holden of The New York Times. ''I keep pushing at the envelope.''


Germans Argue Over a Museum That Will Offer A Probing Look At Their History
LEAD: It is something of a given in a land where history is a sensitive subject and self-scrutiny a national affliction that an attempt to found a museum of German history will be controversial - especially if the initiative comes from the Government.


City Ballet's New Look Is Cut From Dark Fabrics
LEAD: Many of the premieres in the New York City Ballet's continuing American Music Festival look grim rather than pretty and are danced without tutus.
This virtually tutu-less festival, with its tendency toward gloom, offers an esthetic image of the City Ballet that is significantly different from the one we customarily expect.


Ethiopian Region Goes to the Root of Hunger
LEAD: People in this rugged eastern region of Ethiopia are struggling to transform devastation into development.


Fresh Glimpses Of Prokofiev's 'Romeo' Ballet
LEAD: ''To each his own.
To one it is given to sing of the love of Romeo and Juliet, to another to depict the frenzied screeches and comical capers of monkeys.'' Such is the ironic indictment of Prokofiev by V. Kolomyitsev in 1916, quoted by David Gutman in notes to the CD reissue of the Lorin Maazel recording of Prokofiev's ''Romeo and Juliet.


Town Facing 60% Tax Rise
LEAD: FOR MORE than a century, the gray buildings, shaft houses and crushers of a 71-acre zinc mine stood high on a ridge above this two-square-mile Sussex County hamlet in the Wallkill Valley, tangible evidence of the community's most valuable economic asset and major tax ratable.


Afghan Vacuum: The U.S. Is Wary of Rushing In
LEAD: With Soviet troops poised to begin their withdrawal Sunday, Afghanistan faces a period of turmoil in which the United States is preparing to play an ambiguous military and political role.


New Britain Sox Gain Amenities
LEAD: THE New Britain Red Sox are playing in the same ball park this year.
But it isn't the same old ball park.


The Death of Investor Confidence
LEAD: LAST Thursday, John W. Bachmann, chairman of the Securities Industry Association, and John J. Phelan, Jr., chairman of the New York Stock Exchange, discussed only one topic over their lunch: how to restore investor confidence in the stock market.


THE BAD NEWS AT CBS
LEAD:  PRIME TIMES, BAD TIMES  By Ed Joyce.  561 pp. New York: Doubleday. $19.95.


Mary Ballard Adler Marries
LEAD: Mary Ballard Adler, a daughter of Anne Freeman Adler and Julius Ochs Adler, both of New York, was married yesterday at the Metropolitan Club in New York to Vikram Malhotra, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jagdish C. Malhotra of New York and Bombay, India.
A Hindu ceremony performed by Pandit Hemanand Trivedi was followed by an Episcopal ceremony performed by the Rev.


Was Pete Rose's Suspension Fair?
LEAD: Pete Rose was falsely penalized for misconduct committed by all managers and players over the last 20 years.
Let's be honest.
For Rose, 10 days would have hurt more because he would have the message and, along with the fine, considered it just.
WANDA GREENER  River Edge, N.J.


Wanted: More Focus On Local Efforts
LEAD: The article titled ''Homeless Projects: Setbacks and Optimism''  [ April 24 ]  primarily featured the attempts of Andrew M. Cuomo to do something about homelessness, and mentioned several times his name along with that of the county executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Cos Cob, Conn.  $295,000  11 Grove Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; new kitchen, oversized living room with fireplace; taxes $1,797.
Darien, Conn.  $385,000  57 Echo Drive North  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; hardwood floors, updated kitchen, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,937.


Bound for Posterity
LEAD: ACCORDING TO A RECENT study by a private foundation, the Council on Library Resources, at least 10 million irreplaceable books in America's research libraries are, through the ravages of old age, in danger of disintegration.
One man doing something about it is Jan Sobota, a Czech-born bookbinder and restorer.


Mitterrand Dissolves Assembly and Calls Elections
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand today decreed the dissolution of the National Assembly and called fresh parliamentary elections for next month that his Socialist Party is favored to win.


Balk Record Is Broken
LEAD: Baseball's record for most balks in a season was broken tonight when Rick Mahler of the Atlanta Braves committed the 357th balk of 1988.


Jersey Man Sues Officials Over '83 Drug Raid
LEAD: A drug raid in 1983 in which investigators shot at two bystanders has resulted in a lawsuit accusing former top Essex County officials of covering up their involvement by filing inadequate reports and destroying evidence.


Democrats Needn't Avoid Noriega Issue
LEAD: To the Editor:


PATTERNS OF ADDICTION
LEAD: In his article ''Patterns of Addiction'' (Body and Mind, April 10), William Ira Bennett says that ''Even addiction to street drugs may be at least partially explained as a craving for a certain schedule of sensations, as much as for the drug itself.''


Sarina R. di Bonaventura Married to Philip S. Birsh
LEAD: Sarina Rosaria di Bonaventura and Philip Steven Birsh were married yesterday in a private civil ceremony at the Greentree estate in Manhasset, L.I., the home of the bride's grandmother, Mrs.
John Hay Whitney.


Nassau County's Role In Helping Young Parents
LEAD: The April 17 article ''Young Parents Learn Job Skills'' fails to include the very important contribution of the Nassau County Department of Social Services in identifying and referring potential participants to the Comprehensive Employment Opportunity Support Center project (''Crossroads'') operating on a grant from the New York State Department of Social


Golden Slippers
LEAD:  THE RED SHOES  Starring Moira Shearer, Anton Walbrook, Marius Goring, Leonide Massine, Robert Helpmann and Ludmilla Tcherina.
Written, directed and produced by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger.
Paramount Home Video. 136 minutes. $19.95.


Tuned In
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance; East German Dancer Makes Ballet Theater Debut
LEAD: American Ballet Theater's first ''Don Quixote'' of the season Friday night - with Susan Jaffe in the ballerina role - also offered a historic first in the person of a 25-year-old virtuoso and guest artist from East Germany, Oliver Matz.


McEnroe Shows Signs of Control
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Violence Hurts Clean Hockey
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Paul B. Kusserow And Serena Reed, A Teacher, Marry
LEAD: Serena Reed, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Verner Reed Jr. of New York and Greenwich, Conn., and Paul Berthold Kusserow, a son of Suzanne Kusserow of Underhill Center, Vt., and the late Dr.
Berthold Kusserow, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Neely Paul Towe performed the ceremony at the Stanwich Congregational Church in Greenwich.


Jessica Spohn Engaged To Clifford S. Kayhart
LEAD: The engagement of Jessica Anne Spohn to Clifford Scott Kayhart has been announced by the future bride's parents, Roberta Spohn of New York and Sag Harbor, L.I., and Dr.
Herbert E. Spohn of Topeka, Kan.
A July wedding is planned.


A July Wedding For Ms. Hodgson
LEAD: The engagement of Amanda Elissa Hodgson to John Thomas Hompe has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. S. Hodgson of Port Washington, L.I., parents of the bride-to-be.
Her fiance is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Harold Hompe of Stanley, Wis.
A July wedding is planned.


Review/Music; Previn as Composer and Conductor
LEAD: As part of a three-concert swing through Manhattan, the Los Angeles Philharmonic presented a program Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall that offered two insights into Andre Previn.


Susan Sidd, Law Student, To Wed Dr. Marc Odrich
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
James J. Sidd of Cambridge, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Elizabeth Sidd, to Dr.
Marc Geoffrey Odrich, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald B. Odrich of Riverdale, the Bronx.
The couple plan to marry in September.


La Guardia Arts High School Opens Its First Stage
LEAD: More than 20 years after New York City announced plans for a new high school of the arts, and four years after it finally opened, the last episode in the creation of Fiorello H. La Guardia High School has ended.


Michelle Berman, A Writer, Marries
LEAD: Michelle Berman, the daughter of Dr.
Lewis H. Berman of New York and Bridgehampton, L.I., and Prof.
Deborah Weissman-Berman of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Dennis Love, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Love of Anniston, Ala.
Rabbi Joel S. Goor performed the ceremony at the Manhattan home of the bride's father and her stepmother, Amanda


Uproar Over Odor Persists Despite Plans to Close Fish Plant
LEAD: Donna Peabody doesn't mind smelling the sewage treatment plant or the dump, but the fish rendering plant near her home is another matter.
So when the plant's owners announced last month they were closing in the fall, she should have been ecstatic.


A Musical Version Of 'Little Foxes'
LEAD: ONCE, the notion of opera in a legitimate theater was forbidding and so ''Regina,''


Corrections
LEAD: A response in the Q &amp; A column on Jan. 24 about retirement in Mexico gave an incorrect address for the Retire in Mexico Corporation.
The correct address is Avenida Americas 1297-101, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico.


Glimpses of Grandfather: Scars and Strength of the Heart
LEAD: I AM walking down a blue tiled corridor. Room 205, 206, 207.


WHAT'S DOING ON: The Eastern Shore
LEAD: The bumper sticker reads ''There's No Life West of the Chesapeake Bay,'' and the philosophy behind it is at the heart of life on Maryland's Eastern Shore.


Out of the Memory Hole
LEAD: There's stunning news from Moscow: George Orwell's ''1984'' is to be published soon in the Soviet Union.
Excerpts already have appeared in a Moscow magazine, Literaturnaya Gazeta, prefaced with an acknowledgment that Stalin's despotism helped inspire the 1949 novel.
That Winston Smith; the Ministry of Truth; Newspeak; Big Brother; and the memory hole, where wrongthink documents were vaporized, are to make a licit appearance on Soviet bookshelves is the best evidence yet that a fresh wind is blowing in the


Chemical Company Convicted of Illegal Dumping
LEAD: A chemical distribution company with a long record of pollution violations has been convicted on criminal charges of illegally storing and dumping hazardous wastes at its plant here.


Lisa Bankoff Marries
LEAD: Lisa Rachelle Bankoff, a literary agent with International Creative Management, a talent agency in New York, and Richard D. Simms, the director of motion-picture development for Goat Cay Productions in New York, were married last evening by Rabbi David Posner at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
The bride is a daughter of Bella G.


Israelis and Palestinians Change Their Tactics but Not Their Goals
LEAD: A vegetable garden is tucked into the yard of nearly every home in this Palestinian village, watered by perforated black rubber tubing.
Rabbits and chickens are fattening in handmade cages as a defense against expected hard times to come.


IN THE NEW YORK REGION: Connecticut; Rural East Lyme Lures Within-State Businesses
LEAD: AN office park under construction on a quiet stretch of shoreline in East Lyme is an early indicator of a tilt in Connecticut's commercial space market to the east.
There land is still available and demand is growing from in-state companies rather than from relocating New York City corporations.


Guards Held Hostage in Riot at Oklahoma Prison
LEAD: Inmates at an overcrowded state prison held three guards hostage today after a fiery uprising that left one dormitory gutted and two others damaged, officials said.
One guard and one inmate were injured.


Seeing Dollar Signs In Searching the Stars
LEAD: LYNNE PALMER mentioned that versatility is important if you're a professional astrologer.
You could see that right away in her Manhattan living room.
In one nook, she had a tape recorder set up to record her client readings.
Lying on the coffee table was a sampling of the 14 books she had written, including ''Use Astrology and Change Your Name'' and ''Nixon's Horoscope.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending April 30  MANHATTAN  Gramercy Park Area  $143,000  330 Third Avenue (23d St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 600-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, hardwood floors, southern exposure; maintenance $391, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)


Special Today; Entertaining/Magazine Part 2
LEAD: * Challenging recipes for grillers.


THE REGION: In the Village; Learning How to Take Out the Trash
LEAD: APARTMENT dwellers are notoriously short of space, but the city is trying to persuade the tenants of four Greenwich Village buildings to use some of it to store bottles and cans, as well as newspapers, for recycling.


Outdoors: Fly Casting for Shad
LEAD: ANGLERS have long known that the American shad does not feed during its spring spawning run, that it seizes lure or fly for some other reason, perhaps irritation at repeated intrusions into its procreative odyssey by small, shiny creatures from another world.
If this be so, Joe Purcell and I were unable to irritate any of them during two and one-half days of fly fishing on the Delaware


The Botanic Garden in May: As Pretty as a $100 Picture
LEAD: Hang Ching Lam, the owner of the Dragon Garden restaurant in the Poconos, was married in Chinatown yesterday.
But the hours before his wedding found him with his bride, Hau Hung Yim, smiling for cameras on the Brooklyn Botanic Garden's Turtle Island.


The Koch-Albany Battle; Political Realities Have Limited the Impact Of Tensions Between Mayor and Legislators
LEAD: Mayor Koch spent much of the winter trying strenuously but unsuccessfully to alter the course of legislation affecting New York City by attacking the State Legislature, first over a plan to increase pensions to city workers, then over the city's share of state education aid.


Nasta International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nasta International (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,553,000
5,046,000
Net inc
39,000
381,000
Share earns
.01
-
Share earnings for the year-ago quarter were not given because the company did not go public until June 1987.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: The Press; Media General Fight Raises Questions of Vulnerability
LEAD: BURT SUGARMAN'S battle to take over Media General Inc., the Richmond-based communications conglomerate, is being watched by many in the communications industry with the fascination due a portentous struggle.


Palestinians Stage General Strike, But the Territories Remain Quiet
LEAD: Palestinians in Israel's occupied territories staged a general strike today, and all Arab businesses were closed.
But the West Bank and Gaza Strip were quiet this weekend, even though Israelis and Palestinians alike warned that there was likely to be large-scale violence.


Hungarian Opposition Meets Days Before the Party Does
LEAD: With a long-awaited special conference of the Communist Party only five days away, Hungary's organized opposition displayed its vigor this weekend with an unusual series of open meetings.


SYRIANS SEAL OFF SUBURBS OF BEIRUT TORN BY FIGHTING
LEAD: Syrian forces sealed off the southern suburbs of Beirut today and ordered rival Shiite Moslem gunmen who have fought fiercely over the last 10 days to lay down their arms.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
ADC Telecommunications Inc., Minneapolis, said Fredrick R. Boswell had resigned as president, chief operating officer and a director to pursue other opportunities.
His duties will be assumed by Charles M. Denny Jr., chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Boswell will serve as a consultant for an interim period.


World Oil Price Outlook
LEAD: World oil prices may not strengthen as fast as many think in the next decade and could remain low and unstable until the mid-1990's, the managing director of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group said today.
Speaking to an oil and gas symposium sponsored by the Dutch Government, John Jennings said the world oil surplus might last longer than first thought, depending on non-OPEC production.


Russian Christians' Way
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Offshore Logistics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Offshore Logistics Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,503,000
12,361,000
Net inc
2,092,000
504,000
Share earns
.12
.03
Shares outst
17,476,722
15,862,582
9mo rev
52,592,000
41,104,000
Net inc
b6,563,000
c14,778,000
Share earns
.38
1.79
Shares outst
17,158,090
8,263,309


Electric Fence Kills Woman
LEAD: A 77-year-old man has been charged with manslaughter in the death of a neighbor who died when she tried to free one of her pet dogs from the man's electrified fence.
The police said James J. Kahl had failed to install a regulator that would have sent a pulsating current through the wire instead of a steady flow of 110 volts that killed his neighbor, Bertha A.


Golf Clubs Fit For a Traveler
LEAD: Anyone who has lugged a golf bag through airports knows how cumbersome it is to travel with a set of clubs.
But now you can make it easier on yourself with a golf bag that you can stuff under your airplane seat.


Robert Shaplen, 71, Writer for New Yorker, Dies
LEAD: Robert Shaplen, a correspondent and staff writer for The New Yorker magazine whose authoritative articles and books on Asia over many years made him one of the deans of American journalism, died yesterday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 71 years old and lived in Princeton, N


Review/Theater; Adolescent Yearning In 'Evening Star'
LEAD: Sitting at a table in their backyard, an elderly man and his granddaughter go through their nightly routine.
As he reads aloud from the obituary columns, she crosses off names of people in the telephone book.
The grandfather, who operates a discount stand, explains that he is simply cutting down on the cost of his business mailing list.


Bridge
LEAD: Bridge players have often shown themselves willing to help one of their own with special problems.


Gemco National Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gemco National Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,140,000
4,621,000
Net inc
b232,000
b229,000
Share earns
.08
.08
b-Includes tax credits of $81,000 for the latest quarter and $91,000 for the year-earlier period.


Eleanor R. Berger Wed To Thomas P. Mueller
LEAD: The marriage of Eleanor Ruth Berger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin H. Berger of Great Neck and East Hampton, L.I., to Thomas Peter Mueller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Mueller of Milwaukee, took place yesterday in Glen Cove, L.I.
Rabbi Lee Friedlander officiated at Harrison House.


In Jersey, Two Sides of the Campaign
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson presented sharply different faces today to New Jersey Democrats as the two candidates began their personal campaigning for the state's 118 delegates to the party's national convention.


3 Nuclear Storage Depots to Close as B-52 Missions Change
LEAD: The Air Force has notified Congressional leaders that it plans to close three depots where nuclear weapons are stored at air bases as some B-52 bombers are converted to carrying only conventional bombs.


Exchanging Marine Dress Blues for Tomes on the Law
LEAD: Oliver L. North, who on behalf of the White House dealt for high military and political stakes on several continents, is now mastering the law.
On May 1, after 20 years of service, he retired with the rank of lieutenant colonel from the Marine Corps at the age of 44 to face a future that could include criminal conviction for his role in the


Yanks Club Angels, 9-2
LEAD: In the morning, Charles Hudson woke up and wondered if he would spend the afternoon on the bench or on the pitcher's mound.
There had been no word, no small hint from the manager, about his assignment.


First Family Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Family Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,100,000
14,300,000
Net loss
344,000
c70,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
58,600,000
54,500,000
Net inc
b970,000
d1,900,000
Share earns
.28
-


Dr. Marisa Lawrence Weds Dr. S. M. Martin
LEAD: Dr.
Marisa Lawrence and Dr.
Stephen M. Martin, surgical residents at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, were married yesterday at Tavern on the Green in New York.
The Rev.
Mathew Pravetz, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Blair Heath, a United Methodist minister, officiated.


Soviet Trade Is Rated High in U.S.
LEAD: The Soviet Union gets high marks as a trading partner in a survey of American companies that do business there.


C.I.A. Is Criticized Over a Turncoat
LEAD: From the day Edward Lee Howard was dismissed as a Central Intelligence Agency officer in 1983, senior officials of the agency concealed clear indications that he was a security risk who could well become a Soviet spy, a new book contends.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday


Atlas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlas Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,093,000
5,607,000
Net loss
b1,030,000
c847,000
Share earns
-
.29
9mo rev
26,471,000
13,123,000
Net inc
b1,581,000
d807,000
Share earns
.53
-


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of May 15, 1988:  MONDAY


California Real Estate Investment Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Real Estate Investment Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,334,000
1,253,000
Net loss
56,000
b231,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income  The trust said the loss for the latest quarter resulted primarily from $358,000 of expenses associated with its proposed transaction with Culpepper Properties and Roebling Investment Co., which was terminated March 22, and expenses related to direct negotiations with Roebling Investment Co., which are continuing.


Tennis; Lendl Overcomes Spectators and Foe
LEAD: Ivan Lendl overcame a tenacious opponent and a raucous crowd today, beating 18-year-old Guillermo Perez-Roldan in five sets to capture the Italian Open tennis championship.


Mud and Money Ready in Jersey Race
LEAD: The race for the United States Senate will occupy the second line on the New Jersey ballot in November, but the two likely candidates and the men running their campaigns are readying the most expensive races in state history to make sure they are heard.


Review/Music; Atlantic Celebrates Its 40 Years of Rock and Soul
LEAD: What may have been the world's longest television commercial was staged Saturday, when Atlantic Records celebrated its 40th anniversary with a 12-hour concert at Madison Square Garden.
Corporate loyalty was constantly reaffirmed during the program, which was telecast live in its entirety by the British Broadcasting Corporation and for its last five and a half hours by Home Box Office, with H


Hawks, at Home, Romp Past Celtics
LEAD: Ah, the home court in the National Basketball Association.
The home players know the floor better and the rims are friendly for them.
The shots that normally roll in for their opponents roll out.


Review/Film; Police vs. Guerrillas: Gary Busey in Action
LEAD: When the opening credits announce ''Gary Busey is Bulletproof,'' you pretty much know what to expect.
One of those daredevil cops who can only survive on film, Mr.
Busey jumps into a shoot-out with a room full of gunrunners.
They have piles of automatic weapons, he has a handgun, yet he escapes with a single bullet in his shoulder.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-11  Sandinista pressure on the opposition in Nicaragua is increasing.
Convinced that the contra army is collapsing, the Government has imposed new restrictions on the press and rejected efforts to compromise.
Page A1  A strategy for solving the debt crisis in Latin America does not seem to be working, prompting complaints that the policies of the International Monetary Fund are actually prolonging the crisis.


The Dracula of Medical Technology
LEAD: The Federal project to create an implantable artificial heart is dead.
During its 24-year life this Dracula of a program sucked $240 million out of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.
At long last, the institute has found the resolve to drive a stake through its voracious creation. ''The human body just couldn't seem to tolerate it,'' explains Claude


Westbridge Capital Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westbridge Capital Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,710,000
16,831,000
Net loss
108,000
b193,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


Dr. Miller Wed To a Radiologist
LEAD: Dr.
Holly Dara Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Algernon M. Miller of New York, and Dr.
Eric A. L. Meary, a son of Dr.
Odette Meary of Paris and Talloires, France, and the late Dr.
Robert Meary, were married yesterday at the Faculty House at Columbia University by Acting Justice Harold Silverman of State Supreme Court in the


Brothers in Cooper Deal See Shareholder Victory
LEAD: The Sturman brothers, three real estate developers from Mount Vernon, N.Y., are not ones to treat their investments passively.
After taking their first major stake in a public company, they have ended up on the board to see that shareholder values are at their maximum.


Sports of The Times; Devils Made Their Points in Semifinal Series
LEAD: PUT away the Mickey Mouse ears, Edmonton fans.
The New Jersey Devils are not coming to town.


Books of The Times; 'Quinn's Book,' William Kennedy's New Novel
LEAD:  Quinn's Book  By William Kennedy  289 pages. Viking. $18.95.


Patrick Petroleum Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Patrick Petroleum Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,770,801
1,788,226
Net inc
151,997
135,818
Share earns
.02
.02
Shares outst
7,426,719
7,400,238


Soviet Formally Pulls First Troops Out of the Long Afghanistan War
LEAD: A long convoy of tanks, trucks and happy Soviet soldiers rumbled through a narrow mountain pass and into this capital city today as the first official step of the withdrawal of 115,000 Soviet troops from Afghanistan.


Pope Celebrates Mass in Peru for 1.5 Million
LEAD: Guarded by a small army of policemen and soldiers, Pope John Paul II celebrated a solemn Mass today for one of the largest crowds to attend a papal event in recent years.


Gretzky &amp; company: Older, Smarter, Better
LEAD: EARLY in this decade, when the Islanders were Stanley Cup champions and the best team in the National Hockey League, the Edmonton Oilers were refugees from the disbanded World Hockey Association, a team full of fresh kids who were full of fresh talent.


Pipeline Blast Laid to Rebels
LEAD: Leftist guerrillas blew up Colombia's main pipeline Saturday as Latin American and Caribbean oil-exporting countries ended talks in the Caribbean resort of Cartagena, Government officials said.


East Harlem Pastor Is Arrested as Rapist Of Girls, 14 and 16
LEAD: The 59-year-old pastor of an East Harlem church was arrested yesterday and charged with rape and sodomy in sexual attacks on two teen-age members of his congregation, the police said.


Arthur Miller, 71, Law Professor
LEAD: Arthur Selwyn Miller, a retired law teacher and an authority on constitutional law, died of a brain tumor Friday at his home in Key West, Fla.
He was 71 years old.


Southlife Holding Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southlife Holding Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,125,737
6,666,167
Net inc
b1,690,322
b1,127,696
Share earns
.32
.21
b-After investment gains of $812,135 for the latest first quarter and $355,888 for the year-ago period.


State University of New York at Albany
LEAD: Instead of setting out to acquire wealth, make something of your lives and ''hope you get rich in the process,'' Andy Rooney, the television commentator, told 2,800 graduates yesterday in a commencement address at the State University of New York at Albany. ''We have more rich people than we need right now,'' said Mr.


Their Main Commodity Is Nostalgia
LEAD: Trivia question on the Clifford J. Scott High School reunion, which was held Saturday night at the Matterhorn Hotel in East Hanover, N.J.: how many balloons of red and silver, the school colors, were floating above the banquet tables, and how many helium tanks did it take to inflate them?


Falcon Oil &amp; Gas Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Falcon Oil &amp; Gas Co Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
541,228
311,400
Net inc
147,428
189,759
Share earns
.09
.12
Year-ago first quarter earnings are restated to include a gain of $62,199, or 4 cents a share, form the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Michael Plofker Weds Robin Paula Gitomer
LEAD: The marriage of Robin Paula Gitomer, a senior interior designer for LCP Associates in Manhattan, to Michael Steven Plofker, an architect and associate at Fox &amp; Fowle, a Manhattan architectural firm, took place yesterday.
Rabbi Michael Klayman performed the ceremony at the de Seversky Conference Center in Old Westbury, L.I.


Hadson Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hadson Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
131,536,000
101,695,000
Net inc
556,000
1,455,000
Share earns
.03
.10
Shares outst
19,531,000
15,018,000


Marjory D. Fisher Wed To Eric Michael Kraus
LEAD: Marjory Diane Fisher and Eric Michael Kraus, lawyers in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office, were married yesterday at the Estherwood mansion in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Rabbi Mark Dov Shapiro performed the ceremony.


Harvard Rowers Take Title
LEAD: Harvard waited out a two-hour delay today before capturing the featured varsity heavyweight event at the 43d annual Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges Sprint Championships on a churning Quinsigamond Lake.


Lakers Top Jazz, Even Series
LEAD: For the last five days, it seemed as if time and fatigue had overtaken the Los Angeles Lakers.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Among all the professional teams in baseball, basketball, football and hockey, which one has the longest ongoing string of consecutive winning seasons?


Wheel Lock in White Plains
LEAD: Cyclists competing in the Subaru national criterium championships yesterday.
Page 4. (NYT/Bob Glass)


TV Notes
LEAD:  A New 'Omnibus'


Gunmen Kill 3 in Belfast Bar
LEAD: Three people were killed and nine others wounded today when gunmen burst into a bar in a Roman Catholic section of Belfast, the police reported.
There was no immediate claim of responsibility.


Osborn Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Osborn Communications
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,311,096
1,806,399
Net loss
b804,654
322,091
b-After a gain of $785,682.


Windsor Life Insurance Co of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Windsor Life Insurance Co of America
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b42,526
c178,508
Share earns
-
.11
b-After a capital loss of $2,261.
c-Net income and after capital gains of $239,450.


Give That Man an 'L'
LEAD: Jose Oquendo has played every position but catcher in his major league career.
Now he has a new claim to fame: he's the first non-pitcher in 20 years to get a decision.


Review/Dance; Ray Charles at a Peter Martins City Ballet Premiere
LEAD: Ray Charles took the New York City Ballet's American Music Festival by storm Saturday night with a most unusual personal appearance.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Several Ad Accounts Move to New Agencies
LEAD: A number of accounts found new homes on Friday.


Overseas Readers Lift A U.S. Book Distributor
LEAD: In less than two years, Baker &amp; Taylor Books has tripled its overseas business, taking advantage of growing foreign demand for American books.


Iran Dissidents Enter Gulf War
LEAD: The ground war between Iran and Iraq, which is approaching its ninth year, has taken a small but politically significant turn with the first major attack by dissident Iranians against positions held by troops loyal to the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.


Soviet Penal Institutions: See for Yourselves
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rep. Flake Keeps Post After Review by Church
LEAD: Representative Floyd H. Flake was reappointed as the pastor of his African Methodist Episcopal congregation yesterday after regional church leaders reviewed an allegation that he had engaged in sexual misconduct with a former church employee.


Over $2 Million Raised in AIDS Walk
LEAD: Some of the estimated 15,000 people who participated yesterday in the third annual AIDS Walk benefit.
Organizers said that $2,459,307 was raised to benefit the Gay Men's Health Crisis, the first AIDS service organization.
The 6.2-mile walk followed a rally at Damrosch Park in Lincoln Center. (NYT/Sara


Devils Don't Lose Their Spirit
LEAD: Only a handful of the faithful could have expected the Devils to be in the playoffs this year under a new president and general manager, and with a coaching change in midseason.


146 Sikhs Surrender at Golden Temple
LEAD: About 146 people, most of them Sikh militants, surrendered at the besieged Golden Temple complex here today during a cease-fire called by the Indian police.


Japanese Role in 'Star Wars'
LEAD: Five major Japanese companies are expected to win contracts in the United States's billion-dollar Strategic Defense Initiative, according to a newspaper report.


North European Oil Royalty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North European Oil Royalty Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,410,952
4,226,187
Net inc
3,293,390
4,094,994
Share earns
.40
.50
6mo rev
7,192,704
8,971,644
Net inc
6,951,757
8,725,261
Share earns
.84
1.06


Harvard's Chief Battles Union Drive
LEAD: As a Harvard law professor and labor arbitrator, Derek C. Bok exalted the role of labor unions in the work place.
But since then he has become president of the university, and in that capacity he appears to have modified - some say abandoned - his earlier views.


Couple Shot to Death In a Brooklyn Project
LEAD: A man and a woman who the police said were apparently involved in drug dealing, were shot and killed in a Brooklyn housing project last night, officials said.


Rates Seen Stable for Near Term
LEAD: Barring an unpleasant surprise, interest rates should remain close to their current levels for the near term, credit market analysts say.


Silvercrest Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silvercrest Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,272,000
16,902,000
Net loss
b537,000
c453,000
Share earns
-
.14
9mo rev
52,458,000
48,409,000
Net inc
b65,000
d1,464,000
Share earns
.02
.44


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; The Profit Motive Was Not Motivation
LEAD: After a string of jobs in the public sector stretching over two decades, Peter C. Goldmark jumped across the line into private business in 1986 to take a senior management job with the Times Mirror Company.
Now, after only two years, he is leaping back out of it, this time to experience the world of private, nonprofit organizations as president of the Rockefeller


Poloron Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Poloron Products Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,976,000
7,175,000
Net loss
89,000
b174,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income and after an extraordinary gain of $61,000.


Dr. King Is Honored With a 5th Ave. Parade
LEAD: Cub Scouts passing the reviewing stand yesterday as they participated in the annual Martin Luther King Memorial Parade.
The parade, first held in Harlem in 1959 to honor war dead, moved to Fifth Avenue in 1964 and was dedicated to Dr.
King after he was assassinated in 1968. (NYT/Sara Krulwich)


THREATEN CONTRAS
LEAD: Apparently convinced that the contra guerrilla army is collapsing, the Sandinista Government is taking a new and harder line against opposition groups in the country.


Cycling; Olympic Prospects Emerge in Race
LEAD: From the lost generation to the last generation, amateur bicycle racing has always had to put up with images.
Hemingway, a bullfight and big game enthusiast, poked fun at the soft life of cyclists in his novel of the 1920's, ''The Sun Also Rises.'' In the recent movie, ''Breaking Away,'' the sport was framed by the poignancy of class conflict and shady racing tactics.


Retired Executive Is Named Quaker State's Next Leader
LEAD: Jack W. Corn tried the pasture for a while, but he is back at the Quaker State Corporation and has been designated the motor-oil company's next chief.


Morton Downey Jr. Is Taking His Abrasive Style Nationwide
LEAD: Sean Morton Downey Jr. - Sean to his friends, ''Mort, Mort, Mort'' to the adoring, T-shirted fans crowding the New Jersey television-studio audience - smoked and paced and spewed venom.


New York City's Economy Booms, and the Poor Begin to Profit
LEAD: After years of economic growth and declining unemployment in New York City, researchers have detected the first signs that the benefits are beginning to spill over to some of those living in poverty.


Asia's Touchy Tiger
LEAD: Someone shrewdly described Singapore as a capitalist society run by a Leninist party.
That's the People's Action Party, whose unquestioned boss is Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew.
For 29 years, Mr.
Lee has been a largely benevolent autocrat, helping guide Singapore's 2.6 million people to the third-highest living standard in Asia, with an annual per capita income of $7,000.


Navy Officer and Instructors Charged in Death of Recruit
LEAD: The officer in charge of the Navy rescue swimmer school and five instructors face military charges in a recruit's death at Pensacola Naval Air Station, the Navy says.


Texas International Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas International Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,670,000
2,869,000
Net loss
3,597,000
b10,471,000
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $265,000.


In Fashion World, the Trend Is Away From Drugs
LEAD: In the world of high fashion, it's no longer fashionable to be high.
Interviews with designers, photographers, editors and executives in the wake of Calvin Klein's statement last week that he has entered an alcohol and drug treatment program - the first major fashion figure to do so publicly - reveal an industry that has been moving quietly toward sobriety.


It's Official: Rap Music Is in the Mainstream
LEAD: Rap, the music that began in the nation's black urban ghettoes, enters the mainstream commercial music world in earnest this morning when 1,250,000 copies of Run-D.M.C.'s new album ''Tougher Than Leather'' go on sale.


Victoria Creations reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Victoria Creations (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,100,000
13,100,000
Net loss
616,000
b267,000
Share earns
-
.04
9mo sales
48,300,000
45,300,000
Net inc
700,000
3,300,000
Share earns
.10
.44


The U.N. Today
LEAD: Economic and Social Council  Meets at 10 A.M.
SOCIAL (SECOND) COMMITTEE - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Trusteeship Council  Meets at 10:30 A.M.


Baruch-Foster Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baruch-Foster Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,862,357
2,238,790
Net loss
469,843
39,612


Charlottetown Journal; Isle of Green Gables: Just Another Coney Island?
LEAD: Few inhabited spots in North America have as pristine an image as this island province.


Olympic Notebook; Lewis and Johnson Won't Duel in U.S.
LEAD: At long last, it now appears that Carl Lewis and Ben Johnson will race each other this summer as a prelude to the Olympics.
Promoters are close to finishing a three-race deal of two 100-meter dashs and one 200 that could generate as much as $500,000 for each runner.


China Looks for Help to Keep Its Oil Flowing
LEAD: Out where the lazy, muddy Pearl River empties into the South China Sea, the Chinese Government hopes foreign oil companies will find oil - lots of it.


Images of Coney Island in Scenery and Dance
LEAD: Dancers of all ages, from youngsters to the elderly, will take part in the National Dance Institute's ''Event of the Year'' on June 12 and 14 at the Felt Forum, Seventh Avenue and 33d Street. ''A Day in the Life of Coney Island'' is the theme of the annual event, which will feature scenery and dances that re-create the atmosphere of the seaside amusement park.


US Intec reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US Intec (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,662,000
12,033,000
Net inc
206,000
485,000
Share earns
.07
.16
The year-ago results reclassified to conform with 1988 presentation.


Bando McGlocklin Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bando McGlocklin Capital
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
316,408
155,302
Share earns
.16
.12
Shares outst
2,044,253
1,294,320
9mo net inc
886,381
558,090
Share earns
.43
.43


Resource Exploration Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Resource Exploration Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,012,908
1,490,198
Net inc
9,537
209,736
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
2,182,832
2,959,344
Net inc
589,504
357,420
Share earns
.13
.08


Robert D. Emmerich, Composer, 83
LEAD: Robert D. Emmerich, a pianist and composer who played with the Tommy Dorsey band and wrote songs for Fats Waller, died Friday at Florida Medical Center here.
He was 83 years old.


Finding Oil in Doors and Lights
LEAD: The search for new sources of oil in the United States continues to focus on deep ocean waters and regions like the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, where oil exploration is pitted against environmental concerns.
But some energy experts are successfully prospecting for oil in such places as windows, ceilings and doors.


Oklahoma City Journal; Square-Dancing as Steps on a Road
LEAD: Hours from now, there would be 6,000 people here in the Myriad Convention Center, the women's skirts round as mushroom caps, the dancers bobbing to the beat as they responded to orders to ''swing your partner'' and ''do-sa-do.''


7 Are Reported Killed in 2 Attacks in Sudan
LEAD: Gunmen killed at least seven people, most of them foreigners, in simultaneous attacks today against a hotel and a club frequented by foreign aid workers and diplomats in central Khartoum, the police said.


Albany Plans Tougher Penalties For Possession and Sale of Crack
LEAD: The penalties for possession of crack in New York State would be significantly increased under an agreement announced yesterday by Governor Cuomo and key lawmakers.


Metro Matters; Astrology Quiz: Will the Reagans Hurt Business?
LEAD: ''Business has been very slow,'' said Elaine, who reads palms for $15 above a Chinese restaurant on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. ''Since the book, I think people are just shying away.''


A Rosier Outlook?
LEAD: Domestic rose growers are keeping their fingers crossed that this year's trade bill in Congress will not die.
There is a provision written into the legislation that could give them long-sought protection against Caribbean and South American growers.


Fitness; Swimming Conditions Heart, Mind and Body
LEAD: FEW human athletic endeavors are as beautiful as an accomplished swimmer gliding through the water, a study in grace and precision of movement.
For such people, swimming appears to come naturally.
For others of us, bullied into the deep end of a pool by a physical education teacher long ago, swimming is an ungainly struggle, a battle to breathe correctly and stroke efficiently.


The Editorial Notebook; Split-Level Schooling
LEAD: Carol Lockhart, a 20-year-old senior, had desperately wanted to transfer to Bronx Regional High School.
As one of New York City's 16 alternative high schools, Bronx Regional normally attracts students who have dropped out of or had trouble in other schools.
But Carol's reason for going there was the Eleanor Roosevelt LYFE Center, an infant care center where she could leave her 13-month-old daughter,


Literary Masterpieces Of the Berg Collection
LEAD: From the first Western printing of Homer in 1488 to a handwritten poem by Richard Wilbur, poet laureate of the United States, dated 1988 - 500 years of British and American literature are represented in the magical cases of the Berg Collection, in a show opening today at the New York Public Library.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The Sandinistas see the contras falling apart, and they see the United States not disposed to help them.
They feel that they now control the situation, which means there's no reason to compromise on anything.''  - Luis Sanchez Sancho, a leader of the Socialist Party in Nicaragua.  [ A1:6. ]


'Speed-the-Plow' Stars Talk Things Over
LEAD: Scenes from an interview with Ron Silver, Joe Mantegna and Madonna, the co-stars of David Mamet's new hit play set in Hollywood, ''Speed-the-Plow.''&lt;n  Scene 1


Hemophilia and AIDS: Silent Suffering
LEAD: Hit harder by AIDS than perhaps any other group, the nation's 15,000 hemophiliacs have been racked by anguish, confusion and anger, and forced to confront a threat that is taking the lives of many and scarring the emotions of many more.


INSIDE
LEAD:  The Voters Are Watching  Despite talk of apathy, more Americans say they are paying a lot of attention to this Presidential campaign than in 1984.
Page A15.
Decline in New York's Poor  Researchers see signs that the city's economic growth is helping some poor people.
Many others stay mired in poverty, they say.


Market Place; Unlocking Values In Hotel Stocks
LEAD: THE lodging industry rises and falls with the economy.
When the economy sparkles, more people travel.
As it softens, individuals and business travelers tend to stay home or at cheaper hotels.
Even though the economy is relatively stable now, the hotel industry is suffering from overcapacity, the result of overbuilding that ended when the tax laws were changed in 1986.


McDonnell Sued by U.S.
LEAD: The Government has joined in a lawsuit contending that the McDonnell Douglas Corporation overcharged the Army by as much as $175 million in developing the Apache attack helicopter.


Duratek Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duratek Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
959,000
960,000
Net inc
41,000
91,000
Share earns
.01
.02


On One Issue, No Dispute: L.I. Electric Rates to Rise
LEAD: As electric rate increases slow in most communities around the nation, Long Island residents and businesses will continue to face soaring electric bills - no matter how the impasse over the Long Island Lighting Company's Shoreham nuclear power plant is resolved, according to state and utility officials.


Review/Television; On U.S.-British Relations
LEAD: ''An Ocean Apart'' traces 20th-century United States-British relations.
That may sound academic and dusty; the seven-part series, however, is not.
It is generally imaginative and often evocative; old newsreel film recalls a world that no longer exists.
The series starts on Channel 13 at 9 o'clock tonight.


Moscow's Convention
LEAD: Are you looking forward to the summit?
When that question is asked of Georgi Arbatov, the Soviet propagandist, he sighs and substitutes a less enthusiastic verb: ''We're waiting for the summit.''


Afghan Rebel Vows Assault
LEAD: An Afghan guerrilla leader said today that his fighters would attack Jalalabad as soon as it was free of Soviet Army troops.


Review/Music; A Neglected Symphony
LEAD: In the 1940's, Harold Shapero was nominated for prominence in this country's musical future.
But those who said they knew soon forgot.
Mr.
Shapero took on a quiet but distinguished career as a teacher in Boston, and his music has more or less disappeared from the concert stage.
Was Aaron Copland's original assessment of his gifts too high?


Transcon Incorporated reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transcon Incorporated (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
76,554,000
75,806,000
Net loss
9,375,000
5,399,000


Alaskan Oil Data Dispute
LEAD: The Chevron Corporation has won the first round of a legal battle to keep state officials and its competitors from seeing confidential data on the first exploratory well in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.


Control Laser International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Control Laser International (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
9,439,000
14,658,000
Net loss
b5,803,000
c4,504,000
b-Includes a loss of $1,458,000 from discontinued operations due to the liquidation of its foreign subsidiary, Control Laser Ltd., and a charge of $2,230,000 from a settlement of a patent infringement case.


Perplexed Counselors And the Facts of Life
LEAD: One of the most difficult challenges health care teams face is advising young men who have hemophilia and also carry or are likely to carry the AIDS virus.
Should they have sexual relationships?
Should they tell women they are dating that they are infected with the AIDS virus?


American League; Mariners Rally, Beat Red Sox
LEAD: The Seattle Mariners scored four runs after two were out in the ninth inning today against Lee Smith, the Boston relief ace, and snapped a four-game losing streak with an 11-7 victory over the Red Sox.


Immucell Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Immucell Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
206,045
298,319
Net loss
210,289
76,686


Sara Louise Nolan, Editor, Is Married to Peter Arnell
LEAD: Sara Louise Nolan, an assistant editor of Vanity Fair magazine, and Peter Eric Arnell, a co-chairman of Arnell/Bickford Associates, an advertising agency, were married yesterday at the United Methodist Church in Saugerties, N.Y., by the Rev.
Alden Barnes.


Syracuse University
LEAD: Four people were awarded honorary degrees yesterday at the 134th commencement at Syracuse University.


More Training for Guards Is Urged In Study on Use of Force in Jails
LEAD: The New York City Department of Correction should double the training it gives its officers, stop mandatory overtime and create a panel to investigate allegations of brutality against inmates, according to a study by correction experts on the use of force in the city's jails.


Stony Brook
LEAD: Carl E. Schorske, a former professor of history at Princeton University and the winner of the 1981 Pulitzer Prize in general non-fiction, addressed the 28th commencement of the State University of New York at Stony Brook.


Europe Nears Pact on Money
LEAD: European Community finance ministers have cleared the way for an accord allowing the free movement of money within the 12-nation bloc.


Emons Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emons Holdings
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,745,110
1,172,282
Net inc
b193,255
c195,529
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
5,418,439
9,330,802
Net inc
b958,463
c2,045,513
Share earns
.19
-
b-Includes tax credits of $58,746 and $303,612 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Charles W. Gerber Wed To Maria Silvia Matera
LEAD: At Temple Emanu-El in Manhattan, Maria Silvia Matera was married last evening to Charles Waas Gerber by Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel.


Financings Limited to Short-Term Bills
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular auction of three-month and six-month bills.


Sports World Specials
LEAD:  Shrinking Nighthawks


Kelley Oil &amp; Gas Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kelley Oil &amp; Gas Partners (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,310,000
2,144,000
Net inc
484,000
213,000
Share earns
.08
.06
Shares outst
5,988,234
3,378,360
Share earnings and shares outstanding are in units.


Craig Statler, an Executive, Is Married to Alison Berger
LEAD: Alison Berger, a daughter of Marion G. Berger of Plainview, L.I., and George Berger of New York, was married yesterday at the National Arts Club in New York to Craig Statler, the son of Ben Statler of Vernon, N.J., and the late Sylvia Statler.
Rabbi Bradd Boxman performed the ceremony.


UTL Corp () reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UTL Corp ()
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,241,236
5,339,636
Net loss
b408,289
c578,552
Share earns
-
.12
9mo rev
21,890,108
18,550,000
Net inc
b833,619
2,157,987
Share earns
.21
.45
b-After gains from the early retirement of debt of $436,177 for the quarter and $5,075,185 for the 9 months.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Pistons Lead Series Against Bulls, 3-1
LEAD: The Detroit Pistons didn't deserve to lose today, Isiah Thomas decided.
And largely because of him, they didn't.


It's Only a Picture
LEAD: President Reagan has been singed of late in the writings of such former aides as Larry Speakes, Michael K. Deaver and Donald T. Regan.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Top Remington Officer In Ad for New Shaver
LEAD: Remington Products is bringing out a new device, allowing Victor K. Kiam 2d, the chief executive officer, to get in front of the camera again and tell consumers about it.


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Saudi Arabia will spend $14 billion to develop the city of Mecca over the next 20 years, Okaz, a Jiddah-based newspaper, reported yesterday.
Mayor Fouad Omar Tawfiq said a number of projects would turn Mecca into two cities: one for pilgrims and the other for residents.
As Islam's holiest city, Mecca is the host to millions of pilgrims each year.


Fiery Crash Kills 27 in Kentucky As Truck and Youths' Bus Collide
LEAD: Federal investigators today began looking into a fiery collision late Saturday between a pickup truck traveling the wrong way on an interstate highway and a bus returning from a church youth outing.
Twenty-seven passengers on the bus were killed.


Review/Television; Families and Sentiment Are Hot in New Series
LEAD: It is a truism that there is nothing like the humiliation of being in the ratings cellar to stimulate a television network's creative juices.
Not too long ago, NBC was languishing at the inglorious (but never unprofitable) bottom of the weekly Nielsen lists.
That's when the network began reaching out to innovative series like ''Hill Street Blues'' and ''Cheers.


Greed Is Raising Apparel Prices, Not the Decline of the Dollar
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviet Consultant Shows Way to Business Success
LEAD: If you doubt that private enterprise is beginning to make headway in the Soviet Union, Vladimir Yakovlev suggests you try to find a plain white T-shirt in a Moscow department store.


Steel Starts Early Push On Quotas
LEAD: The gathering of steel company executives in Washington tomorrow for the annual conference of the American Iron and Steel Institute promises to serve as the beginning of an intensive lobbying effort to extend import- protection measures.


Giants Win, 5-1, To Sweep Mets
LEAD: It may not shake empires or even shake the balance of power in the National League, but the Mets lost to the San Francisco Giants again today, 5-1, and for the first time since last July were swept in a three-game series.


Liberty Homes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liberty Homes Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,828,000
19,152,000
Net inc
b116,000
3,444,000
Share earns
.03
.08
b-After a credit of $661,000 from an accounting change.


A Wasteful Law Arouses Too Little Concern
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lan Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lan Systems Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
656,230
229,814
Net loss
8,921
51,213


Long Island University
LEAD: Richard D. Heffner, host of ''Open Mind,'' a public-television interview program, delivered Long Island University's 31st commencement address yesterday. ''We have made imagery, not substance, the hallmark of our society, rewarding the image-maker with a kind of obscene idolatry, rewarding him financially, politically, even academically,'' Mr.


Notre Dame
LEAD: Mayor Andrew Young of Atlanta urged graduates at the University of Notre Dame to become politically aware and volunteer their skills to the needy.


Stealth Bomber Takes Shape: A Flying Wing and Crew of 2
LEAD: After eight years of secrecy, a public portrait of the Stealth bomber is taking shape: an airplane with the range and sophistication to roam elusively over enemy territory for repeated attacks with only two fliers aboard.


Canada Plans New Ministry
LEAD: The Canadian Government, moving to bolster the country's research efforts, has introduced in Parliament a bill to establish a new ''superministry'' to promote development of science and technology.


Charter-Crellin reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charter-Crellin
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,465,000
10,170,000
Net inc
1,142,000
770,000
Share earns
.59
.48
Shares outst
1,930,000
1,590,000


Golf; Lopez Fires a 66 To Win by Eight
LEAD: Nancy Lopez turned in a round as close to perfect as she has had and won the 39th L.P.G.A. tournament of her spectacular career more easily than any of her previous 38 triumphs.


Group Plans To Challenge A.T.&amp;T., Sun
LEAD: An international group of computer manufacturers plans to defy an effort to set a software standard initiated last year by the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company and Sun Microsystems Inc.
The group's challenge could be announced as early as tomorrow.


Tate &amp; Lyle Outlines Staley Plans
LEAD: Neil M. Shaw, chairman of Tate &amp; Lyle P.L.C., the big British sugar refiner that reached an agreement late Friday to buy Staley Continental Inc., said in an interview yesterday that he intends to begin talks quickly to sell Staley's food services division, name new managers and cut operating costs.


The Basics of Setting Up Boat Moorings
LEAD: AS dock space in the nation's harbors becomes increasingly expensive and hard to find, yachtsmen are turning to moorings as a place to keep their boats.
When set up properly, the harbor anchorages are as safe as a dockside berth, and often less wearing on the boat.
In fact, in a storm, moorings often are preferable.


Slaught on Disabled List
LEAD: The news was not good, but Don Slaught seemed to accept it as little more than an unfortunate break at an inopportune time.


Farm Export Rise Foreseen
LEAD: A new Government study projects continued increases in the volume and value of United States farm exports in the next 10 years, declining inventories of grain and steadily rising prices.
The report by the Food and


American Integrity CorpO) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Integrity CorpO)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,961,000
19,840,000
Net inc
280,000
b1,469,000
Share earns
.04
.22
b-Includes a capital gain of $22,000.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Growing Demand for Name Lists
LEAD: FEW people got excited when Young &amp; Rubicam announced last fall that Wunderman Worldwide, its direct marketing network, was entering into a joint venture with the CCX Network.
The venture was to be called Focusmaster.


An Instrument of Mirth
LEAD: Bassoonists have long learned to live with it: when thrust into the limelight, the bassoon tends to sound - well, funny.
Just think of the solo in ''The Sorcerer's Apprentice.'' There is even a bassoon line in Beethoven's Fifth Symphony that is almost always transferred to horns, lest giggles spread through the orchestra.


Louvre Courtyard Set for July Opening
LEAD: The Cour Napoleon at the Louvre -the seven-acre courtyard that contains the controversial pyramid designed by I. M. Pei - will open to the public on July 3.
But the 71-foot glass pyramid itself, which is to become the main entrance to the museum, will not open until late November or early December, according to Pierre-Yves Ligen, the


Denning Mobile Robotics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Denning Mobile Robotics
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
663,954
464,546
The company said it does not report revenue because it is still in the development stage.


Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion
LEAD: Twenty-one graduates were ordained as rabbis and eight invested as cantors yesterday at the ordination and investiture ceremonies of Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion.


Inmate Rebels Agree to Surrender
LEAD: About 20 inmates at a medium-security state prison released one of their three hostage guards late today and tentatively agreed to surrender Monday morning, prison officials said.


Ever-Chaotic World of Thai Politics Becomes Even More So
LEAD: Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda, flying to Moscow Monday for his first visit there, leaves behind him a political climate more unsettled than at any time since an abortive coup in September 1985.


National League; Cards Rally to Win, 7-6
LEAD: Willie McGee's two-out, pinch-hit single in the bottom of the ninth gave the St.
Louis Cardinals a 7-6 victory today over the Atlanta Braves.


Joseph Zambelli, Pyrotechnist, 80
LEAD: Joseph Zambelli, who put together fireworks displays for Presidential inaugurations, the Statue of Liberty centennial and other national celebrations, died of a heart attack Thursday at his home here.
He was 80 years old.


Clearly Wrong on Eyeglasses
LEAD:  Q: What's the difference between $60 reading glasses prescribed by an optometrist in New York and a $12 pair from Woolworth's in New Jersey?
A: $48.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 4 Promotions At Spielvogel
LEAD: Four executive vice presidents at Backer Spielvogel Bates, all of whom were in on the founding of Backer &amp; Spielvogel in 1979, have been promoted to new responsibilities, further solidifying the smaller merger partner's hold on top management.


Women's Club Challenges CUNY on Hiring
LEAD: The City University of New York's hiring practices, which some have criticized as being discriminating against women, is being challenged again, this time by a nonprofit women's group.


Business and the Law; Concern Mounts On Product Suits
LEAD: AN explosion of product-liability cases has hit the courts, according to a recently completed study that will be released later this month.


Horse Racing; A Look at Pimlico: Is Paradise Lost?
LEAD: Pimlico Race Course, where the 113th Preakness Stakes will be run Saturday, has long held a reputation as a front-runner's paradise because of its supposedly tight turns and fast surface.
So a horse who can win the Kentucky Derby at Churchill Downs from start to finish, as Winning Colors did nine days ago, is supposed to have an even easier time of it in the


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; New Publication Aimed At Patients of Dentists
LEAD: Dental Learning Systems of Newtown, Pa., plans to publish a quarterly for patients.


Dues and Costs Rise For Club Membership
LEAD: Membership rolls were flat, while revenues from dues and operations rose a bit, but not quite as much as costs.


Robotic Vision Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Robotic Vision Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,232,000
4,187,000
Net loss
79,000
b166,000
Share earns
-
.03
6mo rev
8,160,000
7,992,000
Net loss
53,000
116,000
b-Net income


Six Firestone Plants Struck; No Negotiations Scheduled
LEAD: About 4,700 United Rubber Workers members struck The Firestone Tire and Rubber Company plants in six states today, and 15,000 other union members are poised to strike The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company at noon Tuesday.


146 Sikhs Surrender at Besieged Temple in India
LEAD: Police guarding women and children after they surrendered at Golden Temple complex in Amritsar, India.
About 146 people, most of them Sikh militants, surrendered during cease-fire called by police.
Page A3. (Reuters)


Tanker Owners Seeing End to an 8-Year Slump
LEAD: Tanker owners see signs that the eight-year-old slump in their industry is coming to an end, as the amount of surplus capacity and the number of tankers being scrapped fell in 1987 to their lowest levels of the 1980's.


WPP Chief to Be Geller Witness
LEAD: The four-week-old hearing in a legal proceeding between the Lord, Geller, Federico, Einstein advertising agency and a rival agency formed by defectors from Lord, Geller is expected to take a dramatic turn this week with the testimony of Martin Sorrell.


Personal Ensign Is Back
LEAD: Personal Ensign overcame a slow start and a seven-month layoff to remain undefeated by scoring a 1 3/4-length victory over Clabber Girl in the $170,100 Shuvee Handicap for older fillies yesterday at Belmont Park.


Official Puts More Urgency In Savings-Fund Warning
LEAD: The chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has been warning the banking and savings industries that if the long-term problems of the insolvent savings and loan insurance fund are not resolved soon, the next President might come up with some very unpalatable solutions.


Jackson Honors a Personal Example
LEAD: Gertrude Brown, a child of the underclass, yearned to lift her family from poverty.


Bruins Are Ready to Take the Final Step
LEAD: Late Saturday night, plastic replicas of the Stanley Cup were flung onto the ice at Boston Garden as Bruins fans, who haven't had a real cup of their own since 1972, celebrated their team's ascent to the final round of the playoffs.
There were still 24 seconds remaining in the game against the Devils, but once Ken Linseman lofted a short-handed flip shot into New Jersey's empty net to give Boston a 6-2 lead, it became clear that the Devils' National Hockey League playoff odyssey had ended while that of the Bruins would continue in


St. Michael's
LEAD: Eugene Lang, who received national acclaim in 1981 after promising a sixth-grade class in Harlem that he would pay their college tuitions, discussed matching one's ideals with one's life in his address today to the graduating class of St.
Michael's College.


Dip in Tourism Has Israelis Worried
LEAD: The Palestinian uprising has caught up with Israel's tourism industry, the nation's largest source of foreign capital.


MSI Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MSI Electronics
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
366,232
432,477
Net loss
73,916
171
6mo sales
732,929
847,025
Net loss
101,307
b51,324
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


In France, a Pendulum Swings From the Left
LEAD: To the Editor:


Vanderbilt Gold reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vanderbilt Gold (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,299,000
1,436,000
Net inc
145,000
b1,505,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
11,080,000
8,603,000
b-Net loss and included $1,308,000 in writedowns because of the mergers completed in the first quarter.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Golf  Lietzke Wins Byron Nelson: Bruce Lietzke, who hadn't won a tournament in four years, sank a 20-foot birdie putt on the first playoff hole yesterday to beat Clarence Rose and capture the windswept $750,000 Byron Nelson Golf Classic in Irving, Tex.
The victory was worth $135,000, more than doubling Lietzke's winnings of $101,157 before the tournament.


In a Surprise, Voters Say They're Watching a Lot
LEAD: For all the talk about how voters have been turned off by boring candidates engaged in confusing contests, more Americans say they are paying a lot of attention to the Presidential campaign this year than said so in 1984.


Facing a Rising Clamor to Fight Drugs, Congress Crosses a Long-Held Line
LEAD: Since the early 1980's, Congressional declarations of war on drugs have tended to coincide with election years, and 1988 is no exception.


Don't Let Prison Space Be the Judge
LEAD: To the Editor:


French Finance Chief Is a Tough Pragmatist
LEAD: In a nation where most Government officials, socialist or conservative, are graduates of elite professional schools, Pierre Beregovoy, France's newly named Finance Minister, is a notable exception.


Eastover Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastover Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,165,000
1,080,000
Net inc
b664,000
b554,000
Share earns
.55
.44
b-Includes gains from the sale of real estate of $275,000 for the latest quarter and $188,000 for the year- earlier period.


International Totalizator Sysems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Totalizator Sysems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,619,225
6,570,538
Net loss
456,356
b322,507
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income and includes tax loss carryforwards of $115,000.


Randi S. Roth Is Bride Of John Devers Hursh
LEAD: The marriage of Randi Susann Roth, the daughter of Marna Roth of Oceanside, L.I., and the late Morton Roth, to John Devers Hursh, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Hursh of Rochester, took place yesterday at the Water's Edge at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens.
Judge Ira P. Block of the First District Court in Hauppauge, L


Review/Dance; Muna Tseng Miniatures
LEAD: Muna Tseng Dance Projects brought choreographic miniatures to the Joyce Theater on Thursday night.
Even an odyssey was only a tiny epic.  ''A Little Odyssey'' was the appropriate title for a new work collaboratively choreographed and performed by Ms.
Tseng and Cydney Wilkes that proved to be a journey into fantasy.


Iraq Claims New Tanker Raid
LEAD: Iraq said today that its warplanes hit another supertanker off Iran's coast, and Teheran accused the United States Navy of jamming radar and radio to aid Iraqi jets in a devastating raid on a vital oil terminal.


10 South Africa Miners Die
LEAD: Ten gold miners fell to their deaths Saturday after an elevator hit an obstruction in the mine shaft, management said.
The accident occurred at the Harmony Gold Mine, near the town of Virgina in the Orange Free State.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Michel Camdessus (Reuters); Latin Frustration With I.M.F. Grows
LEAD: When the Latin American debt saga began in 1982, the International Monetary Fund took the lead in trying to prop up the region's ailing economies and prevent a flurry of defaults from damaging the international financial system.


Soviet TV, Accenting the Positive, Offers Heavy Coverage of Pullout
LEAD: The beginning of the Soviet Union's withdrawal of military forces from Afghanistan was given unusually prominent coverage today in Soviet newspapers and on the prime-time television news.


Bruhn Dance Prize Given
LEAD: Errol Pickford of the Royal Ballet and Rose Gad Poulsen of the Royal Danish Ballet have won the first Erik Bruhn dance prize, and will share $11,250.
The award, established in a trust fund by Mr.
Bruhn before his death in April 1986, is to be given annually to the best male and best female dancer between the ages of 18 and 26 who are members of the Royal Ballet, Royal Danish Ballet, American Ballet Theater or National Ballet of Canada - the companies with which Mr.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ownership Is Changing At Richmond's A.M.W.
LEAD: Richard E. Athey, the 54-year-old chairman, chief executive officer, chief creative officer and - most important - majority stockholder of Athey Martin Webb in Richmond has retired from the agency for health reasons.
Stephen H. Martin, 43 and president, is buying him out and will become chief executive of the 16-year-old agency.


Australia Becomes a Stand-In for Hollywood
LEAD: Six years ago, the miniseries adapted from Colleen McCullough's best-selling novel ''The Thorn Birds'' - the most popular Australian story of this generation - was filmed in the Simi Valley, northwest of Los Angeles.
The producers decided it was cheaper to simulate the Australian settings than to film Down Under.


Marti June Schiff Wed in Hartford
LEAD: The Old State House in Hartford was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Marti June Schiff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Lee Schiff of Avon, Conn., and Dr.
Minas S. Constantinides, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Spiros Constantinides of Narragansett, R.I.
Justice of the Peace Edward Jack Brooks of Newington,


Jamie L. Kreitman Wed To Joseph Alan Cohen
LEAD: Jamie Lauren Kreitman, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Benjamin Z. Kreitman of Brooklyn, and Joseph Alan Cohen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold L. Cohen of Brooklyn, were married yesterday at Congregation Emunath Israel in New York.
The bride's father and Rabbis Kenneth Auman and Mayer Leifer performed the ceremony.


Candela Laser Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Candela Laser Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,909,784
1,014,724
Net inc
152,378
b634,031
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
9,824,473
2,651,458
Net inc
146,528
b1,445,951
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Spinks to Sign Pact
LEAD: Michael Spinks and Butch Lewis, his promoter-adviser, are scheduled to sign contacts today for Spinks's fight against the heavyweight champion, Mike Tyson, on June 27 in Atlantic City.
Milton Chwasky, Lewis's attorney, reported their plans to sign the pacts.
Bill Cayton, Tyson's manager, said all other parties in the fight had signed contracts.


SBK Acquires Stake in Cinecom
LEAD: SBK Entertainment World Inc. has acquired a substantial interest in Cinecom Entertainment Group, an independent film production and distribution company, the companies announced yesterday.


Hawks Even Series With Celtics, 2-2
LEAD: The Hawks sensed that the Celtics were in trouble tonight in the first 19 seconds of the game, when Dominique Wilkins hit his first shot, an 11-foot jumper on a pass from Glenn (Doc) Rivers.


Angolan Affirms Wider Cuban Role
LEAD: Rejecting comparisons with the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, Angola's President said today that the Cuban force here had been reinforced.


Rating Upgraded For Dow Chemical
LEAD: The rating on about $4 billion of debt issued by the Dow Chemical Corporation and its units was increased yesterday by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


O.E.C.D. Is More Upbeat on Growth
LEAD: The world's growth outlook is better than expected, but trade imbalances are being reduced more slowly than predicted, officials of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said today.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''I suspect, therefore, that members of our society will be shocked to learn that the Court, the ultimate guarantor of liberty, deems unreasonable our expectation that the aspects of our private lives that are concealed safely in a trash bag will not become public.''  - Justice William J. Brennan, in dissent on a ruling that permits the police to freely search through garbage.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Harrowing Task
LEAD: Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, brought new definition to his career today as he explained how he wound up with a harrowing task behind the White House press podium rather than at harrowing work in the fields of his father's farm.


Natalie Wales Winslow, Author, 58
LEAD: Natalie Wales Winslow, an author of novels, articles and poetry, died of cancer on May 5 at her home in Winchester, England.
She was 58 years old.


Cineplex Odeon reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cineplex Odeon (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
134,853,000
112,916,000
Net inc
8,006,000
6,468,000
Share earns
.17
.16
Shares outst
47,977,000
38,439,000


'Killer' Bees? Get Serious.
LEAD: The equatorial sun bore down on the forested mountainside and the three beekeepers had already broken a sweat inside their protective garb.
They had hiked a good quarter-mile up a trail to the hives, isolated because this Venezuelan apiary was no backyard operation: it contained Africanized, ''killer'' bees.


U.S. WELCOMES PULLOUT
LEAD: The White House today welcomed the start of the withdrawal of Soviet troops as a first step in the pursuit of ''independence and self-determination'' for Afghanistan.


Manslaughter Charge Filed In Killing of Police Sergeant
LEAD: A Manhattan grand jury indicted a woman yesterday on charges of second-degree manslaughter in the shooting death of a New York City police sergeant, although the fatal shots were fired by another officer.


College Baseball Playoffs
LEAD: The Big East Conference double-elimination baseball playoffs will begin today at 5 P.M. a with a doubleheader at Muzzy Field in Bristol, Conn.
In the opener, top-seeded Villanova (16-2 in league games, 30-20 over all) will play St.
John's (9-9, 23-16-1).
In the second game, Seton Hall (12-6, 38-14) will play Providence (12-6, 22-27).


Chess
LEAD: In capturing the $20,000 first prize in the inaugural World Cup Tournament in Brussels, Anatoly Karpov achieved the 70th tournament victory of his career.
The former world champion from the Soviet Union now has a leg up in the competition for the $150,000 prize that will go to the overall winner of four of the six World Cup tournaments.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  U.S.
Edges Switzerland: The United States came from behind yesterday to edge Switzerland, 2-1, in the opening round of the $750,000 World Team Cup in Dusseldorf, West Germany.
In the other match in the eight-team competition, Argentina and France were tied at 1-1.
That match will be completed today.


Careers; Liberal Arts: High Road to 'Bottom Line'
LEAD: A NEW study of liberal arts graduates in the business world is optimistic.
The study, ''Liberal Education and Corporate America,'' was prepared by Prof.
Michael Useem of Boston University.


Cancer and Early Diet
LEAD: A new study of more than 1,000 Wisconsin residents suggests that frequent childhood consumption of fresh vegetables - especially broccoli, cauliflower and salad - is associated with a reduced risk of developing colon cancer later in life.


ALGERIA TO RESUME TIES WITH MOROCCO
LEAD: Algeria and Morocco announced today that they had decided to restore diplomatic relations after 12 years of bitter political dispute.


Books of The Times; On Clear Duplicity and Doubtful Consequence
LEAD:  The Secret Lives of Trebitsch Lincoln  By Bernard Wasserstein  Illustrated. 327 pages.
Yale University Press. $27.50.


Minstar Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minstar Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
130,118,000
101,164,000
Net inc
10,263,000
b3,555,000
Share earns
.78
-
b-Net loss and includes a loss from discontinued operations of $4,606,000.
The company said that it has completed the sale of its energy services segment to an undisclosed buyer.


Telemundo Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telemundo Group Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,204,000
14,910,000
Net loss
12,493,000
14,996,000
The company noted that the television broadcasting business is seasonal with the first quarter generally contributing the lowest level of revenue.


Surgeon General Asserts Smoking Is an Addiction
LEAD: The Surgeon General of the United States warned today that nicotine was as addictive as heroin and cocaine and recommended the licensing of those who sell tobacco products and tougher laws prohibiting their sale to minors.


Patriots' Settlement
LEAD: In a settlement af a dispute that arose when Brian Holloway, a three-time All-Pro, was traded by the New England Patriots to the Los Angeles Raiders last Sept. 2, the Patriots agreed yesterday to pay Holloway an undisclosed sum.
The National Football League Players Assocation said it would drop charges before a National Labor Relations Board administrative judge that Holloway had been traded because of union activities.


From PC's to Nodes
LEAD: THE personal computer is dead; long live the node.


New Stock for Affiliated
LEAD: Shareholders of Affiliated Publications Inc., the owner of The Boston Globe, yesterday approved creation of a new class of stock with 10 times the voting power of its common stock.


Excerpts From Justices' Opinions on Searches of Curbside Trash by Police
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the opinions in the Supeme Court's decision today that the police may freely search through garbage left outside homes for collection.
Justice Byron R. White wrote the majority opinion, joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Harry A. Blackman, John Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor and Antonin Scalia.


3 Are Killed And 20 Hurt In Bus Crash
LEAD: Three people were killed and 20 others were injured yesterday afternoon when a school bus carrying mentally handicapped people overturned on a sharp downhill curve, hit a utility pole and slid down a wooded embankment in northern Dutchess County, the authorities said.


International Thoroughbred Breeders Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Thoroughbred Breeders Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
23,640,221
21,858,974
Net loss
2,048,673
3,505,911
9mo rev
73,383,806
71,127,349
Net loss
10,690,120
15,298,408


A Powerful XT Clone
LEAD: PERHAPS the most important single element in determining the personality of a computer is its central processing unit, the chip that orchestrates the show.
That bit of silicon sets the speed of the computer, its memory capacity and the general efficiency of the entire system.


Maxxam Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxxam Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
40,949,000
45,793,000
Net inc
12,547,000
3,741,000
Share earns
.92
.27
The company said the increase in income was the result of the recovery of about $26,400,000 of net unrealized losses on marketable securities during the first quarter of 1988 compared to about $13,200,000 in the year-ago period.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council


Bartels &amp; Carstens Adds Associates to Its Name
LEAD: Four people have joined Bartels &amp; Carstens Advertising, which has prompted it to change to Bartels &amp; Carstens and Associates.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL  Little progress has been made on ending farm subsidies, officials of the leading industrial democracies say as they prepare to meet in Paris.
The U.S. wants countries to set a firm date for ending protectionism.
But the European Community maintains the U.S. is as much at fault as anyone else for slowing down the elimination of barriers.


Cuomo Voices Hope on Shoreham Talks
LEAD: Governor Cuomo said today that negotiations with the Long Island Lighting Company presented the best and cheapest way to close the Shoreham nuclear power plant.


Savin Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Savin Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
84,994,000
88,830,000
Net loss
2,073,000
b1,510,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income and includes a $605,000 tax credit.
The company said its latest first quarter revenue was affected by reduced levels of copier, accessory and facsimile volumes in dealer operations as many dealers stockpiled product in December to avoid previously announced January price increases.


Appointments At Federated
LEAD: Federated Department Stores, owners of Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and other leading stores, announced its first high-level executive appointments since it was acquired by the Campeau Corporation two weeks ago.


Poll Shows Dukakis Leads Bush; Many Reagan Backers Shift Sides
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis is capitalizing on deep public doubts about Vice President Bush and the Reagan Administration's handling of key issues and has emerged as the early favorite for the Presidential election in November, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.


Repurchase Plans Enlarged by G.M.
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it had completed the repurchase of five million class E shares, which reflect the earnings of its Electronic Data Systems Corporation subsidiary, and had authorized a program to repurchase another five million shares.


Baseball; A's Keep Rolling, Shut Out Red Sox
LEAD: Dave Parker hit a two-run homer and Storm Davis worked out of two early bases-loaded jams tonight, leading the Oakland Athletics to a 3-0 victory over the Boston Red Sox.


Bring Students and Their Mentors Together More Efficiently
LEAD: To the Editor:


Olson Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olson Industries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,517,000
15,752,000
Net loss
415,000
b2,882,000
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $3,254,000.


Television Reflects No Alien Culture
LEAD: To the Editor:


Excerpts From Koop Report on Smoking
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Surgeon General C. Everett Koop's report on smoking:  Nicotine: Pharmacokinetics, Metabolism and Pharmacodynamics


German Trade Surplus
LEAD: West Germany's trade surplus fell 21 percent in February, to 8.2 billion marks, or $13.8 billion, from 10.4 billion marks in the period a year earlier, the Federal Statistics Office said today.
The surplus came to 8.5 billion marks in January.
The February trade report had been delayed for six weeks because a new reporting system based on European Community guidelines went into effect.


A Judge Orders New Jury Panel For Davis Trial
LEAD: Acting on his earlier finding of racism by the defense in jury selection at the trial of Larry Davis, a Bronx judge yesterday removed the six jurors who had been seated and ordered a ''completely fresh'' trial.


Stars to Go reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stars to Go (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,596,000
14,619,000
Net loss
6,127,000
b336,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income and included a tax credit of $134,000.


Chambers Tape Depicts a Party Before His Trial
LEAD: In a videotape broadcast last night, Robert E. Chambers Jr., who pleaded guilty in March in the strangulation of Jennifer Levin, playfully acted out a story in which he accidentally broke the neck of a doll.


Skyscrapers Attract Imperiled Falcons
LEAD: High above the downtown area, two wild peregrine falcon chicks pecked out of their shells in a nest on a skyscraper ledge.


The Dollar Climbs Slightly While Gold Also Advances
LEAD: The dollar drifted slightly higher in quiet trading yesterday in advance of today's report on the United States trade deficit for March.


Treasury Prices Decline Narrowly
LEAD: A sharp rise in commodity prices pushed prices of Treasury notes and bonds narrowly lower yesterday.


Uniworld Group Lures Essence Programmer
LEAD: Gene A. Davis, formerly vice president of programming for Essence television, has joined the Uniworld Group, one of the largest black-owned ad agencies, as executive vice president of the its new unit, Uniworld Entertainment.


T. E. Stephens, Eisenhower Aide And G.O.P. Strategist, Dies at 84
LEAD: Thomas E. Stephens, a lawyer and former appointment secretary to President Eisenhower, died Sunday at the Morton Plant Hospital in Clearwater, Fla.
He was 84 years old.


Student's Suicide Stirs Protests in South Korea
LEAD: A student committed suicide Sunday to demand the release of political prisoners and the reunification of Korea.
The death set off protests today by hundreds of students, who hurled rocks and firebombs at riot police here.


Cajun Electric Power Co-op Places Top Yield at 10 1/8%
LEAD: Cajun Electric Power Co-op Inc. of Baton Rouge, La., is offering $200 million of noncallable cooperative utility trust certificates in a three-part financing through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The issue is supported by loans that were bought by Cajun Electric from the Agriculture Department's Rural Electrification


Senate to Begin Its Debate on Missile Pact Today
LEAD: Robert C. Byrd, the Senate majority leader, announced today that the Senate would begin floor debate on the new missile accord on Tuesday because all verification issues had been resolved.


A Prize Recital Sung In English
LEAD: Julia Davidson, winner of the 1987 Center for Contemporary Opera vocal competition, chose a program all in English for her prize recital Friday at Weill Recital Hall.
She met the first qualification for such an undertaking handily: texts to most of her selections were printed in the program, but only three or four times in the whole evening was it necessary to glance at them to learn what had been sung.


Europe Plans Fighter Plane
LEAD: West Germany, Britain and Italy today signed an accord to build 750 Eurofighters for $47 billion, the biggest West European military contract since World War II.
Spain is also expected to sign the agreement soon.


Carroll Kowal Is Dead; Housing Aide Was 59
LEAD: Carroll Kowal, a social worker and longtime advocate of adequate housing for the homeless and disabled, died of intestinal cancer Saturday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 59 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline on Saturday about the New York State Investigation Commission's finding evidence of possible extortion by Alexander A. Levine, the former executive director of the State Thruway Authority, characterized the commission incorrectly.
It was established by the State Legislature.


Soviet Television Broadcasts Censored Film About Stalin
LEAD: A two-hour documentary film held back by Soviet censors for eight months was shown on television tonight, drawing together critics and defenders of Stalin to put his leadership on trial.


Healthways Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthways Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,774,398
11,511,908
Net loss
2,164,240
278,883
9mo rev
51,551,475
34,778,129
Net loss
6,047,150
295,475


General Energy Development reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Energy Development (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,939,000
4,628,000
Net inc
110,000
b495,000
Share earns
.01
.05
b-Includes a gain of $475,000 from the settlement of certain natural gas contract disputes.


Back-to-School Days: Jet Rookies Hear Bell
LEAD: Just when the Jets' rookies thought school was out, it's back.


PATTERNS
LEAD:  Fashion Barometer


Shultz, in Talks With Peres, Rejects 'Status Quo'
LEAD: Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel discussed Middle East peace prospects and the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories today as he met with Secretary of State George P. Shultz and members of Congress.


Artists to Take Part In Tibet House Benefit
LEAD: Laurie Anderson, Philip Glass and Suzanne Vega are among the artists who plan to take part in a benefit performance on May 25 to establish Tibet House, a nonprofit educational and cultural organization that will be supervised by the Dalai Lama.


Verify, Clarify, Ratify
LEAD: The Senate rightly held back on ratifying the treaty on medium-range missiles in Europe when Soviet-U.S. verification differences sprang up.
Now Secretary of State Shultz is back from Geneva with the differences resolved.


Long Island Lighting Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Long Island Lighting Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
593,372,000
568,695,000
Net loss
b1,270,000
c70,325,000
Share earns
-
.45
b-After a charge of $1,324,110,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


DeBartolo Case Delayed
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission announced today that a hearing in Federal court in Washington with attorneys representing the real estate developer Edward J. Debartolo Sr., his son and his company had been indefinitely postponed because of an agreement by the attorneys to cooperate fully with the


Visa and Sony Turn to Soviet
LEAD: Pepsi-Cola got a considerable amount of publicity from its announcement May 4 that it would become a television advertiser in the Soviet Union starting yesterday.
But it is not the only company buying such advertising.


Kodak to Compensate Instant Camera Owners
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company said yesterday that it had agreed to set up a $150 million compensation program for the millions of American consumers who bought Kodak instant cameras before the cameras and their film were taken off the market in 1986.


Pasternak's House to Be a Museum
LEAD: Boris Pasternak's woodland retreat outside Moscow, which will become a memorial museum.
The sign, ''Here will be a museum,'' was posted last year by admirers working to create a museum.
Page A8. (NYT/Philip Taubman)


Clark's Homer Seals Victory
LEAD: First there was the home run.
Then the standing ovation.
When the night was over, Billy Martin sat behind his desk in the Yankee clubhouse and smiled.


Iroquois Brands Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iroquois Brands Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,044,000
21,545,000
Net inc
107,000
187,000
Share earns
.18
.26
Shares outst
594,514
710,892
The company said the lower revenue was due to the previously reported sale of Chase Chemical Co., completed during the first quarter of 1988.


U.S. Finances Dolphin Study
LEAD: A project to study dolphin deaths along the East Coast is receiving a cash infusion from the Navy and the National Marine Fisheries Service.


Wilshire Oil of Texas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wilshire Oil of Texas (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,008,000
1,884,000
Net inc
156,000
153,000
Share earns
.02
.02


A LATIN SPECIALIST QUITS WHITE HOUSE
LEAD: A senior White House official responsible for Latin America policy will resign at the end of this month because of differences with a colleague, Administration officials said today.


Medco Containment Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medco Containment Services (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
135,596,000
94,250,000
Net inc
5,780,000
3,803,000
Share earns
.13
.09
9mo rev
359,208,000
200,805,000
Net inc
16,278,000
11,029,000
Share earns
.37
.25


Tele-Optics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tele-Optics Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,685,833
777,159
Net inc
111,479
47,704
Share earns
.07
.05


23 Killed in Punjab; Police Battle Sikhs
LEAD: The police said today that at least 23 people had been killed and more than 30 wounded in attacks across Punjab state attributed to Sikh militants.


Lies Can Point to Mental Disorders or Signal Normal Growth
LEAD: WHILE recognizing that lying is a universal lubricant of social life, psychiatrists are seeking to determine when it becomes destructive and just which kinds of mental problems it can typify.


Firms May Merge
LEAD: The Wedbush Corporation and the Morgan, Olmstead, Kennedy &amp; Gardner Capital Corporation said they were discussing a merger of the two securities firms.
The companies said if a merger was completed, the combined firms would have more than $75 million in capital and more than $500 million in assets.


Students in Debt: Society Pays a Price, Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


Forecasts Vary On Trade Data
LEAD: Perhaps the best evidence of skepticism about the monthly trade figures, related both to compilation difficulties and the ''lumpy'' nature of trade flows, is the wide range of forecasts.


Milton U. Copland, 79, Executive for Builder
LEAD: Milton U. Copland, for many years a top officer of the Uris Buildings Corporation, a major developer of Manhattan office towers, died of cancer of the colon yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old.


Topics of The Times; The Fragrance of Infants
LEAD: The cosmetics industry has flourished by stoking the vanity of the baby boom generation.
Now it is at work on babies.
Under names like Eau de Senteur and Eau de Toilette, it is selling perfume, soaps and other cosmetics for babies and young children, at prices like $30 for 3.3 ounces.
Actually, the targets of this marketing ploy are not ''upscale'' children but their parents.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline yesterday about new anti-crack legislation in New York State misstated the scope of the bill.


Suspect in an Officer's Death Is Held
LEAD: A 28-year-old parolee, tracked to an apartment in northwest Philadelphia by New York City investigators, was captured in a police raid at dawn yesterday and held in connection with the slaying last month of a young housing police officer in Brooklyn.


Voters Near Denver Will Decide Today on Airport
LEAD: Adams County residents vote Tuesday on whether to allow Denver to annex 44.7 square miles of farmland to build what is described here as the largest airport in the world.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
AAR Corp., Elk Grove Village, Ill., a supplier of products and services for aviation, appointed Richard D. Tabery vice chairman, effective June 1.


Kansas City Journal; Soviet Tour Reaches America's Warm Heart
LEAD: More than 50 Russians touring the United States with a cultural exchange exhibition have reached the heart of America.
To no one's surprise, it seemed, they found it open, friendly and warm.


New Round of Cuts In Airline Fares
LEAD: Eastern Airlines and Continental Airlines announced new cut-rate fares for children and the elderly for the summer.
United Airlines, the nation's largest carrier, said it would match the fares in the markets where it competes with them.
Eastern and Continental also said they were easing some restrictions on the regular Maxsaver deep-discount fares.


Washington Talk: Memoirs; Clark Clifford, in No Hurry, Takes the High Road
LEAD: In contrast to Presidential aides who thunder into print as soon as they depart the White House, Clark M. Clifford, an adviser to the last four Democratic Presidents and Secretary of Defense at the height of the Vietnam War, has waited more than 40 years to write his Washington book.


Business and Health; Guide Assesses New Technology
LEAD: COPIES of a 700-page directory intended to facilitate the search for information on the safety, efficacy and cost effectiveness of medical technology have been arriving at offices around the country in recent weeks.
The directory's publisher, the Council on Health Care Technology, is a Government-private group that hopes its Medical Technology Assessment


Continental General Insurnce Company reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental General Insurnce Company (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b400,479
c913,909
Share earns
.09
.22
b-After a capital loss of $35,946.
c-Includes a capital gain of $275,664.


Bull Run Gold Mines Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bull Run Gold Mines Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
718,340
1,533
Net inc
24,341
b33,197
b-Net loss


Perron Resigns
LEAD: Jean Perron resigned yesterday as coach of the Montreal Canadiens, who finished second in the overall National Hockey League standings but were eliminated from the playoffs by the Boston Bruins in the Adams Division final.
In making the announcement at a news conference, the Montreal general manager, Serge Savard, reported that Perron ''said he found the pressures of the job were quite difficult for him, and especially for his family.


Soviet Relinquishes Afghan Province
LEAD: Soviet officials said today that Russian troops had completed their withdrawal from a key eastern Afghan border province that has served as a buffer protecting the area around this capital city from guerrillas based in Pakistan.


Hutton Pays Fines to U.S.
LEAD: E. F. Hutton, now part of Shearson Lehman Hutton, today paid $1.01 million in fines for a money-laundering scheme in which $1.5 million in cash was hidden from the Government for clients, some of them members of organized crime.


Black Labor Congress Plans to Challenge Pretoria
LEAD: South Africa's major black trade union federation is to hold a three-day work stay-away next month, apparently in defiance of Government restrictions.


Critics Honor 'Joe Turner'
LEAD: August Wilson's ''Joe Turner's Come and Gone'' was named the best new play of the 1987-1988 season by the New York Drama Critics Circle at a meeting held yesterday at the Algonquin Hotel. ''The Road to Mecca'' by Athol Fugard was named best foreign play, and the Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine musical ''Into the Woods'' was named best new musical.


Graham Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Graham Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,536,000
13,096,000
Net inc
56,000
b662,000
Share earns
.06
-
b-Net loss and includes a loss of $450,000 from discontinued operations.


Late Rally Pushes Dow Up by 17.08 Points
LEAD: Stock prices rallied late yesterday in continued lackluster trading, lifting the Dow Jones industrial average over the 2,000 mark.


Wearing Spielberg Down To Put 'E.T.' on Cassette
LEAD: ''We finally wore Steven Spielberg down,'' said Gene Giaquinto, president of M.C.A.
Home Entertainment, in explaining why ''E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial'' is to be released on video cassette in October.


Horse Racing Notebook; Workouts Offer a Peek at the Preakness
LEAD: Yesterday morning, it seemed like the Preakness Stakes was being held in New York instead of Baltimore: three of the favorites had their major Preakness tune-ups yesterday at Belmont Park.
Winning Colors, Forty Niner and Brian's Time all had important and impressive workouts and will be vanned to Pimlico tomorrow for the Preakness on


Sister Mary Beck, 82, Ex-College President
LEAD: Sister Mary Celeste Beck, the president of Molloy College in Rockville Centre, L.I., until 1972, died Saturday at the Queen of the Holy Rosary residence in Amityville, L.I., after a long illness.
She was 82 years old and lived at the home, the mother house of the Sisters of St.
Dominic of Amityville.


Trading Carelessly in Trade Figures
LEAD: On April 14 the stock market dropped 101 points, the dollar plunged and interest rates surged, all because of one unreliable statistic - the Commerce Department's report that the foreign trade deficit had got worse again in February.
Well, today's the day for the March figures, and perhaps another spasm of speculation.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Toronto Blue Jays yesterday placed the outfielder Jesse Barfield on the 15-day disabled list with wrist problems. . . .
Doug Moe of the Denver Nuggets has been selectedthe N.B.A.'s Coach of the Year in a news media poll. . . .
Don Koharski, the National Hockey League referee, has invited Jim Schoenfeld, the Devils' coach, to attend his celebrity golf tournament near Toronto in August to raise money for the mentally retarded.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Beene's Way With Furs: Masterly and Irreverent
LEAD: With equal helpings of originality and exuberance, seasoned with frivolity, Geoffrey Beene got the week of fall fur showings off to an exciting start yesterday.
He mixed fur with feathers and fabrics, dyed some pelts unlikely shades like taxicab yellow and tomato red and even lined sober sable with wildly patterned silks.


Pope Lectures Paraguay Leader on Human Rights
LEAD: Visiting Gen.
Alfredo Stroessner in the presidential palace from which he has ruled Paraguay for 34 years, Pope John Paul II delivered a tough lecture today on human rights and political freedoms.


Griffith Consumers Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Griffith Consumers Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
38,455,622
17,963,808
Net inc
2,257,612
1,535,776
Share earns
.91
.62
9mo sales
89,241,571
31,093,749
Net inc
1,601,999
1,416,107
Share earns
.64
.66


Chief Lightens Load At Laidlaw Transport
LEAD: Michael G. De Groote became a millionaire and lost it all in a bankruptcy while still in his 20's.
Undaunted, he tried again and became one of Canada's most successful businessmen.


Senate to Begin Floor Debate on Missile Accord Today
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz talking yesterday with members of Senate Intelligence Commitee, from left: William S. Cohen, John W. Warner and J. James Exon.
He testified on his meetings with Soviet officials in Geneva to resolve verification issues on medium-range missile pact.
Later, Senator Robert C.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.18
7.14
6.88
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.18
6.18
5.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.45
6.43
6.30
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.81
8.80
8.60
30-YR.


Senate Vote Indicates Support for a Death Penalty in Drug Killings
LEAD: Continuing its campaign to get tough on drugs, the Senate today signaled strong support for a Federal death penalty for drug-related killings.


Students in Debt: Society Pays a Price, Too; Banks vs. Schools
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jackson Seeks a Strong Oregon Vote
LEAD: The voters of Oregon have a reputation for upsetting Presidential front-runners, and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson is asking them to do it again in Tuesday's primary.


Soviet Space Prescription: Artificial Gravity for Long Flights
LEAD: The accumulated experience of Soviet astronauts on long space flights suggests that any manned mission to Mars or beyond should be made in a craft that has a centrifuge to provide artificial gravity, according to the country's top expert on space medicine.


Monster Robots Bash Paradise in Mock Battle
LEAD: Weather permitting, tonight at 9 o'clock, the parking lot at Shea Stadium will be the site of an hourlong battle involving flame throwers, artillery, explosives and anthropomorphic metal machines that crush everything in their paths.


Allegheny Meeting Delay
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge in Pittsburgh yesterday issued an order temporarily blocking the annual meeting of Allegheny International Inc., at which a proxy fight led by a New York brokerage firm was to take place.


Majority Stake Bought In Hasselbart &amp; Mitten
LEAD: Leo J. LeFort, William C. Waldman and John Ragsdale, the key executives of Hasselbart &amp; Mitten Advertising and Arocom Marketing Group of Fairlawn, Ohio, which collectively bill more than $50 million, have acquired the majority interest in the companies from the estate of the late Robert Mitten, founder and chief executive, who died in


Korea Eases Gold Curb
LEAD: South Korea plans to lift import restrictions and slash taxes on gold to help end widespread smuggling, Government officials said.
At least 20 to 30 metric tons of gold a year have been smuggled into South Korea, compared with about 24 tons imported legally, economic planning officials said Saturday.


Spending Cut By Brazil
LEAD: In a step toward obtaining a $1.5 billion standby credit from the International Monetary Fund, the Brazilian Government tonight announced a series of new spending cuts aimed at reducing its huge budget deficit.


Telecom Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telecom Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,809,000
9,515,000
Net loss
71,000
b97,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Politics Hasn't Yet Swayed the High Court
LEAD: To the Editor:


Israeli Troops Kill Protester in Gaza
LEAD: Two Palestinians died and at least seven others were shot and wounded in renewed demonstrations across the occupied territories today.
But this evening the Israeli Army tried to determine if one of those killed, an Arab youth said to have been shot by soldiers, had actually died of natural causes.


Poland Is Said to Free Some Leaders in Strike
LEAD: Communist authorities today released Janusz Onyszkiewicz, a spokesman for the outlawed Solidarity union, and 11 strike leaders jailed in connection with Poland's recent wave of unrest, opposition representatives said.


Illinois Seeking Hambletonian
LEAD: A bid by the state of Illinois to bring the Hambletonian harness race back to southern Illinois will include a possible $1 million bonus for the winning horse, an aide to Gov.
James R. Thompson said today.


India Acts in Carbide Case
LEAD: The Government of India reissued summonses today against the Union Carbide Corporation and its former chairman in an effort to make them appear in court on homicide charges in the 1984 Bhopal gas leak.


National Heritage Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Heritage Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,090,000
16,071,000
Net inc
1,958,000
1,605,000
Share earns
.12
.12
Shares outst
16,875,000
13,550,000
9mo rev
56,383,000
44,238,000
Net inc
7,171,000
4,014,000
Share earns
.42
.30
Shares outst
16,900,000
13,500,000


ALLIES FALTERING IN EFFORT TO END AID FOR FARMERS
LEAD: A year after promising to begin a process of withdrawing aid to farmers in exporting crops, officials of the leading industrial countries concede that they have made no real progress and do not hold much hope for any soon.


Sequa Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sequa Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
416,001,000
237,224,000
Net inc
17,007,000
b13,676,000
Share earns
1.49
1.16
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $336,000.
Latest first quarter includes results of Atlantic Research Corp., acquired at the end of 1987.


Review/Theater; Bill Irwin's Adventures as a Post-Modern Hoofer
LEAD: As usual, Bill Irwin's show - in this case, ''Largely/New York'' at City Center Theater - begins with no overture or fanfare.
The clown is by himself on stage.
Holding a remote control, he points it up at the curtain and slowly the curtain rises, revealing another curtain.
Abashed, he pushes the button again.


Police May Search People's Trash Without a Warrant, Court Rules
LEAD: The Supreme Court, over an impassioned dissent, ruled today that the police may freely search through garbage bags and other refuse containers that people leave outside the home for collection.


Review/Dance; City Ballet Completes Its Unpredictable Festival
LEAD: Fireworks lighted up the stage if not the sky, and intimations of Old Glory - stars and blurry tones of red and blue - were projected against a backdrop as the New York City Ballet closed its three-week American Music Festival on Sunday night at the New York State Theater.


Occidental Sets Share Offering
LEAD: Saddled with high debt from recent acquisitions, the Occidental Petroleum Corporation announced a new stock offering today.
Occidental has about 210 million shares outstanding and would offer 45 million common shares in June.
The proceeds would be used to reduce debt and for general corporate purposes.


New Publisher At Law Journal
LEAD: James A. Finkelstein will be named publisher of The New York Law Journal on May 23, succeeding his father, Jerry Finkelstein, who has been publisher for 25 years.


Hard Lessons in Grief To Absorb So Young
LEAD: Charlie Jones, the principal of the Radcliff Middle School, thumbed through the dark blue 1988 yearbook today, pointing out 16 of the children who died in one of the worst bus accidents in United States history.


Driver Charged With 27 Murder Counts
LEAD: The driver of a pickup truck that was driven the wrong way on an interstate highway and slammed head-on into a church bus was charged today with 27 counts of capital murder, one count for each person killed in the fiery crash near here Saturday night.


Imre Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imre Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
170,000
-
Net loss
870,061
1,429,263
The company said it had no revenue for the year-earlier period.


New Fluid Thickens In an Electric Field
LEAD: A UNIVERSITY of Michigan physicist has invented a fluid that thickens in response to an electric field, and he believes the material is destined to change technology as radically as the transistor.


Equitec Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equitec Financial Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,559,000
10,974,000
Net loss
970,000
b641,000
Share earns
-
.13
b-Net income and includes net of $166,000 from discontinued operations.
The company changed its fiscal year end to Dec.


After Seven Years And $7 Million, 'Carrie' Is a Kinetic Memory
LEAD: More than seven years after its authors first began work on it, the critically lambasted musical ''Carrie'' has closed after 5 regular performances and 16 previews, making the more-than-$7 million show the most expensive quick flop in Broadway history. ''Rags,'' a musical about the Jewish immigrant experience that starred Teresa Stratas, ran for only four performances in August 1986, but cost less: $5.25 million.


Bill Seeks Cadavers for the Training of Police Dogs
LEAD: To help train police dogs to track missing persons, two state legislators have introduced a bill to make cadavers available to law-enforcement agencies.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Armtek Corp., New Haven, and Pirelli S.p.A. said they had signed a stock purchase agreement for the sale of Armtek's Armstrong tire business to Pirelli for about $197 million.


BELGRADE ADOPTS AN AUSTERITY PLAN
LEAD: The Yugoslav Government imposed ceilings on wage increases today under a new program worked out with the International Monetary Fund.


Artificial Heart in Turmoil
LEAD: A permanent, fully implanted artificial heart has been one of medicine's most ambitious and controversial goals, and the Federally financed research project in pursuit of it has run a rocky course from its start 25 years ago.


New York City Asks State And U.S. for AIDS Help
LEAD: New York City, facing a dramatic rise in AIDS cases, will be unable to deal with the epidemic without more help from Federal and state agencies and the full participation of voluntary and private hospitals and clinics, a city report released yesterday said.


Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Is Losing Its President
LEAD: Peter F. McSpadden, the top Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS executive on both the RJR Nabisco and Northwest Airlines accounts, will be leaving the company around September, a highly placed agency executive confirmed yesterday.


Omnicom Preparing for Acquisitions
LEAD: THE tumultuous events in adland in the last 18 months were felt yesterday at the annual meeting of the Omnicom Group, whose shareholders voted to allow the board to issue more stock so as better to compete in the acquisition marketplace with the deep-pocketed British companies.


Saudi Oil Tied to Spot Price
LEAD: Saudi Arabia has informed crude oil customers that its current market-related pricing arrangements will be extended until the end of July, the Middle East Economic Survey reported today.


MEESE DISMISSES CHIEF SPOKESMAN
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d has dismissed his chief spokesman, Terry Eastland, provoking further turmoil in a Justice Department already torn by resignations and concern over investigations into Mr.
Meese's affairs.


International Recovery Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Recovery Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,074,000
6,694,000
Net inc
403,000
91,000
Share earns
.12
.03
Yr rev
41,061,000
10,841,000
Net inc
1,036,000
286,000
Share earns
.30
.10


Legalize Drugs? Not on Your Life.
LEAD: The escalating drug crisis is beginning to take its toll on many Americans.
And now growing numbers of well-intentioned officials and other opinion leaders are saying that the best way to fight drugs is to legalize them.
But what they're really admitting is that they're willing to abandon a war that we have not even begun to fight.


Environmental Fears Cast Pall Over Riis Park Project
LEAD: A $55 million redevelopment proposal that would add a performing-arts amphitheater and water rides to an oceanfront Queens park has been thrown into doubt because of vehement opposition from community and environmental groups.


European Output Up 2%
LEAD: Industrial production in the European Community increased by 2 percent last year, compared with 3.8 percent in the United States and 4 percent in Japan, the community's statistics office, Eurostat, said today.
The increase was marginally bigger than output growth of 1.9 percent registered in 1986.


Home Loan Agency's Rates
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Banks will set interest rates today for a three-part bond offering totaling $3.18 billion.


Iceland Lowers Currency Value
LEAD: Iceland devalued its currency, the crown, by 10 percent today to help its fishing industry, which has been suffering from falling prices abroad.


Knight Decides to Stay With Indiana
LEAD: After meeting with the Indiana University president whose recent criticism had troubled him, Bob Knight today ended an obsessive tug-of-war between states by turning down an offer from the University of New Mexico and remaining as basketball coach at Indiana.


QVC Network reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* QVC Network (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
38,125,000
11,170,000
Net inc
1,032,000
b6,257,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


LTV Gets an Extension
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge in New York today granted the LTV Corporation a 90-day extension to file a reorganization plan for the company and its 65 subsidiaries.
With the extension, LTV has until Aug. 18 the exclusive right to present a reorganization plan to the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan.


Mowry's Mulligan in Life
LEAD: FOR nearly a decade, the Senior PGA Tour has kept Arnold Palmer, Gary Player, Chi Chi Rodriguez and dozens of other cherished golf names out there on display.
It's been their ''mulligan'' in life, a second tee shot from age 50 on.
But none of the touring senior pros has hit a longer, straighter mulligan than a new name, Larry Mowry, who suddenly found himself walking onto the final green with Palmer and Player at last year's Pepsi Senior Challenge in Roswell, Ga.


White House Group Recommends Only Limited Changes in Markets
LEAD: The White House working group on the stock market crash recommended changes today that would only slightly alter the way trading is conducted on the nation's exchanges.


Gooden Is Hit Hard, but Mets Hit Harder
LEAD: Dwight Gooden pitched ragged ball for the third straight time tonight, but still won his seventh game without a loss when Gary Carter hit a three-run home run in the seventh inning to beat the San Diego Padres, 7-4.


Prism Entertainment Corp reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prism Entertainment Corp (AMEX)
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b96,000
1,694,000
Share earns
.04
.76
b-Includes a tax benefit of $179,000.
The company said lower earnings for the latest year were the result of lower sales, an increase in advertising and selling expenses and year-end adjustments of more than $1,200,000 for bad debt expense, inventory writedowns and writeoff of royalty advances.


Court Affirms F.C.C. Control Of Quality of Cable Signals
LEAD: The Supreme Court today unanimously upheld a Federal Communications Commission rule that bars state and local governments from imposing more stringent standards for the technical quality of cable television signals than those established by the commission.


Pasternak Retreat to Be a Museum
LEAD: Boris Pasternak's posthumous journey from the outlaw reaches of Soviet literature back to the embrace of the establishment was completed a few days ago as the membership of the Soviet Writers' Union was told Pasternak's woodland retreat would become a memorial museum.


Iverson Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iverson Technology Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,384,000
6,176,000
Net inc
1,153,000
557,000
Share earns
.29
.15


Lane Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lane Telecommunications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,434,000
4,918,000
Net loss
614,000
428,000


Jail Barge To Change Rivers
LEAD: New York City's $19 million prison barge will be moved this summer from the East River to a Hudson River pier next to the West Village, the Correction Department has announced.


London Journal; Broken but Unbroken, a Quiet Enemy of Racism
LEAD: Albie Sachs, now the most durable of South Africa's exiled dissidents, sits freshly maimed and hiding in a hospital bed somewhere in Britain, his right arm blown away, his left hand resisting his efforts at conversion to the pen, still his only weapon of protest against apartheid.


Bush Seeks to Balance Oil and Environment
LEAD: Vice President Bush, campaigning in the Northwest, has been urging greater domestic oil production and arguing that it can be achieved without endangering the environment.


Tofutti Brands reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tofutti Brands (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,414,000
2,170,000
Net inc
32,000
b19,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss and includes a tax benefit of $14,000.
There were 13 weeks in the latest quarter, compared with 14 weeks a year ago.


Lane Enters Draft
LEAD: Jerome Lane of Pittsburgh has decided to skip his final year of college eligibility and has made himself available for the National Basketball Association draft.
He joins Rex Chapman of Kentucky, Rod Strickland of DePaul, Tito Horford of Miami and Charles Shackleford of North Carolina.
Lane, a 6-6 forward from Akron, Ohio, averaged 13.9 points and 12.2 rebounds last season, becoming Pitt's third leading career rebounder and eighth leading scorer.(


Cleanup for Closed Landfill
LEAD: Federal authorities have reached an agreement with 226 companies that calls for the firms to pay $4.98 million in cleanup costs at the now-closed Kin-Buc Landfill in Edison, N.J., the United States Attorney's office said today.
The Federal Environmental Protection Agency has identified at least 22 cancer-causing or suspected carcinogenic substances at the former landfill.


Jackson, Citing 'Fairness,' Asserts He Expects Role in Picking Ticket
LEAD: With a hint of anger, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson said today that he expected to play a powerful role in the selection of the Democratic Presidential ticket as well as in writing the party's platform.


Syrian Threat: Warning Signal to Iran
LEAD: Syria's threat to use its army against a pro-Iranian militia in southern Beirut is a signal to Iran that it cannot go too far in challenging Syria's role as a power broker in Lebanon.


Vari-Care Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vari-Care Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,985,000
8,575,000
Net inc
42,000
263,000
Share earns
.01
.05
6mo rev
19,673,000
17,076,000
Net loss
107,000
b420,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


Topics of The Times; Don't Kill the Runoff
LEAD: The New York State Senate recently approved an ill- advised bill to abolish New York City's runoff election system, and persuaded Governor Cuomo to lend his support.
The lawmakers' idea apparently was to frustrate the re-election hopes of New York City's Mayor, Edward Koch, since some believe he would benefit from the runoff system.


Diamond Crystal Salt Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diamond Crystal Salt Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,850,000
5,909,000
Net inc
b3,923,000
c379,000
Share earns
1.52
.14
Yr sales
25,076,000
23,393,000
Net inc
b5,480,000
c1,317,000
Share earns
2.13
.51


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q. Why does a magnet lose its power over time?


Philharmonic and Mehta Plan a European Tour
LEAD: The New York Philharmonic will play 16 concerts in 10 European countries this summer, the orchestra has announced.
Some 150 musicians and 20,000 pounds of instruments and equipment will leave New York on Aug. 18 and return Sept. 10.
Zubin Mehta will conduct all the concerts on the tour, which is to be sponsored by Citicorp


No, PEN Decides, It Won't Invite the Pope to Join
LEAD: It looks as though Pope John Paul II will not be invited to join PEN after all.


Inquiry Into a South Bronx Group Becomes an Issue in Gentile's Race
LEAD: In an action that has become an issue in a primary campaign, the Bronx District Attorney, Paul T. Gentile, did not pursue theft and forgery charges against officials of a South Bronx community group last year after a grand jury had voted to indict them.


Students in Dept: Society Pays a Price, Too; Ferret Out Abuses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Advanced Marketing Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Marketing Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
24,132,000
16,450,000
Net inc
551,000
299,000
Share earns
.11
.08
Shares outst
4,993,485
3,780,000
Yr sales
110,006,000
70,329,000
Net inc
3,558,000
1,619,000
Share earns
.76
.43
Shares outst
4,700,602
3,780,000


U.S. Rig Count Down
LEAD: The number of working oil and gas rigs in the United States dropped by 14 last week, to a total of 883, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
The rig count, the widely watched industry index of drilling activity, totaled 744 a year ago.
The rig count reached a peak of 4,500 in December 1981, at the height of the oil boom.


World Bank Criticizes Lag in Third World Aid
LEAD: The international strategy for resolving the third world's debt crisis is being jeopardized by the refusal of private banks to cooperate and by lower-than-expected economic growth in the industrial world, according to a World Bank report.


Boeing Gets $3.69 Billion Plane Order
LEAD: As expected, the International Lease Finance Corporation today awarded the Boeing Company three-quarters of a $5 billion airliner order, the largest order ever for commercial jetliners.
The European consortium Airbus Industrie won the remainder.


Prices of Soybeans and Corn Are Up Their Daily Limits
LEAD: Dry weather over the Grain Belt, dwindling crop surpluses, inventory building by food processors and speculative buying combined yesterday to send soybean and corn futures prices soaring by their daily permissible limits.


Syrians Delay Move in Beirut
LEAD: The Syrian Army delayed its deployment in southern Beirut today while Syrian and Iranian officials met in Damascus to discuss ways to avert a head-on collision between the Syrians and the Iranian-backed Party of God.


Police Officer Is Suspended
LEAD: A 27-year-old probationary police officer was suspended yesterday on charges that he used unnecessary force in subduing an emotionally disturbed patient at Elmhurst General Hospital in Queens, the police said.
Officer Stephen Benner, appointed to the force in July 1987, struck the patient, a 24-year-old woman from Jackson Heights, Queens, in the face after she spit at him, the police said.


Doctors Can Sue In Peer Reviews, Justices Declare
LEAD: In a case of great importance to the medical profession, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that hospital peer review committees are not absolutely immune from antitrust suits brought by the doctors they penalize.


In Quest for Fusion Energy, 2 Rival Techniques Fight for the Spotlight
LEAD: FOR decades the costly field of controlled nuclear fusion has been rocked by ups and downs, promise and problems.
But scientists are now confident enough of success to embark, albeit cautiously, on building a new generation of machines that would ignite fusion fuel for the first time, releasing controlled bursts of energy.


Devils Aim to Join The N.H.L.'s Elite
LEAD: Although the Devils fell a game short of playing the Edmonton Oilers for the Stanley Cup, they are still quite a distance from the upper echelon of the National Hockey League.


Convest Energy Partners Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Convest Energy Partners Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,897,000
2,578,000
Net loss
401,000
295,000


New Process Saves Books
LEAD: A book preservation technique developed by the Library of Congress shows promise, but alternatives should also be considered, according to a study by the Federal Office of Technology Assessment.


Inside
LEAD:  The Two Faces of Lying  Psychologists find that specific kinds of lies are linked to personality problems, but that lying also plays a positive role.
Science Times, page C1.
Murder Charged in Crash  The driver of a pickup truck that crashed head-on into a church bus in Kentucky was charged with 27 counts of capital murder.


Reviews/Music; Springsteen at the Garden
LEAD: ''There comes a time when you've got to take the past and put it behind you,'' Bruce Springsteen said at Madison Square Garden last night during the opening show of his ''Tunnel of Love Express Tour.'' Mr.
Springsteen's reflection was part of a monologue that introduced a powerful, hard-edged new rock song, ''Spare Parts,'' about young love, pregnancy and abandonment, but his words also evoked the transitional position in which


28 Injured in Cable Car Crash
LEAD: A crowded cable car heading downhill in light rain rammed the rear of a truck stopped at a red light today, injuring at least 28 people.


Sea of Paper Work On America's Cup
LEAD: The future of America's Cup yacht racing has become quantifiable.
It amounts to more than 15 pounds of legal documents being filed this week with the New York State Supreme Court.


Crown Brands Inc reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Brands Inc
Year to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
44,500,000
29,000,000
Net loss
1,486,000
618,000
The company said the increase in sales was mainly due to the inclusion of the sales of I. Rokeach &amp; Sons Inc. and its subsidiaries for all of 1987 as compared with only five months of 1986.


Addington Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Addington Resources Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
47,701,689
28,559,366
Net inc
3,303,050
1,162,897
Share earns
.56
.30
Shares outst
5,855,000
3,900,000


Kinnard Investments Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kinnard Investments Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
268,417
424,474
Share earns
.17
.26


Pepitone to Begin 6-Month Jail Term
LEAD: Joe Pepitone, visibily nervous, was led out of a Brooklyn courtroom in handcuffs yesterday to begin serving a six-month jail sentence for his 1986 conviction for possession of Quaaludes and drug paraphernalia.


Bush Assails Kerry on Drug Issue
LEAD: Vice President Bush today accused Senator John Kerry of disclosing potentially ''slanderous'' information implying that a Bush aide had knowledge of drug dealings involving the Nicaraguan rebels.


Dear Mr. Rakhmanin
LEAD:  Ivan Rakhmanin  Office of the Procurator  Moscow, U.S.S.R.  Dear Mr. Rakhmanin,


Favorite in May Is Favorite in Fall, Too
LEAD: While polls taken six months before the election cannot be taken as predictive of the ultimate outcome, surveys by The New York Times/CBS News Poll since it was established in 1976 suggest that the candidate whom the electorate loved in May was also its favorite in November.


Irving Wins Vote On Board
LEAD: The Irving Bank Corporation defeated a hostile takeover bid by the Bank of New York Company in a proxy fight whose results were announced yesterday.


By Design; Flowers and Fresh Greens
LEAD: Some fashion successes are easy to fathom, while others are not.
The fabric flower, fastened to a barrette, has replaced the bow as this season's most popular hair ornament, store spokesmen say.
Other fashion observers report spotting scarves, skirts and shirts blooming with big floral prints all over town, even on the formerly clad-all-in-black downtowners.


Industrial Output Rose 0.7% in April
LEAD: Output of the nation's factories, mines and utilities jumped seven-tenths of 1 percent in April after two months of virtually no growth, the Federal Reserve Board reported today.
It was the biggest advance since a 1.1 percent surge in October.


Soviet Dance Troupe Visits East Harlem School
LEAD: Members of Merani, a dance group from Tbilisi, U.S.S.R., performing a Georgian folk dance yesterday at Public School 99.
The performance was part of a Soviet-American cultural exchange; last month a chess club from the school traveled to the Soviet Union. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


Home Depot Inc reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Depot Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Sales
446,592,000
333,969,000
Net inc
19,245,000
12,807,000
Share earns
.38
.29
Shares outst
50,891,000
44,879,000


Dread Locusts: An Appreciation, Almost
LEAD: For they covered the face of the whole land, so that the land was darkened, and they ate all the plants in the land and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left; not a green thing remained, neither tree nor plant of the field, through all the land of Egypt.'' Exodus 10:3.


Our Towns; Imagine a Light On Your Head At the Y.W.C.A.
LEAD: The Women's Network has been meeting at the Y.W.C.A. here for years.
Eighty percent of the women are college graduates, 40 percent have advanced degrees.
Two-thirds earn more than $40,000, 20 percent more than $75,000.
At the start of meetings, these businesswomen introduce themselves.
They work for Texaco, Merrill Lynch, New York Telephone, I.B.M.


Clayton Fox Nenno, Priest, 69
LEAD: The Rev.
Clayton Fox Nenno, a Jesuit priest and a former teacher at St.
Peter's Preparatory School in Jersey City, died of heart failure Thursday after surgery at Arden Hill Hospital in Goshen, N.Y.
He was 69 years old and lived at the Gonzaga Seven Springs Jesuit Community in Monroe, N.Y.


National Gallery to Show Jasper Johns Drawing
LEAD: The National Gallery of Art plans to mount a retrospective of the drawings of Jasper Johns in mid-May 1990 for his 60th birthday, something it has rarely done for the works of a living artist.


Texaco Says It Is Talking With Icahn
LEAD: Texaco Inc. announced yesterday that it was engaged in talks with Carl C. Icahn, its largest shareholder, in an effort to resolve their differences over the company's future.


Making Trade Data More Precise
LEAD: In addition to the traditional work of foiling drug smugglers and collecting more than a half-billion dollars a year in import duties, A. Robert Beikirch has a new priority: helping to improve America's trade statistics.


Steel Production Down
LEAD: Steel production fell to 1.99 million tons in the week ended Saturday, a decrease of 1.8 percent from the previous week's 2.03 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute reported yesterday.
The industry's production amounted to 92.9 percent of capacity during the week, compared with 94.6 percent in the previous week.


Excerpt From Report by White House Panel
LEAD: Following is an excerpt from the introduction to the interim report on the financial markets released today by a White House working group:


Biaggi Is Endorsed By Bronx Democrats Despite a Conviction
LEAD: Representative Mario Biaggi was endorsed for renomination yesterday by Bronx Democratic leaders as part of a strategy to retain control over his Congressional seat, which has been threatened by his racketeering trial, a prior conviction and the threat of expulsion from the House.


New Yankee Call: Getcha Fresh Shrimp!
LEAD: Robert Brown was getting a pregame snack at Yankee Stadium last weekend.
For the first time in stadium history, he had lots of choices - sandwiches, pizza, hamburgers, chicken fingers, egg rolls or french fries.
He could drink an imported beer, like Dos Equis.
He could even eat clams or shrimp, served from a raw bar in little plastic boats.


Review/Television; Program Links C.I.A. to Drug Trafic
LEAD: Does the Central Intelligence Agency assist and even encourage drug smugglers? ''Frontline,'' on Channel 13 at 10 o'clock tonight, says it does.
Secret wars and the narcotics trade apparently go together.
Drug lords have helped finance clandestine operations, the program charges, for 40 years.


Skier Retires
LEAD: Debbie Armstrong, who may be best remembered for her unrestrained glee after winning a gold medal in the giant slalom at the 1984 Winter Olympic Games in Sarajevo, Yugoslavia, has announced her retirement from the United States Ski Team.
In two of the last three seasons, she was bothered by leg injuries, and she finished 13th in the giant slalom at Calgary in February.


Inmates Release Last 2 Hostages, Ending 3-Day Siege in Oklahama
LEAD: Inmates at a medium-security state prison released their last two hostages today, ending a three-day prison riot in which they seized eight hostages.


Gulf Insurance Rate Cut
LEAD: Lloyd's of London has cut war-risk rates for general cargoes in much of the southwest Persian Gulf, it said today.
The new rate for non-oil cargoes, which took effect Thursday, is 0.25 percent of the cargo's value, down from 0.30 percent.
The rate for oil cargoes remains unchanged at 0.375 percent.


Chemistry of Seeing
LEAD: USING pulses of laser light that last for only six millionths of one billionth of a second, scientists have directly observed a fundamental chemical reaction that permits animals to see.


For Travelers, Milk From Immunized Cows
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have devised ways to enrich cow's milk - in the cow - with antibodies that may prevent traveler's diarrhea, according to a new study.


Lacrosse Notebook; Strong Finish Earns Cornell an N.C.A.A. Tournament Bid
LEAD: Cornell was invited while Hofstra, C. .W Post and Rutgers were not.
In essence, that was the selection process for the 12-team field for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I lacrosse tournament.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Crowds at the Capitol
LEAD: Because of security precautions and a great increase in visitors, guided tours of the Capitol have been sharply cut back, according the the Capitol Guide Service.


Farrar, Straus Thrives On Success of 2 Novels
LEAD: The backbone of publishing is backlist books, those that will still be around years after this season's best sellers have been remaindered.
But best sellers are also important, providing not just prestige but help for a publisher's large overhead.


United Companies Financial Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Companies Financial Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,958,618
2,949,221
Share earns
.53
.80


Benny Goodman Archive Releases First Recording
LEAD: ''The Benny Goodman Yale Archives, Volume 1,'' 12 previously unavailable selections from the clarinetist's private tapes, was released yesterday on the Musicmasters label.
It is a sampling of the material from Mr.
Goodman's musical archives, which he bequeathed to the Yale Music Library.
He died in 1986.


Ally of Bush Drops Out Of Race for G.O.P. Post
LEAD: Vice President Bush's brother, Jonathan, suffered a serious political setback yesterday when his candidate for New York Republican national committeeman withdrew rather than engage in a party-dividing fight with Richard M. Rosenbaum, the incumbent.


G.&amp;W. Buys Quercus Corp.
LEAD: Gulf and Western Inc. announced yesterday that it had acquired the Quercus Corporation, a junior and senior high school special education publisher.
Quercus will become part of the Globe Book Company, a unit of the Secondary Education Group of Simon &amp; Schuster.


Swept Out in Storm but Offered Refuge
LEAD: Terry Eastland has spent much of his working life on the editorial pages of various newspapers across the South.
But he caught the eye of true believers in the conservative movement with his essays on constitutional issues for a variety of national publications.


A J.W.T. Executive Gets Expanded Duties
LEAD: Donald G. Sullivan, the 47-year-old vice chairman of J. Walter Thompson/USA, has been put in charge of strategic planning, administration and finance by James Patterson, chairman and newly named chief executive.


Bridge
LEAD: Bridge is perhaps the only sport or recreation in which players can put their expertise in cold storage for a decade or more and return to action successfully.


Dryclean USA Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dryclean USA Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,902,000
4,541,000
Net inc
370,000
550,000
Share earns
.13
.20


Pentagon Says Drug War Will Cost $2 Billion
LEAD: The Defense Department has begun gearing up for an expanded role in the war on drugs, and senior Pentagon officials have warned Congress that the effort will cost $2 billion.


Guidry Says He's Ready to Join Yankees
LEAD: Ron Guidry's corner of the Yankees' clubhouse was back in business yesterday.
The pitcher and co-captain, apparently ready to return to work this week after spending the last three months rehabilitating his left shoulder under the Florida sun, could return to the roster within days.


Roanoke Electric Steel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roanoke Electric Steel Corp
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
35,415,549
25,282,115
Net inc
2,511,013
718,063
Share earns
.71
.20
6mo sales
66,254,084
55,393,391
Net inc
4,124,709
1,648,365
Share earns
1.16
.46


Guerrillas Say Support for Cambodia Government Is Eroding
LEAD: Support for the Vietnamese-backed Government in Cambodia is eroding steadily among both civilians and Government troops, guerrillas operating from bases on the Thai border say.


Mack Trucks Unit Offers Dual Issue
LEAD: The Mack Trucks Receivables Corporation, a unit of Mack Trucks Inc., is offering $122.1 million of debt securities backed by truck loan receivables through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.


International Broadcasting Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Broadcasting Corp
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Revenue
25,917,000
22,678,000
Net inc
2,803,000
b2,874,000
Share earns
1.21
1.26
6mo rev
39,075,000
-
Net inc
2,159,000
-
Share earns
.90
-


Frontier Texas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frontier Texas Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,175,015
8,838,308
Net inc
571,535
391,464
Share earns
.05
.05


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International  Agricultural trade is not freer, despite promises by officials of the leading industrial nations to begin withdrawing aid to farmers in exporting their crops.
Washington is pressing for progress.
Page A1


Washington Talk: Briefing; Drug Tests Likely?
LEAD: Bus drivers, subway operators and other mass transit workers may soon be required to submit to random drug testing.


Valhi Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valhi Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
550,900,000
299,786,000
Net inc
b12,991,000
c3,052,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
116,162,000
97,480,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $3,111,000.
c-Net loss and includes a tax charge of $7,876,000.


K Mart Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* K Mart Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 27
1988
1987
Sales
5,841,800,000
5,594,400,000
Net inc
120,800,000
115,500,000
Share earns
.60
.57
The latest quarter includes a pretax LIFO charge of $35 million, compared with $22.5 million in the year-ago first quarter.


Dole Opposes Deal on Noriega Indictments
LEAD: The Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole, served notice on the Administration tonight that the Senate would protest if the United States dropped drug indictments against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega of Panama as part of a deal to force the ouster of the military leader.


Olympic Braodcasting Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olympic Braodcasting Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,534,000
2,642,000
Net loss
2,554,000
3,537,000


Robertson Formally Drops His Presidential Bid
LEAD: Pat Robertson announcing the suspension of his Republican Presidential campaign yesterday in Virginia Beach, Va.
With him were his wife, Dede, and son Tim.
Mr.
Robertson applauded Vice President Bush's ''magnificent effort'' and said he would return immediately to the helm of his financially troubled religious broadcasting network.


Honduran Envoy Held On a Cocaine Charge
LEAD: A Honduran diplomat was ordered held without bail today after he arrived at Miami airport with almost 26 pounds of cocaine in his luggage, Federal authorities reported.


Governor of New Hampshire Bars Drive for Re-election to 4th Term
LEAD: Gov.
John H. Sununu of New Hampshire announced yesterday that he would not seek a fourth two-year term.


U.N. Ends Aid to Camp Held by Khmer Rouge
LEAD: A United Nations agency assisting Cambodian refugees along the Thai-Cambodian border has stopped deliveries of food to a civilian camp under the control of the Khmer Rouge.


Nestle Formalizes Bid for Rowntree
LEAD: The Swiss food giant Nestle S.A. formalized its offer of $:2.1 billion ($3.97 billion) for the British candy company Rowntree P.L.C. amid speculation that Jacobs Suchard A.G. would make a counteroffer.
Nestle's managing director, Helmut Maucher, said in a letter to Rowntree shareholders: ''We are convinced that a merger of Rowntree and Nestle's chocolate and confectionery business is in the best long-term interests of both companies.


Giant Group Ltd. Acts To Sell Cement Unit
LEAD: The Giant Group Ltd., the entertainment and industrial products company controlled by Burt Sugarman, said today that it was negotiating to sell its cement and waste-burning business to the Environmental Treatment and Technologies Corporation for $110 million in cash plus warrants for Environmental


U.S. Clinches Olympic Berth
LEAD: The United States qualified for the soccer competition at the Seoul Olympics when Trinidad and Tobago beat El Salvador, 1-0, Sunday in a qualifying match.


Education: The College Reject; Several Factors Are Behind Growth In Number of Disappointed Students
LEAD: A senior at the Bronx High School of Science, one of the most selective high schools in the country, has a 93 average, three varsity letters, 1,490 out of a possible 1,600 on his Scholastic Aptitude Tests and has never missed a day of school.
Yet this New York student has just been rejected by Harvard, Yale, Stanford and Cornell.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: New York City plans to sell about $200 million in general obligation bonds by competitive bidding no later than June 30, according to Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin.


Hole in Arctic Ozone Is Feared
LEAD: A Canadian researcher says that a hole in the ozone layer may be developing in the stratosphere near the North Pole each winter just as a similar hole is created over the South Pole.


Georgia Pacific
LEAD: The Georgia Pacific Corporation is offering $200 million of 10 1/8 percent notes, due in 2000, at a price of 99.85 to yield 10.146 percent, through a group of underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Brothers.
Noncallable for seven years, the notes yield about 1.07 percentage points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Landlords Rally to Protest Rent Laws
LEAD: In what has become a springtime ritual here, more than 1,000 landlords rallied outside the State Capitol today and then fanned out through its corridors to lobby against a variety of rent-regulation bills.


Critic's Notebook; Great Evil Embodied In a Man
LEAD: The cinema literature of the Holocaust has again been enriched by Marcel Ophuls, whose ''Sorrow and the Pity'' still points the way for anyone who would attempt to comprehend the subject on film.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Sweden Tops West Germany: Sweden beat West Germany, 2-1, and Czechoslovakia downed Spain, 2-1, at the World Team Cup tournament in Dusseldorf, West Germany, yesterday.
Stefan Edberg of Sweden, defeated Eric Jelen of West Germany, 6-1, 6-4.
Carl-Uwe Steeb of West Germany upset Anders Jarryd of Sweden, 7-6, 6-1.


Dr. Herbert Ayers Jr., 79, Dentistry Teacher
LEAD: Dr.
Herbert D. Ayers Jr., a teacher of dentistry at Columbia University for almost half a century, died Saturday at the University Heights Nursing Home in Albany after a long illness.
He was 79 years old and lived in Roslyn Estates, L.I.


A Newark Councilman Is Charged With Graft
LEAD: A City Councilman has been indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges that he obtained kickbacks from a businessman in return for helping him purchase city-owned properties for rehabilitation, the authorities said today.


Soldier Reprimanded In a Fatal Shooting On the West Bank
LEAD: An Israeli military court reprimanded a soldier today for ''improper firing'' in a shooting incident Monday that resulted in the death of a 15-year-old Palestinian youth.
The soldier was given a suspended 35-day jail term.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD:
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 13
May 6
May 15
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.8
6.9
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.7
2.5
Gasoline stocks
225.9
226.8
235.9
Distillate stocks
97.0
93.9
96.0
Crude imports, daily
4.5
5.5
3.7
Product imports, daily
2.3
1.4
2.0
Crude stocks
361.3
359.7
325.3
Crude production, daily
8.1
8.2
8.3
Refinery utilization (%)
84.3
83.6
79.9


Giants Plan to See More of Top Rookie
LEAD: Eric Moore was in the first grade when his father walked away and never came back.
The experience left him hurt, but not devastated.
And it surely prepared him for the time when, a decade later, college football recruiters did the same thing.


Feedlot Cattle Up 4%
LEAD: Cattle being fed for the slaughter market as of May 1 in the seven leading beef states totaled 7.5 million head, up 4 percent from a year ago and 6 percent from two years ago, the Agriculture Department said on Monday.
As of May 1, feedlot inventories were larger than a year earlier in five states and down in two.


Vanzetti Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vanzetti Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,296,257
592,500
Net loss
18,607
706,459
6mo sales
2,884,915
1,453,854
Net inc
81,544
b974,026
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Athletics Win 22d In Last 26 Games
LEAD: Carney Lansford and Walt Weiss had three hits apiece, and Mark McGwire hit his 11th home run tonight as the Oakland Athletics won for the 22d time in their last 26 games, a 12-7 victory over the Boston Red Sox.


Ms. Cooper, a Writer, Marries Paul R. Noble
LEAD: The marriage of Paulette Marcia Cooper, an author and travel columnist, to Paul Ronald Noble, a television producer, took place yesterday at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Rabbi Neil Cooper, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony.


Angolans Besting South Africa in a Remote Battle
LEAD: South African gunners are firing only 40 artillery shells a day into the ruins of this farming town, a sign to entrenched Angolan and Cuban soldiers here that a pivotal battle for the future of southern Africa is turning in their favor.


Contract Ruling Backs A.T.&amp;T. On U.S. Work
LEAD: A General Services Administration appeals panel ruled today that agency employees had discriminated against the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in awarding contracts for telephone switching equipment to its rivals.


Use of Industry Capacity Rose to 82.7% in April
LEAD: The nation's industry operated at 82.7 percent of capacity in April, the highest level in more than eight years, the Government announced today.


Court Upholds Tougher Fuel Ratings
LEAD: Displaying a bitter ideological split, a Federal appeals court today backed changes in fuel economy ratings that could cost the nation's two largest auto makers $300 million in penalties.


A Taste of America, A Meal for Comrades
LEAD: When three of the best young chefs from Seattle made lunch for 25 people at the Mezhdunarodnaya Hotel here today, they were also making history.


Andrew Duggan, an Actor on TV, Stage and the Screen, Dies at 64
LEAD: Andrew Duggan, a movie and television actor, died of throat cancer Sunday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 64 years old.


Rouse Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rouse Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
114,248,000
91,446,000
Net inc
8,070,000
5,743,000
Share earns
.16
.11


PARTY RULES CITED BY JACKSON CAMP
LEAD: In a move that sets the stage for a potential fight over delegates at the Democratic National Convention, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's campaign plans to send a letter to Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis charging that the nomination process is ''inequitable,'' ''demonstrably unfair'' and ''distorted by rules that favor insider politics.


New Irving Proposal By Bank of New York
LEAD: Rebuffed in its attempt to replace the Irving Bank Corporation's board, the Bank of New York Company yesterday announced a new step in its eight-month battle to acquire Irving.


50% Success Rate in $1 Billion Infertility Fight
LEAD: Americans spent $1 billion last year to combat infertility, and half of them ended up conceiving a child, the Government reported today.


United Merchants &amp; Manufacurers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Merchants &amp; Manufacurers Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
161,325,000
153,694,000
Net inc
b7,644,000
c4,908,000
Share earns
.84
-
9mo sales
505,363,000
500,339,000
Net loss
b1,661,000
d8,048,000
Share earns
-
.88


Cut in Gains Tax Doubted
LEAD: The chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Lloyd Bentsen, said today that Congress is not likely to cut the capital gains tax unless other taxes are raised.
Such a cut is one of Vice President Bush's proposals in his Presidential campaign.


Computer Associates Internaional Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Associates Internaional Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
206,441,000
146,117,000
Net inc
33,848,000
b17,440,000
Share earns
.43
.22
Shares outst
84,839,000
78,759,000
Yr rev
709,109,000
452,289,000
Net inc
101,828,000
b50,227,000
Share earns
1.29
.64


Keystone Camera Products Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Camera Products Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,263,000
9,212,000
Net inc
182,000
b1,413,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss and includes a loss of $295,000 from discontinued operations.


Appeals Court Backs Film Makers Over U.S.
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today struck down the Government's attempt to limit tax-free export of documentary films that advocate a cause, calling regulations drafted by the United States Information Agency a ''virtual license to engage in censorship.''


Sports of The Times; What Do You Really Think?
LEAD: THE imprisonment of Joe Pepitone on drug charges is another example of why sports fans and particularly parents should not expect every athlete to be a hero.


PLM International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PLM International (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,500,000
-
Net inc
2,500,000
-
Share earns
.25
-
The company was consolidated from 21 limited partnerships Feb. 1.


Denver Airport Plan Is Passed
LEAD: Adams County voters today solidly approved a plan to let the City of Denver annex land for a new $3 billion airport that could become the nation's second-busiest within 12 years.


Casino Is Sponsor For a Temple Game
LEAD: Temple's basketball game next December against the national champion, Kansas, in Atlantic City has stirred some controversy.


Ontario Defiance Threatens Canada-U.S. Pact on Trade
LEAD: The Canadian Government appears to have failed in a last-ditch attempt to persuade the Province of Ontario to comply with the free-trade agreement reached last year with the United States.


Connors Withdraws
LEAD: Jimmy Connors, the fifth-ranked player in the world, has withdrawn from the French Open, which starts Monday, because of an injured right foot.
Connors, 35, first suffered the injury before the United States Open last August.
He aggravated the injury three weeks ago.
The French Open is the only Grand Slam tournament he has failed to win.


DE GUSTIBUS
LEAD: THE Chino Farm, 25 miles north of San Diego in a lush valley called Rancho Santa Fe, has taken on something of a cult status among food lovers across the country.
When you mention its name to those in the know, a look of reverence crosses their faces and they wax rhapsodic about the perfect carrots, succulent strawberries and juicy tomatoes.


Economic Scene; Paying for Wider Health Insurance
LEAD: COMPETENCE is what counts, insists Michael Dukakis, not charisma.
And the Massachusetts Governor's supporters may have hit on the issue to make the case.
They are touting the state's new mandatory health insurance plan as vintage Dukakis: liberal government at a cost conservatives can love.


Agency Halts Oil Exploration in Florida Preserve
LEAD: The Interior Department halted oil exploration in Florida's Big Cypress National Preserve last week after conservation groups filed a suit charging that department officials had pushed for drilling despite unresolved environmental concerns.


An Old Combination
LEAD: To The Living Section:


3d Howard Beach Trial Possible
LEAD: An effort to avoid having two additional trials in the Howard Beach racial-attack case may have been undermined by a defense lawyer's commitment in another court, parties involved in the case indicated yesterday.


George Sklar, 79, Dies; Playwright and Author
LEAD: George Sklar, a playwright and novelist, died of cardiac arrest Sunday in Los Angeles.
He was 79 years old.


Lawmaker Killed in Robbery
LEAD: A western Pennsylvania lawmaker returning from a late-night card game with his colleagues was slain and his body left in a street, District Attorney Richard A. Lewis said today.
The slain Representative, William Telek, 64 years old, of Johnstown, the father of seven children, was apparently struck on the head and his wallet taken, Mr.


JEWISH EMIGRATION FROM SOVIET UNION CONTINUES TO RISE
LEAD: More than 1,000 Jews, having been permitted to emigrate, left the Soviet Union in April.
It was the highest monthly total since 1981.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times yesterday about locusts in Africa gave an incorrect citation for a Biblical quotation about the insects.
The correct verse was Exodus 10:15.


The Limits of Mubarak Awad's Moderation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Zayre Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zayre Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,450,852,000
1,295,775,000
Net inc
4,543,000
b41,630,000
Share earns
.08
.70
b-Includes a gain of $20,536,000 from the cumulative effect of a change in inventory accounting.


American Raises Offer To Buy Lucky Stores
LEAD: The American Stores Company said today that it had sweetened its offer for Lucky Stores Inc. to $65 a share, or $2.5 billion, topping a $2.35 billion leveraged buyout deal from Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen to which Lucky agreed last month.


About New York; Sour on the City: A Product Of the Streets
LEAD: It was 1983 and Ken Garber was on the move around the city a lot, selling medical electronics - patient monitors, EKG machines, that sort of thing - when he began to notice pushcarts were getting fancier.
All of a sudden lightning struck in the form of a full-blown idea (it happens this way with entrepreneurs) and Mr.


Education; Words to Sentences, Mystery for Linguists
LEAD: A baby learning to talk tackles a task that might be compared to learning a foreign language without a translator or a dictionary or even a command of a native language to use as a base.
Yet virtually all children understand scores of words and can speak simple sentences by the time they are 3 years old.


Harold Lief, Teacher, 85
LEAD: Harold Lief, who taught business law and accounting for 45 years at the former Haaren High School in Manhattan, died of complications after surgery for an aneurism Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Manhattan.


INDIAN COMMANDOS CLOSE IN ON SIKHS
LEAD: Indian commandos smashed several Sikh fortifications in the Golden Temple complex and trapped several militants in an underground bunker today in the fiercest assault of the nine-day blockade of the temple.


Tudor City Given Status As Landmark
LEAD: Tudor City, the towering residential enclave from the 1920's that brought 16th-century England to the eastern edge of mid-Manhattan, was declared a historic district yesterday by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.


Placid Oil Will Sell Properties to Nerco
LEAD: The Hunt brothers' Placid Oil Company has agreed to sell its oil and gas interests in the Black Lake field in Louisiana to Nerco Inc., a natural resources company in Portland, Ore., for $150 million in cash.
Nerco has also agreed to acquire other Placid properties, including a pipeline from Louisiana to


A Deadline Is Looming In Texaco-Icahn Talks
LEAD: As negotiations between Texaco Inc. and its largest shareholder, Carl C. Icahn, continue over a restructuring of the company, both sides apparently feel a deadline looming.


Education; Study Finds Unions Aren't Obstacles
LEAD: A study commissioned by the Education Department says teachers' unions have not been a major obstacle to efforts to improve schools, contradicting frequent charges made by Education Secretary William J. Bennett and other critics.


Howard Nemerov Named 3d U.S. Poet Laureate
LEAD: Twenty-five years ago, Howard Nemerov held the chair of consultant in poetry to the Library of Congress, a title that has since been redesignated and glorified by Public Law 99-194, enacted in 1985.
As of September, Mr.
Nemerov will become poet laureate consultant in poetry, or, more simply, the poet laureate of the United


Blast Reported at Soviet Plant That Makes Vital Missile Part
LEAD: An explosion has destroyed several buildings at a Soviet plant that produces rocket motors and fuel for long-range missiles, the Defense Department reported tonight.


Baldwin &amp; Lyons In Filing on Uslico
LEAD: Baldwin &amp; Lyons Inc. disclosed that it had filed for permission from insurance regulators in various states to increase its stake in the Uslico Corporation from 9.8 percent, to up to 20 percent.
The filings are necessary because Uslico, a financial services holding concern in Arlington, Va., has two divisions engaged in life and property and casualty insurance.


The Golden Wind
LEAD: Trying to think of the perfect title:


USR Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USR Industries Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
260,526
127,230
Net loss
146,216
164,697


Jets Hope Rookie Will Beef Up Line
LEAD: Larry Pasquale, a Jet coach, observing Albert Goss take a vertical jump test at camp yesterday.
Page A28. (NYT/Barton Silverman)


Colombian Mayor Shot Dead
LEAD: A member of a leftist Colombian party who was elected to a mayor's office two months ago has been assassinated in the city of Medellin, the police said Tuesday.
Elkin de Jesus Martinez of the Patriotic Union, mayor of Remedios, a mining town in the northeastern province of Antioquia, was shot to death Sunday in a Medellin hotel lobby by two killers who escaped in a waiting car.


The Trans-Atlantic Numbers Game
LEAD: There is a trans-Atlantic numbers game going on, and anybody who can spell ''North Atlantic Treaty Organization'' can play.
First you tally the percentages, and you discover that the United States devotes six percent of its gross national product to its military while the West Europeans collectively spend only three percent.


Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
546,084,000
569,824,000
Net loss
4,414,000
cd17,925,000
Share earns
-
.50
9mo sales
2,022,602,000
2,274,691,000
Net inc
b26,672,000
d10,147,000
Share earns
1.13
-


Ragen Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ragen Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,276,000
3,245,000
Net loss
b540,000
c70,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo sales
4,696,000
7,022,000
Net loss
b638,000
c101,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Includes a loss of $119,000 and $2,000 from discontinued operations for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


9 Killed as Soviet Liner Burns in Japan
LEAD: Smoke billowing from the Soviet passenger ship Priamurye at a pier in Osaka.
Nine were killed and 35 injured as fire swept through the ship early today.


Dayton Hudson Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dayton Hudson Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,540,000,000
2,150,000,000
Net inc
30,700,000
38,100,000
Share earns
.36
.39
The company said the latest first quarter results include a pretax charge of $12.4 million for the LIFO inventory accounting method, compared with a pretax LIFO charge of $8.9 million included in the year earlier quarter's results.


Distressing Signals From the Court
LEAD: The Supreme Court's 5-4 decision to reconsider the rights of minorities to sue private parties for racial discrimination under a 19th century law signals bad news for the rights of blacks.


Witness Says Wedtech Offered Stock to Biaggi
LEAD: A former Wedtech executive said yesterday that company officials had offered stock to Representative Mario Biaggi because they were behind in legal fees to the Congressman's former law firm.


Forum Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forum Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,376,000
18,016,000
Net inc
1,018,000
b375,000
Share earns
.03
-
Yr rev
84,362,000
85,337,000
Net inc
7,054,000
11,124,000
Share earns
.21
.31


A Comeback for the Vacuum Tube
LEAD: In their endless quest for faster and more efficient electronic devices, scientists are borrowing from a technology many considered moribund 30 years ago: the vacuum tube.


Missouri Couple Held on Charges Of Plotting to Assassinate Jackson
LEAD: Federal authorities charged yesterday that a member of a white supremacist organization and his wife conspired to kill or injure the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


Review/Art; Amid Ageless Repose, a Cloisters Gallery Is Renewed
LEAD: The Cloisters may be only 50 years old, but it seems to have been there forever.
On the northwest edge of a city of speed and movement, it almost makes people slow down.
With its esthetic of synthesis and balance, with its odd yet successful blend of medieval and modern stone, and with its formidable collection of medieval objects that are very much about contemplation, it is one of very few institutions in New


Chances Are Slim, But This Jet Is Not
LEAD: When the Jets surprised Albert Goss of Jackson State by taking him as their final selection in the draft, they also wound up with the heaviest player in their history: 348 pounds.


Europe Energy Use Up
LEAD: Total energy use in the 12 nations of the European Community rose nine-tenths of a percent in 1987 from 1986, Eurostat, the community's statistics agency, said today.
Eurostat said the increase was well below the growth rates of its gross domestic product and industrial production.


World Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* World Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
34,188,000
33,081,000
Net inc
b580,000
c4,598,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Includes a gain of $3,200,000 from discontinued operations.
c-Net loss and includes a loss of $3,671,000 from discontinued operations.


Union Narrowly Wins Tough Battle to Represent Harvard Workers
LEAD: Harvard University's office, service and technical workers voted narrowly today to accept union representation.


Searle Disputes Infertility Claim
LEAD: Medical records do not support a woman's contention that the Copper-7 intrauterine device caused her infertility, a lawyer for the IUD's manufacturer, G. D. Searle &amp; Company, told a Federal jury today.


On West Coast, a Newly Vital Judaism
LEAD: As recently as the 1950's, the San Francisco Bay area was considered a backwater of American Judaism.
Of its 4 million residents then, about 100,000, or 2.5 percent, were Jews.
Most had been assimilated into the culture at large and lived a secular existence, as had many of the German and Eastern European Jewish pioneers who migrated to California during the Gold


James Dean Twiname, Store Executive, 88
LEAD: James Dean Twiname, a department store executive, died May 5 at the Life Care Center in Scottsdale, Ariz.
He was 88 years old and lived in Scottsdale.


Olympic Notebook; Time Running Out For North Koreans
LEAD: Whatever possibility remained that some events of the Seoul Summer Olympics would be held in North Korea has apparently ended.
Appearing in a television debate in Seoul Monday night, Park Seh Jik, the president of the South Korea organizing committee, rejected the idea by saying that to split the Games would violate the


Home Loan Bonds
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Banks are offering $3.18 billion of bonds separated into one-, three- and five-year maturities, through various securities dealers.
The bonds are priced at par.
A $1.25 billion issue of one-year securities, due in 1989, yields 7.75 percent; $1.14 billion of a three-year issue, due in 1991, yields 8.50 percent, while $790 million of a five-year issue, due in 1993, yields 8.90 percent.


Palo Alto Journal; 'Deadheads' in an Idolatrous Pursuit
LEAD: Tie-dyed from head to toe and fuzzy with marijuana, the young men and women paraded up and down Campus Drive outside the Frost Amphitheater at Stanford University. ''One, just one,'' they crooned, with index fingers raised high, begging for tickets to a recent Grateful Dead concert.


Club Considers Change
LEAD: The 110-year-old, all-male Cosmos Club finally appears to be seriously considering the admission of women.
Earlier this month, the Board of Management presented the 3,000 members with a proposed change in the bylaws, striking the word ''man,'' and inserting ''individuals of distinction, character and sociability.


Seized Honduran Faces Hearing
LEAD: A Honduran diplomat was in a local jail today awaiting a hearing on Federal charges of cocaine possession after his arrest by United States Customs agents at Miami International Airport.


Ford Motor Credit Has 5-Year Notes
LEAD: The Ford Motor Credit Company, a unit of the Ford Motor Company, is issuing $250 million of five-year notes through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council  ECONOMIC COMMITTEE - 10:30 A.M.
SOCIAL COMMITTEE - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Trusteeship Council  Meets at 3 P.M.


Solentiname Journal; Font of Lush Paintings, Inspired by a Rebel Priest
LEAD: The peasants on this pristine archipelago raise cattle and grow rice and beans like peasants everywhere in Central America, but unlike others, they are also artists whose paintings have been exhibited around the world.


'Les Mis' Brightens Day for Outcasts
LEAD: Randy Graff - long-haired, graceful, a luminary in the musical ''Les Miserables'' - glided across a broad stage yesterday and belted out her part's best lyrics: I had a dream my life would be so different from this hell I'm living/So different now from what it seemed/Now life has killed the dream I dreamed.


Corrections
LEAD: A Company News report in Business Day on Saturday about the I.C.H.


Boy Scouts Find Success Blazing Inner-City Trail
LEAD: One by one, and mostly with great timidity, a handful of boys, residents of the Prince George, a Manhattan welfare hotel, entered the cellar of a midtown church for the kickoff meeting of a new Boy Scout troop.


Investors at Lear Oppose Stock Plan
LEAD: A group of investment partnerships that controls 10.4 percent of the preferred stock of the Lear Petroleum Corporation said they would oppose the terms under which the British Petroleum Corporation has agreed to redeem Lear's preferred shares.
The redemption is part of BP America's merger agreement with the Dallas-based natural gas transport concern.


Coast Guard Fighting Off 'Yacht Club' Image
LEAD: Here at the United States Coast Guard Academy, the cadets bristle at suggestions that their school is as casual as Topsiders, a virtual yacht club where the curriculum centers on how to rescue capsized weekend captains.


Awards to Be Given For Writing on Theater
LEAD: The George Freedley Memorial Award for excellence in writing about the theater is to be presented tonight to Charles Shattuck for ''Shakespeare on the American Stage, Vol.
II: From Booth and Barrett to Sothern and Marlowe'' (Folger Books/Associated University Presses).
The award is from the Theater Library Association, which is to also present its award for excellence in writing about film, television or radio to John Canemaker for ''Winsor McCay: His Life and Art'' (Abbeville Press), a work about the first master of film animation and comic strips.


Education; 'Tom Sawyer' Still Tops Reading List
LEAD: The winner and still the heavyweight champion of the books most read by American children in their free time is Mark Twain's ''Tom Sawyer.''


More Hutton Laundering Is Suspected
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., which pleaded guilty earlier this week to charges that an E. F. Hutton &amp; Company branch had laundered money, disclosed today that it had uncovered further instances of possible money laundering at several New York City branch offices of E. F. Hutton.


Wedbush Leader Sticks To Traditional Business
LEAD: Edward W. Wedbush did not follow the traditional path of many securities executives.
Instead of selling stocks at a small firm after graduating from college, in 1957 Mr.
Wedbush and a high school friend, Robert Werner, started their own brokerage house with their pooled savings of $10,000.


Review/Theater; 'Spoils of War,' in a Family, Life and the World
LEAD: In ''Spoils of War,'' Michael Weller's wrenching new play at the Second Stage, a 16-year-old boy named Martin will stop at nothing to mend the pieces of his broken household.
The time is the Eisenhower 1950's, and Martin (Christopher Collet), a precocious only child, is all too keenly aware that the era's promised ideal of the model home has eluded him.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bell &amp; Howell Co., Skokie, Ill., said its shareholders had approved a proposal for a management-led group to take the company private at $64 a share.


Transcript of President's News Conference on Foreign and Domestic Issues
LEAD: Following is a transcript of President Reagan's question-and-answer session with reporters in Washington yesterday, as recorded by The Associated Press and The New York Times:  OPENING STATEMENT


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Washington Talk page in some copies yesterday about Clark M. Clifford omitted the name of the person assisting Mr.
Clifford with his memoirs.
He is Richard C. Holbrooke, a former Assistant Secretary of State, who is continuing his duties as a managing director of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., the New


Why Bush's Campaign Needs Nancy Reagan
LEAD: To the Editor:


AT THE NATION'S TABLE: CHICAGO
LEAD: ''YOU have exported your fast-food chains to our country,'' said Alfonso Ornelas, personnel manager for a chain of Mexican restaurants called Chon y Chano. ''Now we have given Chicago one of Mexico City's fast-food taquerias with our own particular style.''


Experience Profits a Promoter
LEAD: In 1984, when Evander Holyfield, the Olympic bronze medalist, was considering which promoter he would fight for as a professional, he turned down an offer from Josephine Abercrombie's Houston Boxing Association, even though the association offered more money than he got from the promoter he chose, Dan


Senate Begins Debate on Missile Treaty
LEAD: After months of political skirmishing and a series of last-minute negotiating crises, the Senate today began formal consideration of the arms treaty banning medium- and shorter-range missiles based on land.


WINE TALK
LEAD: IT'S one of those things about which, once it is done, everyone asks, ''Why wasn't it done a long time ago?'' People have been arguing for years over the relative merits of French and American wines.
Now, Christian Brothers has taken the next logical step: it has combined the two.


A Suspicious Storeroom Fire Forces an Evacuation at Saks
LEAD: A small fire broke out in a storeroom at Saks Fifth Avenue yesterday, forcing the evacuation of the department store and the suspension of business for about 90 minutes.
No injuries were reported.


David L. Guyer, 62, Diplomat and Head Of Save the Children
LEAD: David L. Guyer, a former diplomat and president of Save the Children Federation from 1977 until last year, died of lymphoma of the brain Saturday in Honolulu.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Yankees Can't Hit Or Field, Can't Win
LEAD: Two seasons ago, Billy Swift came within four outs of pitching a no-hitter against the Yankees.
One season ago, he underwent surgery on his right elbow.
Last night, he proved he had come full circle for the Seattle Mariners.


Horticulture May Be Sold
LEAD: Carter F. Bales, a management consultant who specializes in media companies, is expected to buy Horticulture magazine, an 84-year-old monthly for amateur gardeners, people familiar with the deal said yesterday.


Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
235,330,000
187,196,000
Net loss
5,553,000
b405,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income and includes a gain of $3,492,000 from discontinued operations.


Westphals Switch
LEAD: A week after Paul Westphal resigned as the basketball coach at Grand Canyon College in Phoenix in order to accept a position as assistant coach with the Suns, his older brother, Bill, accepted the job Paul left.
Bill, who is expected to sign a three-year contract today, has a career coaching record of 169-149 and was 25-27 the past two seasons at Occidental College in Eagle Rock, Calif.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: FIRM-FLESHED, meaty halibut, which is entering its peak season in Northeastern waters, is one of my favorite fish for outdoor barbecuing and broiling.
Its mild flavor can be enhanced in limitless ways with herb marinades.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Some things you have to keep to yourself when you're arguing with someone else.''  - President Reagan on U.S. negotiations with Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega of Panama.  [ A1:1. ]


Syrian Plans to Enter Beirut Appear Stalled
LEAD: An Amal militiaman firing a recoilless rifle as factional fighting with pro-Iranian fighters continued in Beirut's suburbs.
Iranian pressure appears to have set back Syrian plans to send troops into the suburbs to end 12 days of gunbattles between the rival militias. (AP)


Israel Overreacts to Nonviolence
LEAD: Israel's effort to expel Mubarak Awad, a Palestinian-American known for his espousal of nonviolence, raises fundamental legal and political issues.
The case is so unusual that Israel's High Court of Justice has agreed to a rare review of an expulsion order charging that Mr.
Awad has lived illegally in Israel since last November.


Far-Flung Gobs of American Military Gravy
LEAD: To the Editor:


REAGAN IS LAVISH IN PRAISING PERES
LEAD: President Reagan met today with Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel, lavishly praised him for supporting American efforts to revive peace negotiations in the Middle East and indirectly criticized Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.


McFarland Energy Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McFarland Energy Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,128,000
2,687,000
Net inc
561,000
2,687,000
Share earns
.13
.13


Florence Salomone, Newspaper Executive, 43
LEAD: Florence Salomone, vice president and general manager of The Rockland Journal-News in West Nyack, N.Y., since 1982, died of a heart attack yesterday at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
She was 43 years old and lived in Mount Vernon, N.Y.


Review/Television; Ladies Of Theater Perform
LEAD: When it comes to Presidential showcases and photo opportunities, few have been constructed more shrewdly than the public television series ''In Performance at the White House.'' Taped in the East Room, these periodic specials star the President and Mrs.
Reagan as just plain Ron and Nancy having a few select friends over for a character-building exercise in arts appreciation.


EXPORTS A RECORD
LEAD: In a performance that exceeded even the most optimistic predictions, the United States exported a record amount of goods in March and shrank its monthly trade deficit to $9.7 billion, the lowest level in three years.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the credit markets incorrectly described the Kimberly-Clark Corporation's new three-year notes.


Diet Advice: Eat, Drink and Don't Worry
LEAD: EVERY day - but especially as bathing-suit season nears - millions of Americans gird themselves to embark on a diet, riveted by the fantasy that life would be better if they were lighter and slighter.


Merger Will Create No. 1 Bank in Spain
LEAD: The chairmen of two leading Spanish banks announced plans today to merge their institutions and create Spain's biggest commercial bank.
Alfonso Escamez, chairman of Banco Central, and Mario Conde, chairman of Banco Espanol de Credito, appeared on Spanish television after their boards had approved the deal.


Not a Slave to the Zodiac, Reagan Says
LEAD: President Reagan declined today to say whether he believed in astrology, saying he did not know enough about the subject to assess its validity.


Conferees Back Bill Curbing Device to Detect Lies
LEAD: Compromise legislation that would prohibit most polygraph, or lie-detector, tests for private employees and job applicants was approved unanimously today by House and Senate negotiators.


Bipartisan Reading
LEAD: It is not too often these days that the Senate majority and minority leaders find themselves in agreement.
It is even more unusual for an author to find his work praised in a Senate debate, as happened in a debate on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The work in question is a new book by Clyde V.


'Windsor Fallout': Jewels as Investment
LEAD: LAST October, two days after the stock market plunge, a 64.83-carat diamond was sold at Christie's for $6.4 million, the highest price ever paid at auction for a gem.
Last month, that record was broken by the sale of a 85.51-carat diamond for $9.13 million at Sotheby's.
The same Sotheby's auction set records with the prices fetched by a pink diamond ($4.73 million) and a cultured pearl necklace ($1.265 million).


3 Retailers Post Lower Earnings
LEAD: Five of the nation's leading retailers yesterday reported lower profits or losses in the period ended April 30, principally because of weak sales in apparel.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Italian Food on S.I.


Causes Sought In Bus Accident That Killed 3
LEAD: Police and transportation officials searched here today for clues to the crash Monday of a bus carrying mentally handicapped workers that left 3 people dead and 20 injured.


The Embarrassment of the Bronx
LEAD: By endorsing the re-election of Representative Mario Biaggi this week, the Bronx Democratic Party reinforces its reputation for sleaze and embarrasses New York.


Fireproof Crates Called for on Jets
LEAD: Prompted by the crash of a South African Airways Boeing 747 last November, the National Transportation Safety Board on Monday urgently recommended requiring fire-resistant containers for cargo carried on main passenger decks of airliners.


Coalition Is Set For Software
LEAD: A United States and European coalition of seven rival computer makers said yesterday that it would create a new software standard that may make it possible for users to mix and match computer hardware and software from different vendors.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: LUNCH hour on a lovely spring day.
The Pulitzer Memorial Fountain in front of the Plaza.
The crowd is contented.
Some people lazily remove sandwiches from paper bags.
Others simply observe the horse and carriage trade.
There are readers and there are dozers and there are those obviously eager for an early tan.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Review/Music; Metier of Modern Dance
LEAD: There is music that demands to be danced - almost anything by Tchaikovsky, for instance - and other music that dancers must bend to their purposes.
Many works of the latter sort, such as the aleatory pieces by John Cage that Merce Cunningham has often found useful, function as sound backdrops against which apparently unrelated choreography plays itself out.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Lakers Barely Get By Jazz
LEAD: The Los Angeles Lakers, who trailed Utah two games to one just four days ago, took a 3-2 lead tonight with a 111-109 victory over the Jazz.
Michael Cooper hit his only field goal with seven seconds left to put Los Angeles ahead to stay at 110-109.


Penney, J C Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penney, J C Co Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
3,174,000,000
3,224,000,000
Net inc
131,000,000
54,000,000
Share earns
.96
.36
Shares outst
136,000,000
150,700,000
The company said year-ago quarter results include provisions totaling 55 cents a share for the costs of relocating the company's headquarters to Dallas.


Women Are Liberating a Citadel of Male Power
LEAD: This capital, which was traditionally a man's domain in matters of power and influence, is now a woman's city, too.


General Microwave Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Microwave Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
5,356,235
5,441,181
Net inc
193,074
b31,994
Share earns
.14
-
Yr sales
20,769,012
20,496,612
Net inc
888,648
817,593
Share earns
.62
.55


Graduate Student In Indiana Charged in Threat on Reagan
LEAD: A Federal grand jury indicted a graduate student today on charges he threatened the life of President Reagan and other public officials in letters and telephone calls.


Beman Quits Playing
LEAD: Commissioner Deane Beman of the PGA Tour has decided to abandon his role as an active player. ''I simply do not have the time necessary to prepare for competition if I am to continue as commissioner, and I intend to do that,'' Beman said by telephone from his office in Ponte Vedra, Fla. ''I will not compete in Europe this summer.


Trashing Privacy
LEAD: A man's home is his castle, but is his trash can part of that protected domain?
No, says the Supreme Court by a 6-to-2 vote, it's abandoned property left for the municipality.
The police may search it for evidence without a warrant or even a reason to suspect that it contains something incriminating.


Alatenn Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alatenn Resources Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
55,577,000
46,336,000
Net inc
988,000
1,146,000
Share earns
.43
.50


Sbarro Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sbarro Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 24
1988
1987
Revenue
29,959,000
22,128,000
Net inc
1,911,000
1,366,000
Share earns
.21
.15
The company said that effective Jan. 1, it changed from a 12-month fiscal year ending on Dec.


Albany Panel Backs Work Limits For State Employees in Campaigns
LEAD: A legislative commission recommended yesterday that employees of the Legislature be barred from working on election campaigns while on the job and from using state computers, mailing lists and cars for campaign purposes.


Sailor's Death Spurs Review of Training
LEAD: The chief of Navy training, Vice Admiral N. R. Thunman, said today that he had ordered a thorough review of training procedures that involve risk.
He said he was acting to prevent another death like that of Lee William Mirecki, a sailor who drowned in an air-sea rescue exercise.


A Way to Neutralize Toxic Waste Sites
LEAD: Toxic waste sites are often difficult to clean up, particularly when the wastes have seeped deep into the ground.
The Environmental Protection Agency, working with two private companies, recently demonstrated a technique to neutralize PCB's at a site at Hialeah, Fla., by boring holes into the ground and injecting a neutralizing chemical and cement.


Far-Flung Gobs of American Military Gravy; A Base That Belongs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Caution and Reagan Link Seen as Bush's Problems
LEAD: After using his association with President Reagan to secure an easy path to the Republican nomination, Vice President Bush is now having to decide just how close he wants to remain.


Texfi Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texfi Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
46,809,000
40,988,000
Net inc
b3,027,000
c2,435,000
Share earns
.37
.30
6mo sales
86,647,000
72,835,000
Net inc
b5,356,000
c4,453,000
Share earns
.65
.56


Arts Exhibit Dispute Splits Miami Cubans
LEAD: Once again the arts have become a battleground in the Cuban-American community here, a contest between forces of free expression and those of political ideology.


Reagan Asserts He Won't Retreat On Negotiations to Oust Noriega
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he would not retreat from negotiations with Panama's leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, despite increasing opposition to a deal that would require the United States to drop drug-trafficking charges against him.


Kent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kent Electronics (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
7,794,000
5,169,000
Net inc
441,000
215,000
Share earns
.16
.11
Shares outst
2,691,400
1,890,300
Yr sales
27,142,000
18,114,000
Net inc
1,468,000
630,000
Share earns
.60
.36
Shares outst
2,464,100
1,736,700


Doctors in Massachusetts Are Embittered by Dukakis Policies
LEAD: If Massachusetts doctors had their way, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's Presidential bid might be dead on arrival.


On the Origin of Venus
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Limits of Mubarak Awad's Moderation; A Voice of Reason
LEAD: To the Editor:


Canadian Agency Wins Top Prize for Billboards
LEAD: For the first time in the 46-year history of the Obie Awards for outdoor advertising, a Canadian agency has received the top prize, for its billboard for McDonald's of Montreal.


Backers Fail to Get Lethal Injection Bid On California Ballot
LEAD: Backers of a measure that would allow the terminally ill patient to request a lethal injection from a physican have failed to gather enough signatures to place the measure on the November ballot in California.


Warner Signs Lorimar Pact
LEAD: Warner Communications Inc. and the Lorimar Telepictures Corporation announced today that they had signed a definitive agreement for Warner to acquire Lorimar, producer of ''Dallas'' and other hit TV shows, in a stock swap.


Robinson Hurt
LEAD: Manager Frank Robinson, who has a ruptured disk in his back, was hospitalized in Baltimore yesterday and will not be back to manage before Saturday.
Elrod Hendricks, the Orioles' bullpen coach, will guide the team over the next four games.
Hendricks, 47 years old, has been in the Orioles' organization for 18 and a half years as a player and a coach.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Animed Inc., Roslyn, L.I., a veterinary clinical service and diagnostic company, appointed Larry P. Rapp chief financial officer.


Macmillan Gets a Bid From Bass
LEAD: The Robert M. Bass Group of Texas said yesterday that it had made an unsolicited offer to acquire Macmillan Inc., the New York-based publishing and information services company, for $64 a share, or about $1.6 billion.


Pennsylvania Bond Yields Range From 5% to 7.65%
LEAD: The largest competitive deal yesterday was a $155 million Pennsylvania general obligation bond offering, which was awarded to an underwriting group led by Prudential-Bache Securities.


Israel Awaits Modern Plague
LEAD: Israel set up emergency telephone hot lines Tuesday and prepared insecticide-spraying planes to fly into action against a possible plague of locusts, the desert insects dreaded since biblical times.
Only a small number of locusts were sighted in southern Israel and the Jordan River valley, but officials warned of a possible larger invasion from the south.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Foote, Cone In European Joint Venture
LEAD: FOOTE, CONE &amp; BELDING COMMUNICATIONS, a company with a venerable American heritage, is going to form an alliance with Publicis S.A. of Paris, that includes shared equity, an exchange of board members and the creation of an European joint venture with $2 billion in billings.


Federal Insurance Urged for Long-Term Care
LEAD: A Brookings Institution study recommended today that Federal social insurance replace charity care in paying for the rising cost of long-term health care for elderly people who are disabled.


What's in a Name?
LEAD: Edmund Morris, the authorized biographer of President Reagan, has a concern.
In a capital where the chief of state is commonly referred to as Ron, or even Dutch, where the Speaker of the House goes by Jim and the Senate minority leader Bob, Mr.
Morris has raised his voice against ''the unasked-for abbreviation of our proper names.


Site in Hiss-Chambers Case Now a Landmark
LEAD: Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel, rejecting the opinion of an advisory committee, granted landmark status today to a key site in the celebrated espionage case involving Whittaker Chambers and Alger Hiss.


Organogenesis Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Organogenesis Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
760,280
307,115
Net loss
535,962
281,274


Lilco Pact Seen as Ending 'Uncertainty'
LEAD: The chairman of the Long Island Lighting Company, speaking today at the utility's annual shareholders meeting, all but endorsed a settlement with New York State that would result in the abandoment of the Shoreham nuclear power plant.


Review/Film; The Many Kinds of Division in Israel
LEAD: In its exasperatingly prolix and tendentious way, ''Shattered Dreams'' accents the growing political, economic, social and religious divisions that are putting dangerous strains on Israeli democracy.
The painfully timely British-made documentary, which opens at Film Forum 1 today, is filled with confrontations between Arabs and Israelis, hard-liners and Peace Now demonstrators, religious zealots and people who drive on the Sabbath.





Cone, Myers Stop Padres
LEAD: David Cone, who pitches for the Mets mostly when it's nobody else's turn, pitched his fifth straight victory tonight and it was a tour de force: five singles and no runs in seven innings, 12 strikeouts and a 1-0 victory over the San Diego Padres.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Marvin D. Waldman, a senior vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, has been named a group creative director.


Treasury Bonds and Notes Fall
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes fell by as much as a point in fairly light trading yesterday, as market participants reacted negatively to the implications of a report showing a big drop in the nation's merchandise trade deficit in March.


Dollar Up on Trade Report; Pound Drops With Rate Cut
LEAD: The dollar advanced against all major foreign currencies yesterday on an unexpectedly sharp drop in the nation's trade deficit in March, while the pound plunged after a cut in the British base lending rate.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-12  The trade deficit dropped in March to $9.7 billion, the lowest level in three years, as the United States exported $29 billion worth of goods, a 23 percent increase and a record for any month.
Page A1


Review/Folk Music; The Songs of Bulgaria
LEAD: Wondrous, and not always invidious, are the ways of fashion.
Bulgarian folk music, and especially that country's keening, nasal, dissonant women's singing, has been a staple of record collectors for decades.
But in the last year, two disks were released in the United States - Nonesuch's ''Mystere des Voix Bulgares'' and Hannibal's ''Balkana'' - that became all the rage among pop stars, college radio stations, alternative weeklies and magazines and other arbiters of hip.


First Russian Column Leaves Afghanistan
LEAD: The first Soviet troop convoy to withdraw from Afghanistan crossed the border into the Soviet Union this morning.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ogilvy Given 3 Andy Awards
LEAD: Ogilvy &amp; Mather stole the show last night at Roseland, where the 24th annual Andy Awards were distributed by the Advertising Club of New York.


Millions Missing From German Jewish Fund
LEAD: The leader of West Germany's main Jewish organization said today that tens of millions of marks were missing from a fund intended for Jewish victims of Nazism and that his predecessor might have taken them.


As Concern Rises, President Restates Confidence in Meese
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he retained complete confidence in Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d despite growing concern in Congress and among conservative leaders that Mr.
Meese's legal troubles had undermined the work of the Justice Department.


Brazil Program Backed
LEAD: All but two of Brazil's powerful state governors have given their support to President Jose Sarney's economic austerity program aimed at winning an accord with the International Monetary Fund, officials said.
They said 22 state governors threw their support behind official policies at a meeting with Mr.


Correction
LEAD: A recipe and a chart with the Microwave Cooking column in The Living Section on May 4 gave incorrect instructions for sweet custard.
In step 2 of the recipe, the mixture should be divided among four custard cups.
The times given in the chart are for cooking in the four custard cups, not in a four-cup measure.


EATING WELL
LEAD: IT is confusing enough to decide what your diet as an adult should be: we are told to eat more fiber and less fat, to drink skim milk and not to eat eggs more than twice a week.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Soviet Rocket Plant Blast


Th D p tm t of J st e, Cont.
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese had the right to dismiss Terry Eastland as his public relations chief.
Mr.
Meese may even have been right to want him out if he thought his aide was privately commenting on Mr.
Meese's plight with not wholly flattering candor.
What's astonishing about the firing is its insensitivity.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.03
7.30
6.67
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.18
6.18
5.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.55
6.45
6.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.88
8.81
8.76
30-YR.


Sidney M. Davis, 69, Aide to Senate Panels
LEAD: Sidney M. Davis, a Manhattan lawyer and counsel to investigating committees in Washington and Albany, died of heart disease Sunday at New York Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Theologian Rejects Catholic U. Proposal To Settle Suspension
LEAD: A theologian who was suspended by the Catholic University of America charged yesterday that the action was tantamount to dismissal and said he would pursue a suit charging the university with violating his rights as a tenured professor.


Inland Gold &amp; Silver Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inland Gold &amp; Silver Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
594,461
-
Net inc
30,655
-
Year-ago figures are not available because the company, which was formed in January 1987, and went public in July, did not begin production until the fourth quarter last year.


Travelers Is Hurt in Real Estate
LEAD: The Travelers Corporation, the nation's sixth-largest insurance company, is struggling to limit the damage from a growing portfolio of troubled real estate loans that is already depressing its earnings.


THE POP LIFE
LEAD:  Iglesias and Wonder


Education; Lessons
LEAD: College administrators can be much more than just the plotters of policy and budgets.
Stripped of title and office, the presidents, vice presidents, deans and division heads of the academy are at the core teachers and their daily routine of administration should, ideally, be a campuswide lesson in the management of human affairs.


Real Estate; Fifth Avenue Abuzz From 34th to 42d St.
LEAD: UNTIL recently the stretch of Fifth Avenue between the Public Library at 42d Street and the Empire State Building at 34th Street had been overlooked by developers of large office projects.


Citicorp Rates Up for 3d Week
LEAD: Interest rates were up at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.
It was the third consecutive increase in as many weeks.


Centex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centex Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
387,458,000
302,862,000
Net inc
5,005,000
6,976,000
Share earns
.33
.39
Shares outst
15,038,541
17,779,201
Yr rev
1,460,061,000
1,303,897,000
Net inc
b74,163,000
44,204,000
Share earns
4.63
2.47
Shares outst
16,016,005
17,863,177


Market Place; Analysts Size Up Specialty Insurers
LEAD: WITH the stock market unable to gain much momentum above the Dow industrials' 2,000 level, diehard investors are being forced to search further afield for stocks to buy.
Specialty insurers are among those that some analysts and investors say deserve more attention.


Coated Sales Inc reports earnings for Year to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coated Sales Inc (OTC)
Year to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
126,143,000
90,010,703
Net inc
10,871,000
7,203,530
Share earns
.55
.40


Bronx Jury Clears Police In '87 Death
LEAD: A 28-year-old Bronx woman who spent the last six days of her life in courts, jails and city hospitals waiting to be arraigned received woefully inadequate medical care while in detention and died needlessly, according to a grand jury finding described yesterday by the Bronx District Attorney.


U.S. Links Men in Bomb Case To Lebanon Terrorist Group
LEAD: Three men arrested last October as they tried to bring a bomb into the United States are members of a Lebanon-based terrorist group and were planning an attack in America, law-enforcement officials said today.


Trading Curb Called Months Off
LEAD: Though the White House working group on the market crash has won the rere ment of majoexexchanges to stop rarading when theoDow Jones indusiaial average drops 250 points in one day, entmtment of such a ''ciritit breaker'' could be months away, exchange and regulatory officials said today.


Japan's Faulty Memory
LEAD: If he had been a German official, or a stiff-backed President of Austria, everybody would have been up in arms.
There would have been a clamor for wide-ranging debate, for TV documentaries and films, for programs in the schools, for a basic review of textbooks.


I.B.M. Seeks Clone Fees
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation has stunned personal computer ''clone'' manufacturers by demanding retroactive payments from them for patents used in PC clones over the last several years.


Tejano Is Out Of the Preakness
LEAD: Tejano will not run in the Preakness Stakes at Pimlico Saturday, his trainer told track officials today.


First Chicago Blocks Theft
LEAD: The First National Bank of Chicago, a unit of the First Chicago Corporation, said today that it had thwarted an attempt by an employee to embezzle $70 million from three customer accounts.


Bonn to Try Accused Hijacker in Juvenile Court
LEAD: Mohammed Ali Hamadei, a Lebanese who is accused of hijacking an American jetliner in 1985, will be tried by a West German juvenile court since his age at the time of the crime remains in dispute, the court announced today.


Like a Real Candidate, Tanner Falls Flat in Hollywood
LEAD: The Democratic Presidential candidate Jack Tanner came to Hollywood recently for the usual purpose - to raise money.


2 Styles That Couldn't Be More Different
LEAD: After six weeks of playoff eliminations, two teams remain in contention for the Stanley Cup, teams that have had identical springtime success despite the fact that they don't resemble each other in the least.


Bridge
LEAD: Those who play duplicate have an advantage over the followers of almost all other sport or recreation: In almost any city in the world they can walk into a bridge club, receive a warm welcome, and make new friends.


U.S. Civil Rights Commission's Stake in the AIDS Battle
LEAD: To the Editor:


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  ATLANTA (NL) - Released Damaso Garcia, second baseman.
Signed Jerry Royster, infielder.
COLLEGES  ARMY - Named Ray Bosse men's and women's swimming coach.
GRAND CANYON - Named Bill Westphal basketball coach.
HOLY CROSS - Named Jim Stewart assistant hockey coach.
NEW JERSEY TECH - Named T.


Copper Prices Rise Sharply; Frozen Orange Juice Falls
LEAD: Prices of copper futures rose sharply yesterday, indicating strong demand despite indications that supplies will be rising soon.


Bronx Drug Adviser Shoots Supervisor and Kills Himself
LEAD: A counselor at a Bronx methadone clinic shot and wounded a supervisor yesterday and killed himself as patients and staff members barricaded themselves behind locked doors.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Saying that boxing was in his blood, a former three-time world champion, Wilfredo Gomez of Puerto Rico, will make a comeback July 20 at Miami against an opponent to be named.
Gomez, 31 years old, who held the World Boxing Council super bantamweight and featherweight titles and the world junior lightweight crown, said he was seeking the W.B.C.


Sexton's Poetry: Better as Poetry Than Therapy
LEAD:  Selected Poems of Anne Sexton  Edited by Diane Wood Middlebrook and Diana Hume George  266 pages.
Houghton Mifflin Company. $21.95.
I am filling the room  with the words from my pen.
Words leak out of it like a miscarriage.
I am zinging words out into the air  and they come back like squash balls.


New AIDS Virus Test Reduces Blood Risks
LEAD: Scientists said Monday that they had developed a new AIDS virus test that should reduce the slight remaining risk of tainted blood transfusions by revealing if people are infected long before they develop antibodies to the virus.


A Capitol Chorus
LEAD: Some 100 members of the House of Representatives are scheduled to stand on the steps of the Capitol at 9:30 A.M. today to help honor Irving Berlin, who turned 100 years old last week, with renditions of ''Happy Birthday'' and the composer's own ''God Bless America.'' The performance is to be part of a CBS-TV special on Mr.


Blues Dismiss Coach
LEAD: The St.
Louis Blues, dissatisfied with the team's early exits from the National Hockey League playoffs the past two seasons, dismissed Coach Jacques Martin yesterday. ''Over the past two seasons we have had a dramatic infusion of young talent into this hockey club,'' General Manager Ron Caron said.


Tidewater Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tidewater Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
44,622,000
37,372,000
Net loss
32,278,000
56,678,000
Yr rev
155,913,000
151,482,000
Net loss
b32,278,000
56,678,000
b-Includes a gain of $13.5 million from the sale of the company's interest in Indonesian production sharing contracts.


Corrections
LEAD: The headline of the Peripherals column in Science Times yesterday referred incorrectly to computers containing Intel 80286 chips.
They are AT computers by I.B.M., as well as clones produced by other manufacturers.


Tipping for Wine
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page picture caption yesterday misidentified the Senate committee before which Secretary of State George P. Shultz testified.
It was Foreign Relations.


Heileman Division
LEAD: The Australian owner of the G. Heileman Brewing Company agreed to sell Heileman's baking division to RT Group S.A., a privately held Belgian sugar producer.
Terms were not disclosed.
BBH US Inc., a subsidiary of Bond Corporation Holdings of Australia, which last year bought the Wisconsin brewer for $1.26 billion, said the Heileman Baking Company has 12 bakeries in five states in the Midwest.


Hyundai Car Tops Imports
LEAD: The Korean-made Hyundai Excel, the top-selling import in the United States in 1987, was again the import sales leader by a wide margin in the first four months of 1988, industry figures showed today.


Intermec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermec Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,672,000
17,462,000
Net inc
1,823,000
1,133,000
Share earns
.29
.19
Yr rev
85,196,000
65,603,000
Net inc
5,233,000
3,899,000
Share earns
.85
.65


Dukakis Defeats Jackson In Oregon Presidential Vote
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts strengthened his claim to the Democratic Presidential nomination today by defeating the Rev.
Jesse Jackson in Oregon's primary.


Reporter's Notebook; Reverence, and a Joke, for the Pope
LEAD: Although Pope John Paul II is on his 37th overseas trip, he still travels with the stubborn gusto of a man adding new entries to his record book and finding himself cast in new roles.


Materials Research Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Materials Research Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
30,384,000
26,166,000
Net inc
623,000
252,000
Share earns
.15
.06
6mo sales
57,768,000
47,604,000
Net inc
850,000
318,000
Share earns
.20
.08


Rested Henderson Restless
LEAD: Rickey Henderson paused a moment from the dominoes game that occupied his attention and flexed his left hand.
He wanted to show that it was nearly healed, that the sore ring finger no longer really bothered him and that when Friday arrived, he would be ready.


Soviet Closes a Magazine Extolling Openness
LEAD: The editor of the independent magazine Glasnost said today that the authorities had confiscated his printing equipment and destroyed his files and manuscripts, leaving the future of the best-known Soviet dissident journal in doubt.


Vice Raids Baffle Manila, an Exuberant Town
LEAD: Policemen moved quickly through the Flamingo nightclub the other evening, plucking young hostesses from the couches where they sat with customers and hustling them quietly out to a waiting van.


A Mutilated Display Prompts Middlebury To Punish Fraternity
LEAD: A Middlebury College fraternity was placed on suspension for one year today over the display of a mutilated female mannequin that hung from the fraternity's balcony in two days of parties May 7 and 8.


Big Series at the Stadium
LEAD: THEY look a little like the old Oakland Raiders, with their broad shoulders and their long frames, and a little like a traveling chorus, with their identical herringbone sports jackets.


Practice Nepotism, But Affirmatively
LEAD: Loved her, hated him.


Talking Deals; Texans Welcome Outsider's Capital
LEAD: TEXANS in banking and real estate hope that last week's bid for the developer of the sprawling Las Colinas complex northwest of Dallas will mark a turning point for badly needed fresh capital to flow into dozens of debt-burdened projects in Houston and Dallas.


Longs Drug Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Longs Drug Stores Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
450,007,000
421,593,000
Net inc
13,273,000
11,035,000
Share earns
.65
.52


Dart Group Buys 50% of Jumbo Food
LEAD: The Dart Group Corporation announced it had acquired 50 percent of the stock of Jumbo Food Stores Inc., which operates 18 discount grocery stores in Maryland and Virginia.
Dart Group, which has unsuccessfully tried to acquire some of the largest retailers in the country in the last several years, did not disclose the cost of the stock.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Hawks Win to Close In on Upset
LEAD: The ''I HATE L.A.'' T-shirts have already been displayed by the entrepreneurs on Causeway Street.
Inside the Boston Garden, the Celtic fans were aware that the Detroit Pistons had concluded their playoff series tonight.
There were bad guys to take on across the country.


Joint Chefs' Head Skeptical on Noriega
LEAD: The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff predicted today that Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the Panamanian leader, would not give up power as early as Washington wants.


Derwent Prizes to Estabrook and Wong
LEAD: Christine Estabrook, who played the retarded Sheila in ''The Boys Next Door,'' and B. D. Wong, who made his Broadway debut in ''M.
Butterfly,'' are the winners of the 1987-88 Clarence Derwent Award, which was announced Tuesday.
The award, which is named for the actor and former president of the Actors' Equity Association, has been made each year since 1944 to ''the most promising female and male actors on the metropolitan scene.


Charlotte Charles Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charlotte Charles Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,146,000
4,811,000
Net loss
840,000
872,000
9mo sales
34,326,000
34,831,000
Net inc
700,000
639,000
Share earns
.56
.51


Currents; Visions of Bygone Greece and Turkey
LEAD: THE easel is draped with a pair of antique Turkish pants; 19th-century weapons on loan from the Metropolitan Museum of Art are arranged in the vitrine; pieces of 16th-century horse armor are displayed on the mantelpiece.
The dusty pink walls have been delicately stenciled by James Huniford.
The decor is by Stephen Sills, below left, an interior designer who was given the unusual commission by Michael Ward, a gallery owner, below right, of creating an ambiance for an exhibition of lithographs by Louis Dupre.


Cooper Cos. to Pay Proxy Fight Costs
LEAD: The Sturman brothers of Mount Vernon.
N.Y., disclosed that the Cooper Companies had agreed to reimburse up to $900,000 of their expenses in preparing for a proxy fight against the medical equipment concern based in Palo Alto, Calif.


Dollar Ends Mostly Lower; Gold Advances in New York
LEAD: The dollar finished lower yesterday against most major currencies except the Canadian dollar as a rally inspired by a positive United States trade performance ran out of steam.


With Teller Distracted, Man Takes $100,000 From Bank
LEAD: A man robbed a bank here of $100,000 today after a teller's attention was diverted, allowing him to walk out with a bag of money that had just been delivered by armored car, the police said.


No-Frills Oilers Take 1-0 Lead
LEAD: The Oilers promised they wouldn't and couldn't use ''razzle dazzle'' to carry them past the Boston Bruins to a Stanley Cup, and as their series commenced tonight in Edmonton, they showed themselves to be as committed to an unadorned style as their opponents.


U.S. and Europe Seek End of Farm Impasse
LEAD: The United States and the European Community are deadlocked in their negotiations on how to eliminate the more than $200 billion spent each year on farm subsidies around the world.


Basix Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Basix Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
31,159,000
31,066,000
Net inc
878,000
b428,000
Share earns
.09
-
b-Net loss and after a loss of $1,793,000 from discontinued operations.
Year-ago results are reclassified for comparative purposes.


Beijing Journal; Where the Price of Vegetables Only Feeds Despair
LEAD: At the Yong An Li food market in eastern Beijing last Saturday, lines of anxious shoppers stretched into the street.
Inside, harried shop assistants shouted at customers and at one another in an effort to cope with the panic buying that engulfed the Chinese capital before sharply higher food prices took effect.


Gold Output Up in 1987
LEAD: Gold production in the non-Communist world rose 4 percent last year, to a record 1,341 metric tons, Samuel Montagu &amp; Company said today.
Mines in North America and Australia accounted for the increase from 1986's 1,290 tons.
South African output, affected by strikes, declined.


8 Reputed Members Of Genovese Family Indicted by U.S. Jury
LEAD: Federal prosecutors yesterday announced the indictments of eight reputed members and associates of the Genovese crime family, including Anthony (Fat Tony) Salerno and Matthew (Matty the Horse) Ianniello, on charges of extortion and racketeering stemming from the 1984 takeover of an Edgewater, N.J., gravel company.


Alcott and Lopez At Top of the Tour
LEAD: Amy Alcott promised two things today on the eve of the Mazda Ladies Professional Golf Association Championship.


ICH Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ICH Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
723,436,000
653,555,000
Net loss
b8,305,000
c14,997,000
Share earns
-
.21
b-After a loss from investments of $2,388,000.
c-Net income and after a gain from investments of $11,669,000.


Giants Candidates Bid for Jobs
LEAD: Tim Richardson working out yesterday during a warm-up drill at Giants Stadium.
Rookies took part in the second day of minicamp.
Page D27. (NYT/Barton Silverman)


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Right now, I feel beautiful, because I am waiting to see the Soviet people.''  - Igor Lukyanchuk, a 19-year-old soldier returning from Afghanistan.  [ A10:6. ]


American Century Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Century Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b14,182,000
2,667,000
9mo net loss
21,293,000
6,651,000


All-Electronic Swiss Trading
LEAD: Switzerland's financial markets will take a technological leap forward Thursday with the opening of the world's first fully automated options and futures exchange.
Unlike similar exchanges in


KMS Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KMS Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,993,000
4,716,000
Net inc
200,000
238,000
Share earns
.09
.12
Shares outst
2,330,000
1,951,000


F.C.C. Approves Atlantic Cable Plan
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission yesterday approved plans by an international group of telecommunications companies to build a new trans-Atlantic undersea cable that would go into service in 1991.
The fiber optic cable, known as TAT-9, will carry 80,000 simultaneous telephone calls, or about twice the capacity of the TAT-8 cable scheduled to go into operation between the United States and Europe this year.


Media News Picks President
LEAD: Michael H. Heath, president and chief operating officer of Macromedia Inc., has been named president and chief operating officer of Media News Group Inc. and Media News Holdings Inc., company officials said today.
The Dallas-based Media


Facet Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Facet Enterprises Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
93,845,000
68,168,000
Net inc
b2,307,000
c843,000
Share earns
.44
.27
Shares outst
5,258,000
3,081,000
6mo rev
174,712,000
107,107,000
Net inc
b3,391,000
c1,023,000
Share earns
.65
.33
Shares outst
5,173,000
3,079,000


Big Sale, Big Flap
LEAD: When the entertainer Art Linkletter was named United States Commissioner General to help Australia celebrate its 200th birthday, the appointment was celebrated by a company for which he acts as spokesman by holding a sale on a contour chair dubbed the Ambassador.
The Government was not amused.


Willem Drees Dies at 101; Postwar Dutch Leader
LEAD: Willem Drees, Prime Minister of the Netherlands in the period of postwar recovery from 1948 to 1958 and architect of the nation's comprehensive welfare system, has died, the Government announced today.
He was 101 years old.


Biosearch Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biosearch Medical Products
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,132,732
4,691,228
Net inc
b917,020
c95,846
Share earns
.16
-
b-Includes a tax benefit of $379,000.
c-Net loss and after a tax benefit of $134,300.


Texas Banks' Improvement Seen
LEAD: Losses continued to rise among Texas banks in the first quarter, but L. William Seidman, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, said today that the industry's fortunes in the state should improve next year.


Unitrode Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unitrode Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
40,326,773
34,926,770
Net inc
351,893
b1,997,286
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


License Revoked
LEAD: The thoroughbred training license of Robert DeBonis has been revoked by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
The license was revoked for ''attempt to commit a fraud in connection with racing and breeding,'' according to an announcement yesterday by Richard Corbisiero Jr., the board's chairman.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Pistons Take Series
LEAD: Detroit advanced to the Eastern Conference final tonight as Bill Laimbeer scored 13 of his 19 points in the fourth quarter to lift the Pistons to a 102-95 victory over the Chicago Bulls.
The Pistons won the series, four games to one.


Mason Sees Cover-Up In Death of a Detainee
LEAD: A lawyer for a Bronx woman who died after six days in jails and city hospitals called on Governor Cuomo yesterday to name a special prosecutor to look into the police role in the case.


Why Chess And Not Bridge?
LEAD: Graybeard former undergraduates who, in the 30's, majored in Benny Goodman and minored in bridge will be dismayed to hear what the Aquarian Age has done to their sport.
Alan Truscott, The Times's bridge columnist, recently reported on a study showing that for every bridge player on campus now, there are eight chess players.


General Mills Will Sell Talbots and Bauer for $585 Million
LEAD: General Mills Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Talbots women's apparel chain to the Jusco Company, a large Japanese chain-store retailer, for $325 million in cash.
It will be the first major purchase by a Japanese company of an American retailer.


Lilco Accord Facing Foes; Unanimity Is Ending Over Shoreham Issue
LEAD: On Monday, Governor Cuomo endorsed ending his battle over the Shoreham nuclear power plant by negotiating with the Long Island Lighting Company to abandon the $5.3 billion plant.


Ceradyne Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ceradyne Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,377,000
6,953,000
Net loss
868,000
b89,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


Robert James Lewis, Investment Banker, 89
LEAD: Robert James Lewis, a retired investment banker, died Tuesday at his home in Manhattan after a series of strokes.
He was 89 years old.


Hollywood Sends Talent Scouts to (Film) School
LEAD: John C. McGinley is an actor on the rise.
After appearances in ''Platoon'' and ''Wall Street,'' and fresh from shooting his third Oliver Stone film, ''Talk Radio,'' he is starring in ''The Buddy and Al Story,'' an offbeat comedy about two brothers who dream of winning back the nightclub their mother lost when they were just show-biz kids.


Clean Up New York's Scandalous Voting Mess
LEAD: To the Editor:


Agents Discover a Cartridge On Jackson Campaign Plane
LEAD: Secret Service officials said today that they had found an unfired 9-millimeter cartridge for an automatic weapon aboard the aircraft chartered by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's campaign.


Mario Merola Remembered
LEAD: Tullia Merola, wife of the late Mario Merola, Bronx District Attorney, with Philip T. Foglia, a candidate for District Attorney, and her son, Michael, at the dedication of a grove of pine trees in Van Cortlandt Park.
Below, young attendees check the weather. (NYT/Jim Estrin)


Consolidated Hydro reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Hydro (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,174,000
4,865,000
Net loss
2,347,000
633,000
9mo rev
12,258,000
9,529,000
Net loss
7,761,000
3,657,000
Latest 9 months includes a non- recurring charge of $420,000.


Regulation Is Top Issue At Agencies
LEAD: Against a background of exploding interest in advertising - interest both wanted and unwanted - the American Association of Advertising Agencies began its annual meeting here this afternoon at the stately old Greenbrier.


Children Of 2 Lands In Search Of Home
LEAD: Growing up in Vietnam, Vinh Doan came to expect rejection.
His father was a black American soldier whom he never met.
His Vietnamese mother spent years telling him he was ugly because he looked like his father, then gave him to a neighbor when he was 7 years old.


Reds Get Durham
LEAD: The Chicago Cubs traded their veteran first baseman, Leon Durham, yesterday for the Cincinnati Reds' Pat Perry, a left-handed relief pitcher and an undisclosed amount of cash.


15 Playwrights Invited To the O'Neill Center
LEAD: Fifteen dramatists have been invited to participate in the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center's 1988 National Playwrights Conference in Waterford, Conn.
The conference, to be held from July 3 to 31, is devoted to the development of talented writers.


BTR Realty Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BTR Realty Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,579,010
5,190,464
Net inc
259,721
300,472
Share earns
.03
.03


New Jet Defensive Backs Fly
LEAD: The Jets looked sensational today, from the new corps of defensive backs batting away passes, to the top draft selection not allowing anyone to cross the offensive line, to 365-pound Albert Goss, who blew opposing centers away as if they were toothpicks.


Soviet Reports New Ethnic Clash In Armenia and Spread of Tension
LEAD: Ethnic tensions have flared anew in recent days in two Soviet southern republics that were shaken by violent confrontations and mass demonstrations earlier this year, a Soviet radio broadcast said today.


Louis Glenn Fields Jr., State Department Aide, 58
LEAD: Louis Glenn Fields Jr., a former State Department lawyer and arms control negotiator, died of intestinal cancer Tuesday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington, D.C.
He was 58 years old and lived in Alexandria, Va.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: ABOUT one of every seven children in the United States has emotional problems that need psychotherapy or professional counseling, according to a 1986 report by Office of Technology Assessment, a research arm of Congress.


Intercontinental Life Insurance Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intercontinental Life Insurance Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,797,000
17,369,000
Net inc
539,000
947,000
Share earns
.37
.64


Funds of Pastor Charged in Rape Are Studied
LEAD: A Harlem minister charged Sunday with raping two teen-age members of his Pentecostal church has been the target of an investigation into his finances and style of living, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.


Conservative PAC Bankrupt
LEAD: The Fund for a Conservative Majority, a political action committee that raised $5.1 million to promote the election of President Reagan in the 1980 campaign and $5.4 million in his 1984 re-election effort, filed for protection under the bankruptcy code last week.


3 Couples Who Heard The Call of the Inn
LEAD: THE dream of operating an inn has seduced all kinds of people over the years.
In recent decades innkeeping has been perceived as an escape from the high anxieties of corporate life.
Some have been wise to follow their dream, others not, as the stories of Rabbit Hill's three most recent innkeepers attest.


Times Sq. Gunman Tied to Connecticut Shooting
LEAD: Police officers who went to the scene of a fatal shooting near Times Square early yesterday seized a man from Connecticut who confessed not only to killing the unidentified man sprawled nearby, but also to wounding another in Meriden, Conn., less than 36 hours before.


Court Upholds Defendant's Use of Classified Data
LEAD: A schoolteacher charged with illegally shipping guns from Washington State to Pakistan for Afghan rebels can use classified documents to support his contention that the United States Government encouraged his activities, a Federal appeals court ruled today.


Syrians Suspend Move Into Suburbs of Beirut
LEAD: Syria said today that it was suspending plans to deploy troops in Beirut's southern suburbs, the scene of 13 days of fighting between rival Shiite Moslem militias.


On Death ad te Job of Getting There
LEAD: In her new novel, ''Second Chances,'' Alice Adams describes one character's thoughts: ''Death, the idea of death, is not what she so much minds . . . dying will be a fairly simple matter, she believes, a losing of consciousness, quite possibly welcome, like sleep.
But the stages on the way to death, the ways that the world has now worked out for people to die, there's the real horror: hospitals, surgery, anesthesia.


Brazil Halts Debt Talks With Foreign Bankers
LEAD: Brazilian negotiators suspended talks with foreign commercial banks today amid reports of differences over whether a new debt restructuring package should be linked to an agreement with the International Monetary Fund.


Deal in Texas To Rescue 4 Saving Units
LEAD: Federal regulators will provide at least $2 billion to the Southwest Savings Association, a Dallas savings and loan, to help it acquire four insolvent Texas savings institutions in a deal worth $4.4 billion, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board said today.


Review/Jazz; Quintet's Bop Standards
LEAD: The Metropolitan Bopera House, a virtually unknown jazz quintet, deserves more attention than the notoriety it has attracted as a result of being sued by the Metropolitan Opera Association over its name.
The group's members - John Marshall on trumpet, Ralph Lalama on tenor saxophone, Tardo Hammer on piano, John Weber on bass and Tom Melito on drums - are revivalists on a mission: they want to restore the overlooked compositions of jazz's hard-bop era to their proper place.


TV Notes
LEAD:  A Burnett Retrospective


Groundbreaking Set for New Denver Airport
LEAD: City officials said today that ground would be broken for a huge $1.6 billion airport next spring now that voters in nearby Adams County have overwhelmingly approved Denver's annexation of 45 square miles of high prairie.


Judge Demands Panel Drop Impeachment Inquiry
LEAD: Federal District Judge Alcee L. Hastings of Miami demanded today that a House subcommittee dismiss allegations of misconduct brought against him by fellow judges after his acquittal on bribery conspiracy charges five years ago.


Reviews/Dance; Emphasis on Live Music By Mark Morris Troupe
LEAD: Mark Morris is not a great choreographer but he is a fluent and entertaining one.
His work, in its joining of energy and classical music, belongs to the same corner as Paul Taylor's and Lar Lubovitch's.
As Tuesday night's opening by the Mark Morris Dance Company proved again at the Brooklyn Academy of Music (30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland


REAGAN AND BUSH PLACE NEW STRESS ON THE DRUG ISSUE
LEAD: Apparently sensing political trouble, both President Reagan and Vice President Bush yesterday called for stronger efforts to combat drugs and said it was time for the two parties to come together on finding solutions to the problem.


Nichols, S E Inc reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nichols, S E Inc (AMEX)
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
340,144,457
318,614,932
Net loss
1,940,090
b1,466,029
Share earns
-
.31
b-Net income  The company said that net income and several other balance sheet accounts for fiscal years 1987 and 1986 were restated to reflect a material discreptancy between the company's general ledger accounts payable account and the accounts payable subsidiary ledger.


Fehr Wants Expansion
LEAD: Don Fehr, the executive director of the Major League Baseball Players Association, accused the club owners of making franchises artificially scarce and insisted today that they immediately consider expansion.


Orbit Instrument Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orbit Instrument Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,796,000
9,401,000
Net inc
1,015,000
715,000
Share earns
.11
.08
9mo sales
32,121,000
29,283,000
Net inc
3,700,000
2,812,000
Share earns
.39
.31


Hills Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hills Department Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
318,460,000
285,784,000
Net loss
11,951,000
16,786,000


Personal Health
LEAD: Can history help us come to grips with one of the most devastating emotional disorders of modern young women, the self-imposed starvation that is the hallmark of anorexia nervosa?


U.S. Gives Plan In Trade Talks
LEAD: In GATT talks, the United States has proposed a way to liberalize trade in service industries, delegates said today.
The proposal was submitted


Big O Tires Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Big O Tires Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,716,600
20,952,100
Net inc
36,000
b215,800
b-Net loss


Joseph J. Tomlin, League Founder, 85
LEAD: Joseph J. Tomlin, the founder of the Pop Warner football program for youths, died Monday after a brief illness.
He was 85.


TJX Cos reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TJX Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
396,717,000
364,853,000
Net inc
18,022,000
b25,656,000
Share earns
.34
-
b-Includes a gain of $10,689,000 from the cumulative effect of a change in inventory accounting.


Triple Jeopardy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Political Memo; Economy Up but Bush Is Down As an Axiom Is Put to the Test
LEAD: If the nation's economy is performing so well, why are the Republicans, specifically George Bush, not doing better?


Marion Abeson, Songwriter, 75
LEAD: Marion Abeson, a writer of songs for children, died of colon cancer Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 75 years old.


60 Years of Technique From Martha Graham
LEAD: Dancers who have performed with Martha Graham from the 1920's through the present are to participate today in ''Sixty Years of Martha Graham Technique,'' at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street.


Review/Dance; Slow Unfolding Of a Nightmare World of Horror
LEAD: Sin Cha Hong put her audience through a lot when she presented her new ''Seraphim'' on Friday night at the Joyce Theater, performed by her Laughing Stone company in the 3-D at the Joyce festival.
Hers was a look at humanity, ironically or sadly the highest angels of the dance's title, that unfolded at such an uncompromisingly slow and repetitious pace to a score of such uncompromising horror that she lost a good part of the audience by the time ''Seraphim'' had reached its eerie conclusion.


Bank of New York, Irving Break Off Talks Abruptly
LEAD: The rancor between the Irving Bank Corporation and its hostile suitor, the Bank of New York Company, reached a new level yesterday as leaders of the two banks met for 20 minutes and broke off talks.


Tuning In on Summit
LEAD: Speaking yesterday of his hopes for improvements in information exchanges with the Soviet Union, Charles Z. Wick, director of the United States Information Agency, said the agency's broadcasting services were planning saturation coverage of the Moscow summit meeting between President Reagan and Mikhail S.


Sasson Jeans Founder Is Accused in Threats
LEAD: Paul Guez, former head of the collapsed Sasson Jeans empire, was arrested by the F.B.I. yesterday on charges of threatening the life of the Federal bankruptcy judge handling his company's reorganization.


Rise in Black Applications Reported by Many Colleges
LEAD: Many colleges are reporting sharply higher numbers of applications from blacks this year, suggesting more blacks may be on campus next fall after several years of intense recruiting of black high school students.


New Head Sees Growth At Minnesota Exchange
LEAD: The Minneapolis Grain Exchange, a regional cash and futures commodities market, has named James H. Lindau president and plans to embark on a period of growth.


American Shared Hospital Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Shared Hospital Services
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,925,000
1,978,000
Net inc
678,000
121,000
Share earns
.30
.06
The company said financial results of Curcare Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary acquired by the company in October 1987, are included in the company's first quarter 1988 revenue and net income.


May Flowers by Shipment, Not Shower
LEAD: NOW that the spring orgy of azaleas and dogwoods is upon us, the most frantic time in a busy gardener's life is at its end.
I mean the plant-shipping season, which starts in early March, peaks in late April and slows almost to a standstill by the second week of May.
Every three or four days during this time, the postman or the U.P.S.


Kiddie Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kiddie Products Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,433,652
5,456,509
Net inc
109,099
85,168
Share earns
.29
.23


Barr Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barr Laboratories Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,218,000
16,401,000
Net loss
b31,000
c832,000
Share earns
-
.13
Shares outst
7,572,240
6,278,002
9mo sales
42,491,000
46,406,000
Net inc
b1,570,000
3,433,000
Share earns
.21
.55
Shares outst
7,562,247
6,267,120


Fiat Earnings Up in '87
LEAD: The Italian auto maker Fiat S.p.A. reported today that its 1987 earnings rose 9.8 percent on the strength of higher sales.
The results for Italy's largest private company included the recently acquired Alfa Romeo unit and Snia-BPD, the textile and military group.
Fiat reported earnings of 2.37 trillion lire, or $1.9 billion, in 1987, up from 2.16 trillion lire a year earlier.


Some Meese Aides Dispute His Reasoning on Assistant's Dismissal
LEAD: A number of angry Justice Department officials today sided with the department's former chief spokesman, Terry Eastland, in a dispute with Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d over the reasoning behind the spokesman's dismissal.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  MARKETS  The stock market continued its sharp retreat amid growing concern over higher interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial averaage fell 35.32 points, or 1.8 percent, to 1,951.09, the lowest level since early February.
Broader market indexes also fell and declining stocks far outnumbered advancing ones.


Paul J. McNulty, Dean, 57
LEAD: Dr.
Paul J. McNulty, vice dean for academic affairs at the Columbia University Graduate School of Business from 1984 until last month, died of occlusive coronary artery disease Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old.


Stock Exchange Loses Economist to Kaufman
LEAD: Roger Kubarych, who became chief economist at the New York Stock Exchange two years ago, has left to become an economics analyst with Henry Kaufman &amp; Company, a consulting firm.


Baker Says He Has Not Seen Reagan Swayed by Astrology
LEAD: Howard H. Baker Jr., the White House chief of staff, said today he had never seen President Reagan make a policy decision based on astrology or the influence of Nancy Reagan.


Currents; Modern Landmarks Suitable for Nibbling
LEAD: WHEN Ken Walker wanted to create a product that could be sold through the Museum of Modern Art, he tried to think of something that would reflect his interests in architecture and architectural history, and yet be a bit humorous.
The result: Genuine Architectural Cookie Cutters, which are modeled after modern landmarks.


Scientists Seek Ways To Limit Lasting Harm Of Hepatitis Infection
LEAD: Scientists have begun research that they hope will provide the first treatments to limit the liver damage caused by chronic infection with hepatitis viruses, a major global health problem.


Edward R. Jobson, 65, Publishing Executive
LEAD: Edward R. (Ted) Jobson, retired executive vice president of the Jobson Publishing Corporation, died of intestinal cancer Friday at Stamford (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 65 years old and lived in Stamford.


Ojeda Keeps Padres at Bay on 2 Hits in 8Y Innings
LEAD: The Mets made it three straight over the San Diego Padres tonight with one more pitching extravaganza.


N.B.A. Notebook; Lakers and Celtics Struggle
LEAD: The Los Angeles Lakers will be the first team since the Celtics of 1969 to repeat as the National Basketball Association champion.


Israeli Says Moscow Plans To Boost Jewish Emigration
LEAD: Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel said yesterday that he has been told that 1,400 Jews would be allowed to leave the Soviet Union this month, continuing a recent upward trend.


News Corp. Reports Loss
LEAD: The News Corporation, the media company based in Sydney, Australia, that is owned by Rupert Murdoch, yesterday reported a loss of $18 million for its third fiscal quarter ended March 27.


Currents; Sampling British Design At London Show House
LEAD: SHOW HOUSE fever seems to be spreading abroad.
From next Thursday to June 19, Chelsea Old Town Hall on King's Road in London will be the site of the British Interior Design Exhibition, a 21-designer event.


F.B.I. Accuses Soviet Of Spying at Libraries
LEAD: The Soviet Union has directed a vast espionage operation against United States libraries in an effort to gain sensitive technical knowledge and recruit agents, according to a report by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


American Academy In Induction Ceremony
LEAD: The American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters inducted more than a dozen official and honorary members and honored about 40 writers, painters, architects, musicians and other artists yesterday at the arts organization's annual awards ceremony.


Ethics Inquiry on Speaker of House Is Urged
LEAD: The watchdog group Common Cause called on the House today to investigate some financial activities of the Speaker, Jim Wright, for possible conflicts of interest.


Tax-Exempt Tightening
LEAD: Representative J. J. Pickle, chairman of a House subcommittee that has been considering plans to tax more types of income-producing activities of tax-exempt organizations, said today that his panel would come up with a package of legislative proposals ''in the next week or two.''


Lucky Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lucky Stores Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Sales
1,630,176,000
1,754,064,000
Net inc
31,388,000
b58,308,000
Share earns
.81
1.51
b-After net from discontinued operations of $22,158,000 and a $5,907,000 gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Advance For Canada Trade Pact
LEAD: Two Congressional committees have overwhelmingly approved legislation that clears the way for final enactment of the free-trade agreement with Canada.


MacNeal-Schwendler Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MacNeal-Schwendler Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,667,000
7,833,000
Net inc
2,182,000
1,955,000
Share earns
.18
.16


U.S. Reporters Get Firsthand View of Soviet Space Launching
LEAD: Soviet space officials opened this sensitive launching site to American journalists today in what space experts said was the first visit by reporters from the United States.


Pope, Ending Trip, Urges Justice in Paraguay
LEAD: Ending his Latin American tour, Pope John Paul II traveled today to this nation's most revered religious shrine and issued a fervent call for social justice in Paraguay.


Yellow Pages Units Merging
LEAD: Two of the three trade associations representing the advertisers and publishers of the Yellow Pages directories will merge July 1.


TRIAL OPENS TODAY FOR EX-GOVERNOR
LEAD: An Arizona Supreme Court justice refused today to delay the Thursday start of former Gov.
Evan Mecham's criminal trial based on allegations he concealed a campaign loan.


Democracy, With Gusto, at Co-op City
LEAD: Nobody is waving a bloody shirt in this year's campaign for the board of directors at Co-op City, but mysterious stains in the laundry are a key rallying point.


Plenum Publishing Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plenum Publishing Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,556,695
9,356,199
Net inc
4,321,315
4,547,521
Share earns
.78
.79


Preakness Notebook; Smaller Field Suits the Filly
LEAD: The field for the Preakness Stakes at Pimlico Saturday has shrunk to eight or nine, which is good news for Winning Colors, the front-running filly who won the Kentucky Derby May 7.
The two latest dropouts, Once Wild and Din's Dancer, are the colts who were expected to challenge her for the early lead


Koch, the 'Entertainer,' Gets Mixed Review
LEAD: Given a chance yesterday to discuss civic design with hundreds of architects from around the nation, Mayor Koch chose to savage critics of his development policies as ''idiots,'' lampoon the New York State Court of Appeals and take a fresh swipe at Donald J. Trump.


Books of The Times; A Frustrated Hunter on the Trail of J.D. Salinger
LEAD:  In Search of J. D. Salinger  By Ian Hamilton  222 pages. Random House. $17.95.


Sikhs Surrender to Troops at Temple
LEAD: With their hands held high, 46 Sikh militants filed slowly out of the Golden Temple today and surrendered to Indian security forces, ending a 10-day Government blockade of the shrine.


Ecogen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ecogen Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,042,000
679,000
Net loss
694,000
3,273,000
The latest quarter results reflect the company's continuing transition from a development company to a manufacturing and marketing company.


The Seasoning Process
LEAD: A large factor in American Ballet Theater's current upswing stems from the way once-new dancers have settled into the company and sparkled in this season's debuts.
A perfect example was Alessandra Ferri's first appearance as Kitri in ''Don Quixote'' on Saturday afternoon at the Metropolitan Opera House.


Genisco Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genisco Technology Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,716,155
8,352,153
Net loss
4,359,894
b423,990
6mo rev
18,527,320
16,839,014
Net loss
4,833,302
b697,626
b-Included tax credits of $161,240 for the quarter and $289,240 for the 6 months.


News Corp Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* News Corp Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,050,283,000
864,159,000
Net loss
b17,998,000
bd30,049,000
Share earns
-
.20
9mo rev
3,145,193,000
2,522,114,000
Net inc
c213,167,000
c150,024,000
Share earns
1.35
1.08


Union's Victory at Harvard Seen as Spur to Labor Drive
LEAD: Union organizers at Harvard University, riding high after winning the right to represent the university's 3,400 clerical and technical workers, are moving to the next phase: planning for contract talks.


Roscoe Moss to Pay Fine
LEAD: Government regulators said today that the Roscoe Moss Company had agreed to pay a record $500,000 civil fine to settle charges that it had failed to comply with Federal antitrust rules from 1984 to 1986.


Reviews/Music; A Puerto Rican Touch
LEAD: Yomo Toro brought the cuatro, a 10-string miniature guitar, out of Puerto Rican jibaro, or hillbilly, music and into modern dance halls.
With his electrified cuatro, which sounds like a mandolin that's been pumping iron, and his speed-demon technique, he makes the cuatro a lead instrument for salsa and hybrids of other pop styles from all around the Americas.


Review/Ballet; Stretton McKerrow And Gregory
LEAD: Major cast changes resulted in fresh nuances of interpretation in two works offered by American Ballet Theater Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.


Comstock Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comstock Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
95,124,000
94,487,000
Net loss
4,670,000
864,000


Review/Music; From a Westernized Japan
LEAD: Michio Miyagi's career as a composer belongs to the era when Japan was taking its first firm steps out of a closed culture and into an international one.
Westernization - or so it has been called - is a traumatic process for Japanese music in particular.
For what could be further apart in method or in purpose than the classical style of 18th-century Japan and the corresponding Classicism of Mozart, Haydn and Carl Philipp Emanuel


Missile Fuel Wasn't Involved in Factory Blast, Soviet Says
LEAD: A chemical-factory explosion killed three people but did not involve fuel for a new long-range nuclear missile, as the Pentagon reported, a Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman said today.


Candiotti Finishes 6th Game
LEAD: Joe Carter hit a two-run double in the eighth inning tonight and Tom Candiotti pitched his sixth complete game as the Cleveland Indians defeated the Chicago White Sox, 2-1.


Elexis Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elexis Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,302,234
1,969,986
Net loss
166,890
b104,744
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income


Deb Shops Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deb Shops Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
39,816,426
41,352,000
Net inc
837,488
2,049,032
Share earns
.05
.13


Market Place; Japanese Portfolio Insurance Grows
LEAD: THE Japanese are known for copying American fads and the latest to appeal to them is portfolio insurance, which was cited as a chief contributor to the selling panic on Wall Street last October.


Allegheny Ruling Voids 90-Day Delay
LEAD: In the continuing battle for control of Allegheny International Inc., a Federal District judge in Pittsburgh overturned a lower court's ruling yesterday that could have postponed the company's annual meeting for 90 days.
According to officials from Allegheny, as a result of yesterday's ruling, the company's annual meeting will be held tomorrow.


Consolidated Capital Income Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Capital Income Trust (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
4,577,000
2,414,000
The losses are after provisions for possible losses of $2,386,000 in the latest quarter and $1,350,000 in the year- earlier quarter.


Home Improvement
LEAD: EXPOSING an interior brick wall can bring warmth and character to a room.
Removing plaster from the brick is within the abilities of many homeowners, and is not as difficult as might be imagined.
However, dust and rubble must be kept under control, or the project can quickly become impossibly messy.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.75
6.98
6.60
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.20
6.30
5.68
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.54
6.55
6.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.97
8.88
8.76
30-YR.


Energy Conversion Devices Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energy Conversion Devices Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,647,000
2,902,000
Net loss
5,887,000
5,224,000
9mo rev
7,669,000
8,303,000
Net loss
21,656,000
20,757,000


Board Member Quits At Television Bureau
LEAD: Peter B. Desnoes, 45, who was to become the next chairman of the Television Bureau of Advertising, resigned abruptly from its board after a meeting in Bermuda last week.


SCHOOL BUSES GET HIGH SAFETY MARK
LEAD: Despite the crash that killed 27 people in Carrollton, Ky., on Saturday, school buses are the nation's safest mode of surface transportation, according to Federal, state and independent safety experts.


Award for Gilbert
LEAD: Rod Gilbert, the former Ranger, has won the Canadian Society of New York Hockey Achievement Award for 1988.
The award, established in 1983, is given for outstanding contributions to hockey.
Previous winners were Clarence Campbell, Gordie Howe, Maurice Richard, Bobby Hull and Jean Beliveau.
Gilbert, who played his entire career, from 1960 to 1978, with the Rangers, is the leading scorer in the history of the franchise.


The Fears of Children: Is the World Scarier?
LEAD: IN an era of homelessness, AIDS, drug abuse and ozone-layer depletion, at a time when preschoolers are taught about child abuse and kidnapping, parents and child-development experts are raising new concerns about children's fears.


Bogert Oil Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bogert Oil Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,890,000
3,889,000
Net inc
429,000
367,000
Share earns
.19
.17
6mo rev
10,444,000
8,182,000
Net inc
980,000
671,000
Share earns
.44
.31


Giant Rookie Blends Speed and Ability
LEAD: Sheldon White majored in accounting in college.
Numbers, evidently, don't overwhelm him.
The memory of one, though, still irks him considerably.


International Seaway Trading Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Seaway Trading Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,614,000
2,624,000
Net inc
b112,000
c449,000
Share earns
.18
-
b-After a tax credit of $38,000.
c-Net loss


Bush Reports He Got $100,000 From Trust
LEAD: Vice President Bush received more than $100,000 in income from a qualified trust and $20,773 in a distributions from a limited petroleum partnership in 1987, according to papers made public Tuesday.


Helms Fails in an Effort to Block Arms Pact
LEAD: The arms treaty that President Reagan hopes to take to Moscow this month overcame its first hurdle on the Senate floor today as Senator Jesse Helms lost in his effort to block consideration of the pact on the ground that Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, had no authority to sign it in the first place.


As Some Shake It, Others Are Shaken
LEAD: Every few years, it seems, a dance erupts from America's black culture that gets young people everywhere moving, and older people shaking their heads.
The 60's had the twist, the 70's the freak, the 80's break dancing.
Now there's da butt.


Now, Enforce the 65 M.P.H. Limit
LEAD: Secretary of Transportation James Burnley was at least half right in assessing the effect of the 65-mile-per-hour speed limit on safety: Aggressive enforcement is essential to keep fatalities down, no matter what the limit.
But by suggesting that the switch to 65 from 55 had had no effect on the traffic death rate, Mr.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
BSN S.A., Paris, the biggest food group in France, agreed to acquire Saratoga Sparkling Mineral waters from Anheuser-Busch Cos., St.
Louis.
Terms were not disclosed.


General Automation Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Automation Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,600,000
10,800,000
Net loss
622,000
5,000
9mo rev
37,000,000
29,700,000
Net loss
2,200,000
b361,000
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income


Chapman Energy Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chapman Energy Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,917,432
2,947,109
Net loss
b100,393
1,588,631
9mo rev
8,488,708
8,639,407
Net loss
b1,066,872
23,012,170
b-After a credit for forgiveness of debt of $239,030 and a tax loss carryforward of $105,300 for both the quarter and 9 months.


Cocaine Jury Sees Tapes
LEAD: The jury in the cocaine-smuggling case of Carlos Lehder Rivas asked today to see two videotapes of the defendant, including one in which he called drugs a weapon against imperialism.
Federal District Judge Howell W. Melton allowed the review, on the jury's sixth day of deliberations.
Mr.
Lehder, 38 years old, and his co-defendant, Jack Carlton Reed, 57, of San Pedro, Calif., are charged with conspiring to smuggle 3.3 tons of cocaine into the United States from Colombia from 1978 to 1980.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Comfed Bancorp, Lowell, Mass., a holding company for Comfed Savings Bank, which has retail branches in Massachusetts and Connecticut, elected as a director Thomas D. O'Malley, chairman and chief executive of Argus Resources Inc., an investment and trading company.


Review/Theater; Kay Ballard Flies Solo
LEAD: Kaye Ballard, at age 61, still bubbles with the enthusiasm of a starstruck teen-ager.
For her, the era of vaudeville and of stars like Judy Garland and Mabel Mercer looms perennially fresh.
Her new one-woman show, ''Working 42d Street at Last'' at the tiny Kaufman Theater (534 West 42d Street) is an appropriately charming anachronism - a sophisticated 50's nightclub act expanded into a 100-minute evening that weaves together songs, jokes and impressions.


Glenmore Distilleries Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenmore Distilleries Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,545,000
14,314,000
Net inc
140,000
b1,093,000
Share earns
.06
-
9mo sales
46,140,000
42,645,000
Net loss
105,000
c21,021,000
Share earns
-
9.09


Navistar International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Navistar International (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,054,100,000
931,300,000
Net inc
70,000,000
47,100,000
Share earns
.24
.15
Shares outst
257,100,000
258,600,000
6mo sales
1,977,400,000
1,737,300,000
Net inc
b114,900,000
c51,500,000
Share earns
.39
-
Shares outst
256,300,000
221,500,000


Oregon Primary Tally
LEAD: Unofficial vote count from Tuesday, with 99 percent of the precincts reporting.
$
DEMOCRATS
Dukakis
207,512 (56%)
Jackson
142,382 (38%)
Others
20,442 (6%)
REPUBLICANS
Bush
189,189 (73%)
Others
69,363 (27%)
Source: The Associated Press


Suffolk's Unusual Legislature: Incubator or Just a Hothouse?
LEAD: For nearly two decades, the Suffolk County Legislature has been an incubator of ideas ranging from bottle deposits to smoking bans.
Sometimes first, sometimes far out, it has also considered less-successful proposals, such as one to establish a county navy.


Profit Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Profit Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
46,698,000
37,167,000
Net loss
1,126,000
799,000


Reviews/Music
LEAD: An Argentine Organist


Oil Prices Decline on Report Of Increasing Inventories
LEAD: Prices of oil futures declined yesterday, pushed lower by an industry report that showed swelling inventories of crude and heating oil as well as weaker-than-expected demand for gasoline.


May Plans to Close Three Ayres Stores
LEAD: The May Department Stores Company said it would close and sell its three remaining Cincinnati-area L. S. Ayres department stores by June 15 because the chain is trailing competitors in the market.
Two months ago, May announced it was closing the chain's downtown Cincinnati store.


Sage Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sage Broadcasting
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,194,000
1,866,000
Net loss
82,000
670,000
The company said latest quarter results include a gain on the sale of four of its radio stations in Wisconsin in excess of $1 million.


In Beverly Hills, a High-Stakes Land Rush
LEAD: In a money-is-no-object land rush, big egos and bigger budgets are tearing down grand but aging estates on some of the world's highest-priced real estate to make room for lavish new mansions.


New Booth at TKTS Site
LEAD: Amid swarms of umbrellas and hundreds of theatergoers eager to buy tickets to Broadway and Off Broadway shows, the Theater Development Fund opened a new, redesigned half-price TKTS booth in Duffy Square yesterday morning.


Hewlett Net Rises by 25%
LEAD: Buoyed by strong sales of its new products, the Hewlett-Packard Company reported today that earnings were up 25 percent in the quarter ended April 30.


At Columbia, Crowd Reaction Counts
LEAD: Columbia University ended its 234th academic year yesterday outside in the rain.
The university president, Dr.
Michael I. Sovern, cut short his speech about the threat of an impending shortage of professors, but went ahead and conferred degrees school by school as a steady drizzle turned into a downpour.


Baseball Notebook; Banged-Up Cards Showing Signs of Life
LEAD: If Whitey Herzog can find the man with the voodoo dolls and the pins, the St.
Louis Cardinals may be able to present at least a mild challenge before the Mets completely run away with the division championship.


Vehicle Is the 1,000th Seized in Drug Effort
LEAD: A white 1986 Lincoln Continental being used by two men to peddle cocaine on the Lower East Side in Manhattan yesterday became the 1,000th vehicle to be seized in the Police Department's crackdown on illegal drug traffic, officials said.


Brezhnev Aide's Graft Detailed
LEAD: A Minister of Internal Affairs who was a close friend of Leonid I. Brezhnev plundered state funds to enrich himself and his family for more than a decade, according to a leading Soviet journalist.


Review/Rock; Angry Political Funk
LEAD: Wherever there's a standard approach in rock, Midnight Oil goes its own way.
Midnight Oil's bald, 6-foot-6-inch singer, Peter Garrett, looks like no other performer, flapping his arms and contorting his face like an agonized cheerleader, with his legs pumping rhythms or suddenly carrying him around the stage.


Mutual Fund Sales Decline
LEAD: Total sales of stock, bond and income mutual funds plunged to $26 billion in the first quarter of 1988 from $72 billion a year earlier because of the aftershocks of the October crash, the chairman of the Investment Company Institute said today.


Bozell, Jacobs Office Gets Some New Faces
LEAD: Jay Schulberg has been busy recruiting since joining the New York office of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt.
The agency announced some names of new people on Tuesday.


Macmillan Jumps $18.25
LEAD: Wall Street expressed doubts yesterday that Macmillan Inc. could be acquired at the $64-a-share price offered in a $1.6 billion buyout proposal from a group led by the Texas investor Robert M. Bass.
On an otherwise glum day for the market, Macmillan's stock rose $18.25 a share, to $68.875, on the New York Stock


Merchants of Death
LEAD: When the Surgeon General reported this week that nicotine is as addictive as heroin or cocaine, the tobacco industry's response was given by Brennan Moran, assistant to the president of the Tobacco Institute.


Consolidated Capital Special Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Capital Special Trust (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
2,606,000
2,529,000
The losses are after provisions for possible loan losses of $1,265,000 in the latest quarter and $1,241,000 in the year-earlier quarter.


CCX Network Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CCX Network Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,286,000
-
Net inc
552,000
-
Share earns
.13
-
Yr rev
56,488,000
-
Net inc
3,458,000
-
Share earns
.82
-
The company said it changed its fiscal year end from Sept.


Currents; When Inspiration Strikes Twice
LEAD: A. Cafe table by Kevin Walz for Arc International, 1986.
B.
Triangle Up-Triangle Down table by Richard Chillcott for the Richard Chillcott Design Group, 1987.


Nautical Accessories For Ship or Shore
LEAD: YOU don't have to own a boat to enjoy the soothing sound of ship's bells.
Ship's bell clocks and other nautical instruments are being snapped up by homeowners and interior designers ''when they're looking to do a den or something in a nautical way,'' said Ken Maisler, secretary-treasurer of the 75-year-old New York Nautical Instrument and Service Corporation in lower Manhattan.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about an investigation by the Bronx District Attorney's office misidentified a political opponent of District Attorney Paul T. Gentile.


Lilco Loses Bid to Dismiss Suit Charging Racketeering
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday refused to dismiss a suit by Suffolk County that accuses the Long Island Lighting Company of lying and filing false documents to secure rate increases in its efforts to complete the Shoreham nuclear power plant.


Rise in False Alarms Prompts a Study of Scrapping Fire Callboxes
LEAD: Faced with recent increases in false alarms, New York City is considering eliminating one of the urban landscape's most venerable communications fixtures, the street callbox, in favor of a comparative upstart, the telephone.


Welfare Reform Bill Needs Reform
LEAD: To the Editor:


B.P. Unit Seeks Quick Merger
LEAD: BP America, a unit of the British Petroleum Corporation, put pressure today on the Lear Petroleum Corporation and a group of dissident shareholders by releasing a letter to Lear.
It said that the proposed merger between the two companies must be completed promptly, if at all, because of ''ongoing deterioration'' of


Jackson, in Bid to Heal Rift, Meets With California Jews
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, saying that the field was more fertile for healing here than in New York, held a conciliatory meeting with a group of rabbis and other Jewish leaders from Southern California today.


Payout Cut, Issue Set By Carbide
LEAD: The Union Carbide Corporation yesterday announced a sharp dividend cut and plans to issue about 15 million new shares of stock to help finance its previously announced $700 million capital investment program.


Canadian Treaty Advances
LEAD: Two Congressional committees approved legislation that is needed to put into effect the free-trade agreement with Ottawa.
Page D6.
Glimpse of a Cosmodrome


Metro Matters; On Bronx Juries, Minority Groups Find Their Peers
LEAD: When she practices in Queens, a Manhattan negligence lawyer jokes, she goes by her married name.
But when she appears before juries in the Bronx, she gives her maiden name instead.


MMR Holding Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MMR Holding Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
133,273,000
81,721,000
Net inc
1,925,000
1,242,000
Share earns
.36
.30
Shares outst
5,402,000
4,152,000
9mo rev
359,746,000
209,017,000
Net inc
6,318,000
4,519,000
Share earns
1.17
1.09
Shares outst
5,402,000
4,152,000


Helen of Troy (Co) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helen of Troy (Co) (O)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
15,859,000
10,163,000
Net inc
703,000
598,000
Share earns
.21
.17
Yr sales
67,905,000
52,166,000
Net inc
5,073,000
b4,280,000
Share earns
1.50
1.29


Will RU 486 Spur New Abortion Debate?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carolco Pictures Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolco Pictures Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,927,000
21,132,000
Net inc
506,000
1,834,000
Share earns
.02
.06
The latest first quarter includes $110,000 from its share of the operations of Lieberman Enterprises Inc., and International Video Entertainment.


Australian Trade Gain
LEAD: Australia's trade picture improved dramatically in April, with the current account deficit narrowing to a smaller than expected $396 million (Australian), or $302 million (American), the Statistics Bureau said today.
The deficit in March stood at $1.09 billion (Australian), which was revised from $1.18 billion.


Natchez Journal; A City Longs for the End of the Road
LEAD: Fifty years ago this week, Congress authorized the building of the Natchez Trace Parkway along the trail that first the Indians and then white settlers traveled north from the Mississippi River here to the early trading post of Nashville.


Yields Rise In Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds rose for the week ended yesterday, lifted by fears of inflation and last week's half-point increase in the banks' prime lending rate.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  AMERICAN LEAGUE - Fined Billy Martin, manager of the Yankees, an undisclosed amount for a May 6 incident with Umpire Tim Welke.
CHICAGO (AL) - Traded Leon Durham, first baseman, to Cincinnati for Pat Perry, pitcher, and an undisclosed amount of cash.
YANKEES - Transferred Ron Guidry, pitcher, from the 20-day rehabilitation list to the 21-day disabled list.


4 Men Arrested in Chicago Bank Embezzlement Attempt
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested four men today in connection with a suspected attempt to transfer about $70 million from three large customers of the First National Bank of Chicago to accounts in Austrian banks.


Wedtech Paid $1 Million Fee For 'Payola,' Ex-Official Says
LEAD: The former president of the Wedtech Corporation testified yesterday that a $1 million fee paid to two financial associates of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d was to have been used, in part, ''for baksheesh, which means payoffs.''


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-19


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on the Washington Talk page yesterday about women in positions of influence in Washington omitted the identity of the person who said such women are ''a hidden resource.'' She is Susan Peterson, a former network television correspondent who now heads a media speech-training company, Susan Peterson


Varitronic Systems reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Varitronic Systems (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
11,640,000
7,976,000
Net inc
1,456,000
631,000
Share earns
.28
.13
9mo sales
31,417,000
17,477,000
Net inc
3,588,000
752,000
Share earns
.74
.16


Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 29
1988
1987
Sales
30,068,000
23,662,000
Net inc
1,294,000
894,000
Share earns
.24
.17
9mo sales
86,657,000
68,664,000
Net inc
3,738,000
2,437,000
Share earns
.69
.45


A C.I.A. Man Inflames The Contras' Dispute
LEAD: The already deeply divided contra movement has been further shaken by the intervention of a C.I.A. agent in its dispute.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Calendar: Bird Walk and Guided Tour
LEAD:  Bird Walk, Wave Hill, 249th Street at Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx; 212-549-2055.


Life in the 30's
LEAD: I HAVE noticed that there are a great many more young people around than there once were.
By young people I do not mean people who are children, or who are not elderly, or who have not reached the age of consent.
I mean those people who are egregiously, aggressively young, the kind of people who tell you, bright-eyed, that they would like to do what you do when they grow up, or who treat you with respect and call you ''ma'am,'' or who see fit to mention that their parents often listen to the Beatles, too.


Allegheny &amp; Western Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny &amp; Western Energy (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
78,643,000
94,773,000
Net inc
4,565,000
7,524,000
Share earns
.56
.94
9mo rev
144,963,000
189,688,000
Net inc
4,451,000
16,034,000
Share earns
.55
2.00


The Editorial Notebook; Bread on the Table, Rust on the Span
LEAD: Too bad New York City's Williamsburg Bridge can't march on City Hall, cultivate the news media or go to the polls.
As it symbolizes neglected infrastructure, the bridge, unable to speak for itself, also symbolizes a city's long commitment to people over objects.


Epitope Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Epitope Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
526,004
230,132
Net loss
636,346
360,825
6mo rev
1,943,244
369,417
Net loss
288,257
577,522


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, an article on the Fashion page on Tuesday about Geoffrey Beene's fall fur collection carried a misplaced line at the top of the third column.
The line should have been in the second column; the sentence should have read, ''The sporty look of luxury furs is emphasized by Calvin Klein's designs for Alixandre, which include sable, fisher and mink coats.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Dana Perfumes to Favara, Skahan &amp; Tabaczyk for an assignment for Canoe men's cologne.


Du Pont Assailed on Pay Plan
LEAD: A House subcommittee chairman said today that he would investigate a plan by the E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company to use $75 million in Federal funds to pay severance benefits to 6,500 workers at a nuclear weapon plant even though most of them will keep their jobs under new management.


Bridge
LEAD: For several years the American Contract Bridge League's Bulletin has carried a popular monthly series entitled ''Tips for Tops.''


Blondell Cummings's Ode to a Taxi
LEAD: Blondell Cummings's keen sensibilities as an actor, dancer, choreographer and observer come to the fore in '3'3B49,'' a powerful and imaginative new work presented by Blondell Cummings and Company at the Joyce Theater on Saturday in the 3-D at the Joyce festival.


Maxwell Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxwell Laboratories Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
18,600,000
16,832,000
Net inc
1,107,000
653,000
Share earns
.42
.24
9mo sales
49,717,000
46,630,000
Net inc
2,620,000
1,936,000
Share earns
.99
.72


Venice Sending Gondolas As Prelude to Arts Festival
LEAD: Gondolas from Venice as part of the New York International Festival of the Arts?
That's right, says Martin E. Segal, the festival's founder and chairman.


Army Reports Problems in Its New Beretta Pistol
LEAD: The Army says it stopped accepting deliveries of its new 9-millimeter Beretta pistol last November because of cracking in the frame and that it is now investigating a second problem involving the gun's slide mechanism.


Soviet Ship Fire Toll Is 11
LEAD: The death toll in a fire on the Soviet cruise liner Priamurye reached 11 today, with 35 people injured.
The 4,870-ton Priamurye, sailing from Vladivostok with 129 crew members and 295 passengers, was in Osaka harbor on a three-week tour of Japan when the fire broke out.
Japanese firefighters struggled for 11 hours to put out the fire.


Bamberger Polymers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bamberger Polymers (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
46,198,000
29,356,000
Net inc
772,000
477,000
Share earns
.29
.22
Shares outst
2,662,000
2,209,000


Delmed Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delmed Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,667,000
6,146,000
Net loss
b1,285,000
c5,805,000
Share earns
-
.13
b-Includes a loss of $31,000 from discontinued operations and a loss of $842,000 for disposal of discontinued operations.


Electrolux Pursuit Of Toro Disclosed
LEAD: Sweden's A.B.
Electrolux considered buying the Toro Company, a lawnmower manufacturer in Minneapolis, before it decided to pursue the Murray Ohio Manufacturing Company last month, it was disclosed in a United States court hearing.
The disclosure was made by Neil Anderson, a lawyer for the New York law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, whose relationships with Electrolux and Murray, based in Brentwood,


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  U.S.
Gains Final: The United States defeated France, 3-0, yesterday to advance to the final of the $750,000 World Team Cup in Dusseldorf, West Germany.
The Americans clinched the victory when Tim Mayotte defeated Thierry Tulasne, 6-4, 4-6, 6-2, and Aaron Krickstein beat Tarik Benhabiles, 6-4, 6-7, 6-2, in singles.


The Navy's in Schools To Share, Not Enlist
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Monday showing the number of epople on welfare in New York City carried an incorrect explanation.
The figures referred to the number of welfare cases, not individuals on welfare.


A Steel Quota Divides the Industry
LEAD: Big Steel and Little Steel bickered over import protection at today's session of the annual gathering of the American steel industry.


Regan's Book Gives Harcourt a Lift
LEAD: The huge success of Donald T. Regan's ''For the Record,'' which a week after its official publication date has jumped to the No. 1 spot on the best-seller list, could not have come at a better time for its publisher, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.


FRANCE RESTORING ITS TIES WITH IRAN
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand ordered the Socialist Government today to restore diplomatic ties with Iran, fulfilling a pledge made by the previous Government for Iran's help in winning the release of the last three French hostages in Lebanon.


Battles Erupt in South Korea As Protesters Mark Uprising
LEAD: Thousands of protesters calling for the overthrow of President Roh Tae Woo fought police with firebombs and rocks today as rallies were held to mark the eighth anniversary of the anti-Government uprising in the southern city of Kwangju.


Man Charged in Plot on Jackson Suggested Others Were Involved
LEAD: A law-enforcement official said today that a Missouri man who is accused of plotting to kill the Rev.
Jesse Jackson made a statement to an informer implying that others had done the high-level planning.


Editor of Brooklyn College Paper Caught in Imbroglio Over Content
LEAD: As a student at Brooklyn College and editor of a weekly newspaper at the college, The Kingsman, Michael Golub has been receiving an education about the newspaper business.


Finances of Minister Charged in Rape Being Checked
LEAD: The Rev.
Thomas Streitferdt at arraignment Monday on charges that he raped two teen-age members of his congregation.
Officials said yesterday that the minister, the pastor of the True Church of God at Third Avenue and 127th Street, has been the target of an investigation into his finances and lavish living.


Teheran Claims Gains in Northeastern Iraq
LEAD: Iranian gunboats attacked a Japanese-owned tanker in the Strait of Hormuz today and Iran said its forces killed or wounded 2,000 Iraqis in a new offensive in a rugged part of northeastern Iraq.


Arthur Long, 61, Consultant on Takeovers
LEAD: Arthur F. Long, a consultant on investor relations, died of cancer Monday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 61 years old, lived in Garden City, L.I., and also had homes in Quogue, L.I., and North Palm Beach, Fla.


U.S. Hopes for 3 Modest Pacts On Arms at Moscow Summit
LEAD: The United States hopes that several modest agreements on providing notice of missile tests and on nuclear testing will be signed at the summit meeting in Moscow, senior Administration officials said today.


Shift on Campaign Financing by Cuomo
LEAD: Governor Cuomo, increasing the chances for adopting public financing of statewide election campaigns, has agreed to consider legislation that does not include public financing of legislative races, but that simply lowers contribution limits for those contests, his aides said today.


New Plan for Media General Seeks Broadcasting Spinoff
LEAD: Media General Inc. yesterday received a recapitalization proposal that would involve a spinoff of its broadcasting and cable operations into a new company.


International Microelectronic Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Microelectronic Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Revenue
10,800,000
11,400,000
Net inc
700,000
1,100,000
Share earns
.03
.05
Yr rev
48,900,000
36,200,000
Net inc
5,700,000
2,000,000
Share earns
.23
.08


Vishay Intertechnology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vishay Intertechnology Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
35,016,000
15,274,000
Net inc
4,478,000
2,828,000
Share earns
.57
.38
9mo sales
75,413,000
43,787,000
Net inc
10,964,000
7,448,000
Share earns
1.39
1.02


Palmroth Eligible
LEAD: Tero Palmroth of Finland passed the final phase of his Indianapolis 500 rookie test yesterday, while Harry Sauce withdrew and Dale Coyne was told by the United States Auto Club he would not be allowed to drive.


Jamesway Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jamesway Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
147,355,000
138,270,000
Net inc
357,000
1,273,000
Share earns
.03
.09
The sales figures do not include sales by leased departments of $4,590,000 for latest first quarter and $4,664,000 for year-ago period.


Comstock Offers $1 Billion in Shares
LEAD: Comstock Partners, a management investment company run by a former chief investment strategist at Merrill Lynch, Stanley D. Salvigsen, offered more than $1 billion worth of stock yesterday in a new closed-end fund, Comstock Partners Strategy Fund.


Bangor Hydro-Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bangor Hydro-Electric Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
31,151,000
26,480,000
Net inc
2,071,000
3,394,000
Share earns
.47
.76


Israelis Say U.S. Praise of Peres May Backfire
LEAD: The unusually warm praise of Foreign Minister Shimon Peres by the White House on Tuesday, and the indirect criticism of his chief political rival, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, set off partisan bickering here today.
But on at least one point both sides seemed to agree.


Meridian National Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian National Corporation
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
10,426,000
6,741,000
Net inc
9,000
b64,000
Share earns
.01
-
Yr rev
30,282,000
27,394,000
Net inc
552,000
168,000
Share earns
.13
.04


Bush the Underdog
LEAD: The New York Times/CBS News Poll shows George Bush trailing Michael Dukakis by 10 points; a Los Angeles Times poll shows the Republican trailing in California by 17 points.
Mr.
Bush can now lay claim to being the underdog, and can accuse his opponent of being the front-runner.


Learonal Inc reports earnings for Year to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Learonal Inc (NYSE)
Year to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
157,072,000
127,749,000
Net inc
8,984,000
7,523,000
Share earns
.97
.81


Companies Hold Off On Price Increases
LEAD: Despite inflationary pressures in the American economy, many companies are holding back on price increases for finished goods, a spot check shows.


Review/Television; When Pratyer Is Fatal
LEAD: The man is in a hospital bed, his hand resting on a radio tuned into a religious program.
Suddenly he gets up and, before astonished nurses, begins walking, all the while chanting ''Thank the Lord, thank you, Jesus.'' So begins ''Promised a Miracle,'' the television movie on Channel 2 at 9 tonight.


Pact With School Custodians Is Near, Wagner Says
LEAD: The New York City Board of Education, which has been pressing school custodians for major concessions that would improve the upkeep of schools, appeared close to an agreement on a new contract with the custodians' union last night, the board's president, Robert F. Wagner Jr., said.


Toys 'R' Us Co reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Toys 'R' Us Co (NYSE)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Sales
647,195,000
473,985,000
Net inc
22,509,000
14,523,000
Share earns
.17
.11


Reviews/Dance; Charles Moulton's Merry Manias
LEAD: Everything the Charles Moulton Dance Company did Sunday night at the Joyce Theater was absolutely ridiculous and lots of fun.
Mr.
Moulton's dances were merry manias.


Comfed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comfed Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
945,000
6,631,000
Per share
.11
.77
Yr net loss
b1,498,000
c24,218,000
Per share
-
2.84
b-Included a first quarter after-tax writedown of about $5 million in the value of loans held for sale and a $1.2 million charge of the FSLIC secondary reserve.


Meritor Financial
LEAD: Meritor Financial Group's drive to restore profits is being slowed by rising interest rates, Frederick S. Hammer, chairman of the troubled savings and loan institution, said.
After today's annual meeting, he said that if current interest rates held, ''we are not going to make it.'' Mr.
Hammer declined to predict when Meritor would return to sustained profitability but said that ''we are flirting'' with the break-even level.


Curtis Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Curtis Industries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,644,000
18,881,000
Net inc
1,021,000
416,000
9mo rev
64,914,000
60,419,000
Net inc
4,883,000
3,694,000
There are no share earnings figures because Curtis Industries is privately held.


Wings' Coach Pact Extended
LEAD: Coach Jacques Demers has been given a two-year extension of his contract that lengthens his agreement with the Detroit Red Wings through the 1992-93 season, the club announced today.


Delegate Tally
LEAD: Current breakdown of Presidential preference of delegates to national political conventions, compiled by The New York Times.
Preferences are based on state laws, party rules, delegates' public statements and projections from early results in caucus states.
$
DEMOCRATS
Dukakis
1,643
Jackson
962
Gore
389
Simon
172
Undetermined*
525


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article and a headline yesterday about accusations of improper asbestos removal at the Ansonia Hotel in Manhattan misstated the penalty involved.
The New York City Sanitation Department is seeking a record $400,000 fine against the hotel owners, but no penalties have been imposed.


Martin Nielsen Rasmussen, Telescope Builder, 92
LEAD: Martin Nielsen Rasmussen, an engineer and machinist who built the Junkyard Telescope on display at the Smithsonian Institution, died Saturday.
He was 92 years old.


For Russians And Japanese, Is Thaw Near?
LEAD: The approaching summit conference in Moscow has underscored for Japan the fact that it is the only country in the Western alliance that has not appreciably improved relations with the Soviet Union under Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Dest Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dest Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,169,000
6,221,000
Net loss
b8,336,000
409,000
Yr rev
29,621,000
22,937,000
Net loss
9,396,000
2,227,000
b-Includes a $54,000 charge from the reversal of a tax loss carryforward.


McEnroe Edges In
LEAD: John McEnroe, once accustomed to being at the top of any seeding list, yesterday moved - courtesy of two late withdrawals of ranked players -into the 16th and last seeded spot for the French Open tournament, which begins Monday.
Jimmy Connors, No. 5, pulled out because of a foot injury, and Miloslav Mecir of Czechoslovakia, No.


Dukakis Wins 27 More Delegates in Oregon Race
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis gained his 15th primary ulection victory Tuesday with a solid triumph over the Rev.
Jesse Jackson in Oregon and pushed his delegate total to 1,643, or 438 short of the 2,081 needed to win the Democratic Presidential nomination.


Applied Materials Inc reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Materials Inc (OTC)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Sales
82,584,000
40,881,000
Net inc
8,745,000
b1,312,000
Share earns
.53
-
6mo sales
146,603,000
76,995,000
Net inc
14,437,000
b2,833,000
Share earns
.89
-


Chartwell Group Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chartwell Group Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
20,485,000
14,629,000
Net inc
286,000
877,000
Share earns
.05
.14


Aero Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aero Systems Inc
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
7,568,272
6,008,797
Net loss
364,063
b121,525
Share earns
-
.01
Yr sales
29,897,230
28,508,191
Net inc
118,145
751,709
Share earns
.01
.09
b-Net income


Eritrean Rebels Accuse Ethiopia of Atrocities
LEAD: Rebels in the northern Ethiopian province of Eritrea have accused Government troops of killing 400 civilians by shooting them or crushing them with tanks.


A Computing Magazine Changes Name Again
LEAD: In September 1985 Scholastic Inc. began its first publication for readers outside the school environment.
The magazine was called Family Computing.
As the magazine's perception of its audience changed, so did its name, which became Family &amp; Home Office Computing.


Notes and Bonds Continue Retreat
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes moved lower again yesterday in light, nervous trading.


Trump, Griffin In New Talks
LEAD: Donald J. Trump and Merv Griffin said yesterday that they had begun new talks on giving the Manhattan real estate figure full control of the giant Taj Mahal hotel and gambling casino being built in Atlantic City and allowing the former talk-show host to take over Resorts International Inc., which now owns the casino.


Elsinore Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elsinore Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,294,000
24,269,000
Net loss
b2,111,000
c2,576,000
Share earns
-
.26
b-Includes a $3.5 million provision for the estimated future operating losses of the company's New Jersey operations.


Review/Jazz; A New Big-Band Identity
LEAD: In the 15 years since some New England college students formed a band that mixed rock, swing and rhythm-and-blues and named it the Widespread Depression, the group has gone through a slowly developing series of changes.
It has shifted its focus to the black big bands of the 1930's and 40's, changed its name to the Widespread Jazz Orchestra and gradually built a nucleus of musicians who no longer depend on role models from the Swing


New Residents, New Life in Hamilton Hts.
LEAD: WHEN he was 17 years old, Leonard Brian Philip would walk by the red-brick house on Hamilton Terrace in the Hamilton Heights section of Manhattan and think of it as his dream house.


A Peek at History On Governors I.
LEAD: Governors Island - erstwhile fortress, Civil War prison and remote outpost for a pageant of historical characters - has played a wide variety of roles over the last 350 years.
But only once a year is it a free open house for the public.


2 Die in Kuwait Blast Near Airline's Offices
LEAD: An explosion rocked an area close to the downtown headquarters of the Kuwait Airways Corporation today, killing two people and destroying a car that was apparently the source of the blast, witnesses said.


Lucky Stores' Net Is Off 46%
LEAD: Lucky Stores Inc. said today that its net income declined about 46 percent in the first quarter ended May 1.
Earnings from continuing operations rose 3.9 percent, however, despite $4.4 million in unusual expenses in connection with competing takeover offers for the 486-store food chain, based in Dublin,


Death Penalty Amendment Delays Pentagon Budget Bill
LEAD: The Senate was still trying today to work its way out of a legislative snarl that has blocked final action on Defense Department budget legislation while the House overwhelmingly approved a bill that would appropriate $9 billion for military construction programs in the next fiscal year.


Howard Beach Judge Negotiating Plea Deals
LEAD: The judge in the Howard Beach case has been negotiating plea deals with defendants and without the prosecution, people familiar with the case said yesterday.
They said he has tentatively reached such a deal with at least one defendant.


Continental vs. the Labor Unions: A View From the Cockpit
LEAD: To the Editor:


City Council Leader Opposes Koch on Realty Tax Increase
LEAD: Warning that New York City homeowners already face a dramatic state-mandated property tax increase in 1990, the City Council majority leader, Peter F. Vallone, said yesterday that he opposed the Mayor's request for a $150 million city property tax increase starting July 1.


Hewlett-Packard Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hewlett-Packard Co (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,496,000,000
2,017,000,000
Net inc
202,000,000
162,000,000
Share earns
.82
.63
6mo rev
4,688,000,000
3,757,000,000
Net inc
381,000,000
278,000,000
Share earns
1.53
1.08


1,200 Pounds of Cocaine Seized; 9 Held
LEAD: A supply line that would have brought nearly eight tons of cocaine into the Hamptons for the resort season was cut off by undercover agents who confiscated the first shipment, faked a delivery and made nine arrests, the authorities said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about a videotape showing Robert E. Chambers Jr. misidentified a lawyer for the family of Jennifer Levin, who was killed in Central Park nearly two years ago by Mr.
Chambers.
The lawyer is Jeffrey Newman.


Craftmatic-Contour Indusries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Craftmatic-Contour Indusries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,133,000
12,766,000
Net inc
134,000
269,000
Share earns
.03
.07
6mo sales
19,003,000
24,512,000
Net inc
169,000
303,000
Share earns
.04
.08


Health Center Chief Says He Is Seeking
LEAD: The executive director of the Soundview Health Center in the Bronx announced yesterday that he would challenge Representative Robert Garcia in the Democratic primary this fall.


Louise A. Wood, 78; Ex-Head of Girl Scouts
LEAD: Louise A. Wood, former chief executive officer of Girl Scouts of the U.S.A., died of cancer Monday at her home in Aurora, Calif., about 60 miles east of San Francisco.
She was 78 years old.


At Columbia, an Exercise in Democracy
LEAD: ''All right, let's do it the regular way.'' That was Dr.
Michael I. Sovern's capitulation after graduates booed the Columbia University president's suggestion that, because of heavy rain, degrees at the com mencement be conferred all at once.
By popular demand, the traditional school-by-school method was used.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about an increase in Soviet Jewish emigration misstated the figure given by the National Conference on Soviet Jewry for April departures.
It is 1,088, not 1,086.


Correcting the Record on Israel
LEAD: It certainly looked as though President Reagan was trying to influence the Israeli election next fall.
During Tuesday's White House visit he unstintingly praised Foreign Minister Shimon Peres, whose ''positive attitude toward peace'' he contrasted with the negativism of other, unnamed world leaders who ''consistently reject new ideas.


F.C.C. Votes ON Exclusive TV Reruns
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission today approved rules intended to reduce the number of syndicated reruns on television by allowing broadcasters to negotiate exclusive programming contracts.


One-Family Homes Lag In Month
LEAD: Construction of single-family homes fell in April, providing evidence that higher mortgage interest rates may be dampening building activity.


Leucadia National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leucadia National Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b5,253,000
6,210,000
Share earns
.40
.44
Shares outst
13,159,000
14,153,000
b-After a charge of $2.4 million for the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


McIntyre Mines Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McIntyre Mines Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,545,000
b1,441,000
Share earns
1.52
-
b-Net loss and includes share of a special gain reported by Falconbridge Ltd. of $6,081,000.
The company had no revenue because its primary business is its holding in Falconbridge Ltd.


Review/Television; Viewers Are Let In On Gossip
LEAD: We are one big classless society; everyone knows everyone else. ''M and W Men and Women'' encapsulates us all in the same gossip column.
The ABC special, on Channel 7 at 9 o'clock tonight, roams the world without ever leaving the hairdresser's.
It is shallow, silly and pretentious; it is also energetic, wry and funny.


Pentagon Awards 2 Contracts on MX
LEAD: The Westinghouse Electric Company and the Rockwell International Corporation won Pentagon military contracts to build a railroad car and computer software to mobilize the MX nuclear missile.
A contract for $167 million went to Westinghouse to design and build a railroad launching car for the 10-warhead intercontinental missile by mid-1992, the Air Force announced.


Western Tele-Communicaions reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Tele-Communicaions (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
22,140,000
20,894,000
Net loss
b438,000
c2,292,000
Share earns
-
.26
b-Includes a pretax gain of about $1,842,000 from the sale of the company's security position in TCA Cable TV.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


Fremont General Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fremont General Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
26,220,000
25,338,000
Net inc
b3,659,000
c6,257,000
Share earns
.36
.59
b-After a gain of $2,472,000 from discontinued insurance operations and an extraordinary credit of $249,000.


A Single-Parent Home That Sponsors Dreams
LEAD: Like many newly divorced parents, Julie Sharp faced a problem: how to afford a home and day care for her 3-year-old son and still continue her college education.


Contras Taking Refuge in Honduras
LEAD: In the three months since Congress cut off military aid to the Nicaraguan guerrillas, thousands of rebels have flooded into Honduras and created a mini-state in the mountainous border area.


Western Dealers Rush To Sign Soviet Artists
LEAD: In a burst of international entrepreneurship, American and European art dealers are traveling to the Soviet Union in search of contemporary painting that they hope will capture the fancy - and the dollars - of collectors in the West.


A Word for Confusion
LEAD: The Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which arrived on the Senate floor Tuesday, has on occasion encountered bizarre negotiating obstacles - for example the flap over ''osnashcheniye,'' a Russian term that can mean ''armed,'' ''armament,'' ''equipped'' or ''equipment,'' depending, it seems, on who does the translating.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.I have a tiled ceiling that was stained by a water leak in an ice storm last winter.
Because of the cost, I cannot replace this ceiling, but would like to paint it.
What will cover the water stains?


Too Much Rest Prolongs Muscle Pain, Study Says
LEAD: The conventional medical wisdom on treating some muscle pain, such as backache, may actually play a major role in turning such problems into long-term disabilities, new research indicates.


Hal Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hal Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
83,339,000
66,953,000
Net loss
1,417,000
b1,164,000
Share earns
-
.61
b-Net income


Republic Pictures Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Pictures Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,565,000
4,192,000
Net inc
195,000
162,000
Share earns
.05
.04


New Mexico Hires Bliss
LEAD: Dave Bliss of Southern Methodist University was named today as the basketball coach at New Mexico.
The hiring, announced in a statement released by the school, came two days after Bob Knight decided to stay at Indiana.


Nature's Bounty Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nature's Bounty Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,006,290
13,659,162
Net inc
b458,751
c333,562
Share earns
.12
.08
6mo sales
24,651,036
23,619,422
Net inc
b477,291
d729,504
Share earns
.12
-


A FIRST SOVIET UNIT QUITS AFGHANISTAN
LEAD: With the foreign press looking on, the first brigade of Soviet soldiers to withdraw formally from Afghanistan returned home today for a welcome by their Government, tears from their families and traces of bitterness and regret.


Air Midwest Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Air Midwest Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,219,000
18,999,000
Net loss
1,460,000
275,000


Currents; Fine Craft, as Piecework
LEAD: THE ancient Egyptians were very good at it, as were many Italian Renaissance artists and 17th-century French furniture makers.
These days, a number of artists are interested in marquetry, a woodworking technique in which images are created of pieces of wood veneers like pieces in a puzzle.


Focus on First Ladies And Expected Byplay
LEAD: Relations may have warmed between President Reagan and the Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev since their first summit meeting in Geneva but, as public perceptions go, relations between Nancy Reagan and Raisa M. Gorbachev remain closer to the spirit of the cold war.


Conran's, Writ Larger
LEAD: CONRAN'S, an American retail chain that revolutionized home furnishing retailing a decade ago with simple, moderately priced designer furniture, will open a flagship store next Wednesday in the former RKO Keith's theater building, at 81st Street and Broadway.
The 34,000-square-foot, four-story outlet will be Conran's third in Manhattan and its 16th in the United States, and one of the largest retail stores ever to open on the Upper West


Autodesk Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autodesk Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
25,757,000
17,292,000
Net inc
7,246,000
3,889,000
Share earns
.30
.18


Univar Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Univar Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
272,683,000
251,737,000
Net inc
2,529,000
b1,029,000
Share earns
.29
-
Yr sales
1,117,309,000
696,279,000
Net inc
11,163,000
712,000
Share earns
1.27
.11
Shares outst
8,764,343
6,686,885


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Floyd Patterson, the former world heavyweight champion, will receive an honorary doctor of humane letters degree at Marist College on Saturday. . . .
Art Still, a 10-year veteran left end, has been told by Jim Schaaf, the general manager of the Kansas City Chiefs, that he no longer fits into the team's plans and would not be with the team in 1988.


GCA Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GCA Corporation (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
34,597,000
13,423,000
Net inc
b1,404,000
c12,637,000
Share earns
.15
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $215,000.
c-Net loss


Unicycling Jugglers
LEAD: Experts and amateurs will be taking part in the First New York Festival of Juggling and Unicycle Arts, tomorrow from 10:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. at the Naumburg Band Shell in Central Park, at 72d Street.
The free event is sponsored by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation, the Internationl Jugglers Association and the International Unicycle Federation.


Indonesia's Debt to Rise
LEAD: Indonesia's total external debt is projected to hit $50 billion this year, with debt repayments by Southeast Asia's largest nation forecast to rise sharply, the World Bank said today.
But it said that a Government program to wean the economy away from dependence on oil was working, with non-oil exports expected to increase rapidly, and that the debt picture was not as serious as in many other heavily indebted nations.


Kelley Oil &amp; Gas Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kelley Oil &amp; Gas Partners (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,310,000
2,144,000
Net inc
484,000
213,000
Share earns
.08
.06
Shares outst
5,988,234
3,378,360
The share earnings are in cents a unit and shares outstanding are in units.


Review; Review/Art Biomorphic Profiles Both Abstract and Real
LEAD: DeWitt Godfrey gracefully molds, bends and sandblasts steel into shapes that resemble mushrooms and plants and, in one case, a limp gramophone speaker.
The young Houston-born artist's latest show at the R. C. Erpf Gallery includes four objects and two large-scale charcoal drawings depicting the sort of irregular, rounded forms that Mr.


Healthwatch Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthwatch Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,484,252
1,280,398
Net inc
109,850
104,771
Share earns
.06
.06
9mo rev
4,308,313
3,557,198
Net inc
327,192
215,662
Share earns
.18
.12


Funeral Procession for Student in South Korea
LEAD: Mourners in Seoul, South Korea, marching in a procession for Cho Sung Man, who committed suicide Sunday as a protest against the United States and policies of South Korea.
Across the nation thousands of others took part in the largest protests since last summer, when demonstrations led to direct presidential elections.


Love Moves Ex-Polish Leader From Warsaw to Rego Park
LEAD: Seven years ago, he was a prominent Polish politician, a pro-Soviet hard-liner who helped crush the Solidarity movement.
Today, Stefan Olszowski lives an anonymous middle-class life in Rego Park, Queens.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Syms Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Syms Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
58,272,000
47,293,000
Net inc
2,481,000
2,053,000
Share earns
.14
.12


Readings to Honor Maxwell Anderson
LEAD: The Rockland Center for the Arts is paying tribute to one of its founders, the Pulitzer Prize-winning playwirght Maxwell Anderson, tonight on the occasion of the centennial of his birth.


Pontiac No. 2 at G.M.
LEAD: The Pontiac Motor division has replaced Oldsmobile as the General Motors Corporation's No. 2 car-selling division, behind Chevrolet.
Pontiac has also become the third-best-selling nameplate in the auto industry, behind Chevrolet and Ford.
According to G.M.'s latest sales reports, through May 10, the Pontiac division's sales have increased 3.9 percent for the 1988 model year, while Oldsmobile's sales have fallen 12.9 percent in the same period.


Israeli High Court Overrules Rabbis by Installing Woman
LEAD: The Israeli Supreme Court overruled the nation's rabbis today by ordering the appointment of the first woman to a religious council that administers synagogues and ritual baths.


Mavericks Gain Final; Jazz Ties Series; Jazz 108, Lakers 80
LEAD: Suddenly, the script has changed.


Edelman Group Has 7.6% of Payless
LEAD: Asher B. Edelman, the New York investor, said that he and Sutherland Lumber-Southwest Inc. of Kansas City, Mo., headed a group of investors that had acquired 2.56 million shares, or 7.6 percent, of Payless Cashways Inc., an operator of a chain of building materials stores, also based in Kansas City.


Falcon Cable Systems LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Falcon Cable Systems LP (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,624,200
4,728,700
Net loss
119,900
b652,700
Share earns
-
.11
b-Net income and after a gain of $774,000 on the sale of a stock interest in a home shopping network.


U.S. AIDE HOPEFUL ON ANGOLA TALKS
LEAD: The leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union may make progress toward resolving the conflict in Angola when they meet later this month in Moscow, a State Department official said today.


Qubix Graphic reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Qubix Graphic
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
731,000
101,000
Net loss
912,000
1,037,000
Yr sales
2,837,000
351,000
Net loss
3,121,000
4,175,000


A Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a Feb. 23 article by Sergei I. Grigoryants, chief editor of Glasnost, a now-closed independent Moscow-based magazine, mistakenly attributed a remark critical of Dr.
Georgi V. Morozov, director of the Serbsky Institute of Forensic Psychiatry, to Mr.
Grigoryants.
The author's manuscript attributed the remark, ''the criminal is defending his right to murder,'' to an American human rights worker.


Florida Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
16,313,000
bc1,254,000
Share earns
-
.13
9mo net loss
33,624,000
c17,352,000
b-Net income  c-After extraordinary losses from prepayment of FHLB advances of $8,467,000 for the quarter and $22,678,000 for the 9 months.


AGS Computers
LEAD: AGS Computers Inc. of Mountainside, N.J. said it had ended talks about acquiring C3 Inc., a computer systems integration company based in Herndon, Va.
It gave no reason for the decision.
AGS had agreed in principle in March to acquire C3 for $15.75 a share, or about $157.5 million.
C3's shares fell $2.875 yesterday, to $10, in New York Stock Exchange trading.


Koch Patronage Inquiry Told of Altered Records
LEAD: Several former New York City employees have told investigators that Koch administration officials ordered the alteration or destruction of some personnel records to delete references to patronage affiliations of job applicants.


Catalyst Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Catalyst Energy Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
141,771,000
99,923,000
Net inc
2,572,000
b5,490,000
Share earns
.15
.33
b-After an extraordinary loss of $627,000 on the early extinguishment of debt.


One Man's Glasnost
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev's campaign for openness, or glasnost, was well under way last year when Sergei Grigoryants got out of prison.
He had been jailed for publishing an underground journal.
This time he decided to test the limits of glasnost by publishing openly.
The first issue of his journal, called Glasnost, appeared last


N.H.L. Playoffs; Patience Pays Off for Oilers
LEAD: Patience has finally become a virtue in Edmonton.
The Oilers, eager to gain a fourth Stanley Cup, seem to have begun the process of neutralizing their ultimate playoff opponent, the Boston Bruins, with a hockey commodity flaunted by all their other fallen opponents but rarely attributed to them.


Dominion Textile
LEAD: Dominion Textile (USA) Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Dominion Textile Inc., is offering $150 million of 9 7/8 percent notes due 1995 at a price of par through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
Noncallable for the life of the issue, the notes yield about nine-tenths of a percentage point more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Review/Dance; Surreal Urban Themes
LEAD: Audiences at the 3-D at the Joyce festival receive blue and red viewing glasses with a picture of a gorilla.
If you scratch the front, the scent of bananas wafts into the air.


Our Towns; They Scramble To Reassemble Their Nest Eggs
LEAD: Inside the auditorium at the Long Island Lighting Company's annual stockholders meeting this week, money was foremost on everyone's mind.
Would they ever get their money back?
Most of the 1,300 stockholders who showed up were retirees.
They thought they had invested in a sure thing: a utility providing electricity to a booming suburb.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Samsung America to Milton Samuels Advertising, Fort Lee, N.J. for magnetic tape and telecommunications.


Xylogics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xylogics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,621,000
6,515,000
Net inc
852,000
b853,000
Share earns
.27
.33
Shares outst
3,203,000
2,639,000
6mo rev
15,138,000
11,552,000
Net inc
1,865,000
b1,446,000
Share earns
.59
.59
Shares outst
3,162,000
2,416,000


School Custodians, Under Control
LEAD: The Board of Education's settlement with school custodians marks a big step forward in regaining control of New York City's school buildings.
The tentative contract agreement announced yesterday gives school officials greater authority over custodians and makes schools available for wider community use.


Teacher's Flaws Bring Months More of School
LEAD: A class of fourth graders must go to summer school before the pupils can be promoted, says their principal, who unsuccessfully tried to dismiss their teacher.


Instrument Systems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Instrument Systems Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
94,377,000
84,634,000
Net inc
b1,011,000
c3,129,000
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
29,295,000
32,175,000
6mo sales
184,687,000
166,962,000
Net inc
b4,440,000
c4,583,000
Share earns
.04
.07
Shares outst
31,285,000
32,128,000


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 425 money market mutual funds increased $3.70 billion, to $274.12 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 116 institutional funds increased $2 billion, to $74.44 billion.
Assets of the 212 general purpose funds were up $1.05 billion, to $83.9 billion.


NEW YORK REACHES A TENTATIVE PACT WITH CUSTODIANS
LEAD: The New York City Board of Education yesterday reached a tentative settlement with the school custodians' union, and board officials say they believe it will lead to major improvements in the physical conditions of dilapidated school buildings.


Sports People; N.H.L. Award Finalists
LEAD: Wayne Gretzky, who has won the Hart Trophy as the National Hockey League's most valuable player in each of his first eight seasons, is in the running to get it again.
Gretzky, along with the Oiler goalie Grant Fuhr and the Pittsburgh center Mario Lemieux, are finalists for the award.
Kelly Hrudey and Bryan Trottier of the Islanders and Jan Erixon of the Rangers were named as finalists for other awards.


Kadar Said to Face a Tough Challenge for Hungarian Leadership
LEAD: Janos Kadar, the leader of Hungary's Communist Party, is facing a severe challenge for the leadership from Karoly Grosz, the man whom he installed as Prime Minister last June, party figures reported today.


Federal Committee To Examine Plight Of Elderly Workers
LEAD: A special Labor Department committee will study the problems facing elderly workers, Secretary of Labor Ann McLaughlin said today.


Sports People; Robinson in Shape
LEAD: John Thompson, the head basketball coach of the United States Olympic team, said yesterday in a telephone news conference that he was impressed with the physical condition of David Robinson, the 7-foot 1-inch former Navy center.


TV's Doomed Effort To Examine the Press
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place; Farmers Group's Unusual Defense
LEAD: IN its bitter battle to thwart a $4.3 billion takeover attempt by a British conglomerate with tobacco holdings, Farmers Group Inc. is resorting to an unusual takeover defense.
It is emphasizing social issues.


Reagan vs. Regan
LEAD: The dispute between President Reagan and Donald T. Regan, formerly White House chief of staff, broke three cardinal rules of politics in the capital, in the view of one expert.
The first rule, ''Keep your Enemies in Front of You,'' was broken by the President, according to Christopher Matthews.


Berkshire Gas Co reports earnings for 12mo March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Berkshire Gas Co (OTC)
12mo March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
34,785,000
37,642,000
Net inc
1,781,000
2,864,000
Share earns
1.23
2.24
Shares outst
1,366,672
1,227,181


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Ameritrust Corp., Cleveland, appointed James W. Otto executive vice president and chief financial officer, replacing Robert Yoder, who resigned for personal reasons.


Step Taken In Talks on Farm Aid
LEAD: The United States and the European Community took a step forward today in resolving their dispute over reducing the world's farm subsidies.
How big a step is a matter of dispute.


Moody's Lowers Its Rating On Federated Stores' Debt
LEAD: The rating on $980 million of Federated Department Stores debt was reduced, Moody's Investors Service announced yesterday, citing the Campeau Corporation's $6.6 billion acquisition of Federated.


Review/Film; 'Palace,' a South African Drama
LEAD: Shot in the stark, underpopulated style of a drama seen on public television, the South African film ''Saturday Night at the Palace'' serves as a primer for the roots of that country's racial strife.
It is, however, a very obvious and oversimplified work, essentially a three-character play that sustains a one-note quality all the way through.


Augustin Francis Oakes, Printer, 81
LEAD: Augustin Francis Oakes, a retired printer, died of brain cancer Wednesday at his home in Port Washington, L.I.
He was 81 years old.


Avant-Garde Movies And Hollywood Oldies In Alternative Theaters
LEAD: THE frustrations of standing in a movie line, paying $7 a ticket and then being squeezed into a shoebox-sized theater might drive anyone to dream of a better way to go out and see a movie in New York.
There are several.
Beyond the 300 or so screens in commercial movie theaters in the city is an alternative network of museums, libraries, specialty film institutions and an assortment of other organizations that show classic


North Atlantic Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Atlantic Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,179,000
8,009,000
Net inc
167,000
b353,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss and includes a loss from discontinued operations of $547,000.


Bellwether Exploration Company reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bellwether Exploration Company
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
737,829
718,708
Net inc
101,213
143,163
Share earns
.01
.01
9mo rev
1,936,784
1,866,952
Net inc
278,287
b4,593,928
Share earns
.02
-


Utility Seeks Grant to Burn Coal Cleanly
LEAD: An application to build the world's first full-size electric plant with a new system for burning coal cleanly is among the proposals that the Energy Department will begin evaluating next week.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the decision of Gov.
John H. Sununu of New Hampshire against seeking re-election misstated the date of a conversation between him and Vice President Bush.


DUKAKIS IS TERMED EXTREME LIBERAL
LEAD: Some Republican supporters of Vice President Bush, troubled that Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis is succeeding in his effort to appear as a moderate, have begun to paint Mr.
Dukakis as extremely liberal.


Bullet Trains Can Unclog Air and Land Traffic
LEAD: To the Editor:


Boeskys Win Part of Liquidation
LEAD: A Delaware judge has ruled that Ivan F. Boesky, along with his wife, Seema, and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., must receive part of the proceeds from any liquidation of a partnership formed by Mr.
Boesky.


Filly Gets Post 5 in Preakness
LEAD: Nine 3-year-olds were entered today for the 113th Preakness Stakes at Pimlico Saturday, where eight colts will try to keep Winning Colors from becoming the first filly to win the first two legs of thoroughbred racing's Triple Crown.


Crane Company reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crane Company (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
275,237,000
256,316,000
Net inc
b8,339,000
c14,201,000
Share earns
.37
.62
Shares outst
22,838,000
24,500,000
b-After a loss of $972,000 from segment held for distribution-Medusa Corp.


Ex-Director of 92d Street Y Gets Jewish Committee Post
LEAD: Ira Silverman, who until recently was the director of the 92d Street Y.M. &amp; Y.W.H.A., has been named executive vice president of the American Jewish Committee.


Computer Automation Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Automation Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,798,000
4,974,000
Net inc
b42,000
c570,000
Share earns
.02
.26
9mo rev
17,290,000
15,471,000
Net inc
b743,000
c1,166,000
Share earns
.31
.55


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The Stalinist mood is still strong.
Conservative moods dominate among the greater part of the party leadership.


As the Pressure Mounts, Leiter Keeps His Calm
LEAD: Outside, the pressure kept dropping, which made it harder for Al Leiter to keep it from building inside.
Out of the rain and inside the clubhouse, Leiter, the rookie left-hander for the Yankees, worked at remaining relaxed.
He watched television, prepared for his rubdown and kept to his usual routine even as the steady shower showed no signs of breaking.


Energy Development Partners Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energy Development Partners Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,138,000
9,364,000
Net inc
1,002,000
1,954,000
Share earns
.06
.17
Shares outst
14,666,000
11,236,000
Share earnings are in cents a unit.


West of Chicago, Waiting for a Dial Tone
LEAD: At the Adams &amp; Myers Real Estate office here, the only reliable telephone Wednesday seemed to be the one inside Meryl Adams's car, parked at the curb and hooked up so the horn would bleat rhythmically whenever a call came in.


Chairman Defends Stake in Olivetti
LEAD: Rejecting suggestions that his increased stake in bi&gt;Olivetti was because of friction with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the Italian businessman Carlo de Benedetti said that the additional holding was a sound investment.
Ing C. Olivetti &amp; C. S.p.A. and A.T.&amp;T., which has a 21.2 percent interest in the Italian company, disclosed last month that talks to increase A.T.&amp;T.


Cuomo Urges Developers To Fight Graft
LEAD: Warning that New York City's multibillion-dollar construction industry was ''infected'' by corruption and racketeering, Governor Cuomo yesterday urged developers and contractors to have the courage to help clean up the industry.


Bonn Official Plans to Quit
LEAD: West Germany's Economics Minister, Martin Bangemann, said today that he would resign and seek the presidency of the European Community's executive commission.


Soybeans and Grains Climb On a New Surge of Buying
LEAD: A new surge of buying hit the soybean and grain futures pits at the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday, lifting all the expiring spot May soybeans and soybean products to contract highs.
The expiring wheat and corn contracts also posted sharp gains.


DOC Optics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DOC Optics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,000,000
10,900,000
Net inc
563,510
241,545
Share earns
.24
.10


LSB Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSB Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
44,196,794
41,072,526
Net loss
811,660
b384,002
b-Net income  Preferred stock dividends exceeded net in the year-ago period.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Fernandez Withdraws: Third-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez of Miami withdrew with an injury yesterday from her second-round match against Mariana Perez-Roldan of Argentina in the $100,000 Geneva European Open tournament.
Fernandez, ranked 20th in the world, called for a doctor after falling behind, 4-5.


Dining Out Guide: Business Entertaining
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
Adrienne


Uncovered Short Sales Are Up by 4.8% on the Big Board
LEAD: Both the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange yesterday reported gains in short interest for the month ended last Friday.


10 Poles Die in Train Crash
LEAD: Ten soldiers were killed and 16 injured today when a military transport train crashed in the northwestern Polish town of Pila, the official press agency said.


Soviet Aide Indicates a Toll Of 12,000 to 15,000 in War
LEAD: The Soviet Union lost up to 15,000 soldiers in Afghanistan, a Government press official said today.


Ingram Takes New Angle on 2d Season
LEAD: Mark Ingram remembers being engulfed by his family, friends, reporters and television cameras in his living room back in his hometown of Flint, Mich.
Ingram remembers draft day last year, that glorious afternoon he felt like a giant and that wondrous moment he actually became one.


Rose's Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rose's Stores Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 28
1988
1987
Sales
308,351,000
296,671,000
Net inc
6,462,000
7,689,000
Share earns
.32
.37


Evans Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evans Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 27
1988
1987
Revenue
61,339,000
62,134,000
Net inc
b3,594,000
3,292,000
Share earns
.73
.68
Yr rev
147,765,000
156,635,000
Net loss
b903,000
c2,090,000
Share earns
-
.46


Court Is Asked to Allow Use Of North's Testimony at Trial
LEAD: The independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair argued today that key statements made in Congressional testimony last summer by Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter could be used against them as evidence at trial.


Hudson General Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hudson General Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
35,499,000
30,079,000
Net inc
1,457,000
729,000
Share earns
1.18
.59
9mo rev
91,822,000
73,334,000
Net inc
1,415,000
1,045,000
Share earns
1.15
.85


Martin Avoids Suspension
LEAD: Billy Martin's relatively good behavior on the field, which is not to be confused with his behavior off the field, apparently helped him avoid suspension after an incident with an umpire this month.
Bobby Brown, the American


Review/Art; The Provocative Contradictions of Markus Raetz
LEAD: Markus Raetz will represent Switzerland in next month's Venice Biennale.
His work is provocative, contradictory and perverse.
It asks us both to slow down and to keep moving.
It appears to be anti-dogmatic, yet it is insistent upon an esthetic, one of incompleteness.
It makes a point of its openness, but it is every bit as controlling as the masterpiece mentality it is reacting against.


Ex-Chief of Bullock's Considers His Options
LEAD: Four years ago, Allen I. Questrom abruptly resigned as chairman and chief executive of Rich's Inc., the big Atlanta department store, to spend seven months traveling around the world and contemplating life.


Sports People; Torres Steps Down
LEAD: Jose Torres said yesterday that his decision to resign as chairman of the New York State Athletic Commission after four years turned on a desire to resume his writing career, including writing a biography of the heavyweight champion, Mike Tyson.


Sports People; Daniels Is Released
LEAD: Lloyd Daniels, who played basketball at four New York City high schools but never earned a diploma, has been dismissed from the Waitemata team of Auckland in the New Zealand Basketball Federation on grounds that he missed practices and engaged in heavy drinking.


Telling One Mideast Terrorist Set From Another
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music; A Survey of Cuban Song, in Tropicana Revue
LEAD: Tradition and kitsch, salsa and showgirls swirl together in the giddy Tropicana revue at the Beacon Theater, Broadway at 74th Street, through Sunday.
More than 60 dancers, singers and musicians from the Tropicana are appearing in New York for the first time since the Havana nightclub was founded in 1939 - and to judge by its export company, the Tropicana mixes tourist attractions with a cultural conscience.


Reviews/Film; Images of Veiny Eyeballs And Desperate Goldfish
LEAD: ''White of the Eye'' could be described as a film about everything -about men and women, guilt and innocence, freedom and destiny - but then it could also be described as a film about nothing.
It's the work of Donald Cammell, well known in 1970 as the co-director of ''Performance'' and best known as (in the words of one British journalist) an ''occluded talent'' since then.


Economic Scene; Market Reaction To Trade Figures
LEAD: THE news this week that the United States trade deficit fell dramatically in March, to $9.75 billion, sent the stock market reeling.
A month earlier the unexpected news that the trade deficit soared in February, to $13.8 billion from $12.4 billion in January, also made the market fall.


Referee Says He's Bitter
LEAD: Dave Newell, the National Hockey League's senior referee, said he was angry because he was not chosen for the Stanley Cup finals and believed that the league was retaliating.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Terry Cummings, the forward who led the Milwaukee Bucks in scoring this season with a 21.3 average, has signed a four-year contract ...
Steve Bedrosian, the Phillies reliever who won the Cy Young Award last season, wil be activated on Friday.
He has been sidelined since March 7 with pneumonia an dpleurisy.


At the Movies
LEAD:  Mariel Grows Up


MLX Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MLX Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
78,489,000
67,861,000
Net loss
2,499,000
2,133,000


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.00
6.45
6.77
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.14
6.20
5.51
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.54
6.54
6.10
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.96
8.97
8.74
30-YR.


Celina Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Celina Financial Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,833,000
4,602,000
Net inc
b27,000
b421,000
Share earns
.02
.25
b-Includes investment gains of $1,000 and $24,000 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


Greek Orthodox Chiefs To Shun Moscow Rites
LEAD: The Ecumenical Patriarch of the Greek Orthodox Church and other Orthodox leaders have decided to protest recent decisions of the Russian Orthodox Church by not taking part in celebrations in Moscow next month marking the 1,000th anniversary of the establishment of the Orthodox faith in Russia.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Advest Group Inc., Hartford, a financial services concern, and Col onial Realty will form a national joint real estate venture.


Wolverine Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wolverine Exploration
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,900,000
2,200,000
Net loss
5,100,000
1,600,000
Latest first quarter is after pre-tax gain of $2.7 million from the settlement of certain litigation.


Pupils Steal Rabbits To Prevent Slaughter
LEAD: Two teen-age students stole a pair of rabbits to save them from being killed as part of a agriculture science class and apparently succeeded in ending the practice.


Drexel Challenges Book On Its 'Junk Bond' Role
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. has squared off against Simon &amp; Schuster Inc. and The American Lawyer magazine in a verbal battle over a soon-to-be-published book that is highly critical of the huge investment firm.


New Mexico &amp; Arizona Land Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Mexico &amp; Arizona Land Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,994,000
3,186,000
Net inc
111,000
298,000
Share earns
.05
.12


McCarran-Walter and the Ghosts of Fear
LEAD: For 36 years, the McCarran-Walter Immigration Act has allowed the United States to bar foreign visitors whose ideas the Government finds offensive.
The law itself offends the spirit of free speech and inquiry, and in recent months Congress and the courts have shown a welcome willingness to re-examine it.


Find-Svp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Find-Svp Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,837,000
2,304,000
Net loss
92,000
b3,000
b-Net income


Lucky in Talks
LEAD: Lucky Stores Inc., the subject of a $2.5 billion unsolicited takeover offer from the American Stores Company, said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it was holding talks with an unidentified party over the sale of its 37 Arizona supermarkets.
Those stores represent about 8 percent of its 481 stores, most of which are in California.


Bush Aide Invokes Privilege On '85 Session About Panama
LEAD: A top aide to Vice President Bush invoked executive privilege today when asked what was said about narcotics when Mr.
Bush met with the United States ambassador to Panama in 1985.


Keystone Camera Products Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Camera Products Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,263,000
9,212,000
Net inc
182,000
b1,413,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss and includes a loss of $295,000 from discontinued operations.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-11  U.S. investment abroad is soaring, the Commerce Department reports, despite currency changes that might encourage companies to bring their production home.
Page A1


Capital Cities Says Ad Drop Will Hurt Radio-TV Profits
LEAD: Weakening demand for national advertising is expected to hurt profits in television and radio operations for the rest of the year, Capital Cities/ ABC Inc. executives said yesterday.


Sun Coast Plastics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Coast Plastics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,385,000
2,955,000
Net inc
107,000
b61,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
20,931,000
8,320,000
Net loss
27,000
bc201,000
Share earns
-
.01


Albany Official To Support Shift In Schools Panel
LEAD: Endorsing a concept that Mayor Koch and Governor Cuomo already support, the State Education Commissioner plans to recommend stripping the New York City Board of Education of responsibility for school construction.


Resdel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Resdel Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,817,000
4,600,000
Net loss
399,000
b541,000
Share earns
-
.12
9mo sales
18,434,000
12,614,000
Net loss
288,000
b1,416,000
Share earns
-
.32


Christopher Gore, 45, Screenwriter of 'Fame'
LEAD: Christopher Gore, a writer who was nominated for an Academy Award for his screenplay of ''Fame,'' died Wednesday in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 45 years old.


Review/Film; 'Willow,' a George Lucas Production
LEAD: Today's films have a way of being supplanted overnight.
However bright or ground breaking it may be, a new film can be followed in a flash by another that copies and comments on the first, and this process can repeat and repeat itself.
So five or six stages of fantasy film making separate the 1977 ''Star Wars'' from the new ''Willow,'' although George Lucas made his plans for both projects at roughly the same time.


Goldfield Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldfield Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,360,157
401,360
Net inc
b20,907
c505,264
b-After tax loss carryforwards of $19,656.
c-Net loss and after loss from discontinued operations of $110,421.


Quanex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quanex Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
120,704,000
84,895,000
Net inc
b4,952,000
c1,305,000
Share earns
.40
-
6mo sales
223,003,000
161,382,000
Net inc
b7,117,000
c2,896,000
Share earns
.58
-


Greenspan Sees Merit In Program Trading
LEAD: In Congressional testimony yesterday, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, strongly endorsed program trading and stock-index arbitrage, two of the most controversial stock trading strategies.


Frances Denney Cos reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frances Denney Cos (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,518,732
9,872,575
Net loss
126,202
b746,016
Share earns
-
.27
b-Net income and includes a gain of $605,749 from an accounting change.


Polk Audio reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Polk Audio (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Sales
5,609,765
4,211,856
Net inc
427,755
324,725
Share earns
.19
.13
Yr sales
20,571,817
16,850,253
Net inc
1,767,141
1,412,290
Share earns
.71
.58


Rain Lifting the Spirits Of U.S. Umbrella-Makers
LEAD: Try not to look on the last three days of watery misery as a burden.


Dollar Off as Gold Edges Up; Concern Voiced on Inflation
LEAD: The dollar drifted lower yesterday against most major currencies except the West German mark and the British pound.
The market was sluggish, weighed down by continued concern about inflation and interest rates.


The Year of the Actor On and Off Broadway
LEAD: DEPENDING on the extent of one's Anglophilia, this could be seen as the season that Andrew Lloyd Webber ruled Broadway as well as Britannia (with three simultaneous bonanzas, ''Cats,'' ''Starlight Express'' and ''The Phantom of the Opera'') or as the season that the British musical armada finally struck rocky shoals (with ''Chess'' and ''Carrie'').


Great Western Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Western Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,517,807
1,516,735
Net inc
523,149
253,308
Share earns
.07
.03


Sri Lankan Official Is Shot
LEAD: The General Secretary of Sri Lanka's ruling United National Party, Nandalal Fernando, was wounded today by gunmen on a motorcycle, the police said.
Members of a Sinhalese Marxist group, Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna, were suspected.
Mr.
Fernando was rushed to a hospital.


200,000 Reportedly Gather At Rally in Armenian Capital
LEAD: About 200,000 people gathered peacefully in a square in Yerevan today in the second large demonstration in the Armenian capital this week, an Armenian dissident said.


Rubicon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rubicon Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
633,000
1,477,000
Net loss
691,000
b41,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
2,396,000
3,310,000
Net loss
1,449,000
1,106,000
b-Net income


Explosive Fabricators reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Explosive Fabricators
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,762,735
1,012,187
Net inc
152,639
32,436
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sales
3,243,215
2,206,743
Net inc
200,931
74,160
Share earns
.02
.01


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the second day of Shavuoth, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City on Monday.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Reviews/Film; Terror by Telephone
LEAD: ''Call Me,'' the wrong number now at the Baronet and other theaters, is about Anna, who gets a panting phone call one night (''I want you, I want you, I want you.''), which soon develops into an aural relationship as she and the caller share their fantasies about imaginative uses for an orange.
The dirty talk is the more wholesome slice of Anna's story.


Hoquiam Journal; Motivational Program Lifts a Town's Spirits
LEAD: For more than a decade the two most important resources of this wet coastal town, timber and young people, have been leaving in droves.
The logs go to the Orient.
The young go anywhere they can find work.


TV Weekend; Incredible Hulk Meets Mighty Thor
LEAD: From 1978 to 1982, ''The Incredible Hulk'' was a series that, unlike its competition, did not find the label of ''comic strip'' insulting.
The title character, created by Stan Lee for Marvel Comics, is registered as a trademark of the Marvel Entertainment Group.
Mr.
Lee was a consultant to the television show.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Japanese Fast Food


Panel Appeals for Funds In Artificial Heart Work
LEAD: The Federal Government's top advisory committee on heart research issued a plea today for additional funds to rescue the artificial heart program from extinction.


Black Lawyers Joining the Chase for Big Money
LEAD: When Curtis A. Wood, Paul T. Williams Jr., Thomas R. Rafalsky and Homer L. Harris decided to relocate their law practice three years ago, the distance they traveled was far longer than the miles separating their old suite in mid-Manhattan from their new offices near Wall Street.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Power Struggle in Hungary


Sonora Gold reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonora Gold (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,532,000
-
Net loss
1,154,000
-
The company was not in production in the year-earlier period.


Times Says Driver Slowdown Has Hampered Distribution
LEAD: A series of slowdowns by unionized truck drivers who deliver The New York Times has caused severe distribution problems and sales losses for the newspaper throughout the Northeast and in parts of the metropolitan area, spokesman for the newspaper said yesterday.


Electric Rates Dip
LEAD: Commercial and industrial electric rates in the United States fell fractionally in the year ended April 30, a consulting firm said yesterday.
In its annual study, the firm, National Utility Service Inc. said the nation's 24 largest investor-owned utilities charged their nonresidential customers an average of 6.28 cents a kilowatt-hour over the 12-month period, compared with 6.29 cents a year earlier.


Sterivet Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterivet Laboratories
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
765,000
1,030,000
Net loss
110,000
b206,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


2 in Jackson Case Indicted; Wider Conspiracy Doubted
LEAD: A Federal grand jury in St.
Louis today indicted a Missouri man on charges of threatening to kill the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, who is seeking the Democratic nomination for President.


Bregman Halts Multifoods Talks
LEAD: Bregman Partners, an investment group led by the Bregman and Belzberg families of Canada, said it had terminated its talks with the International Multifoods Corporation about the possible acquisition of certain operating divisions of the food processing concern based in Minneapolis.


Energy Ventures Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energy Ventures Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,908,000
-
Net inc
290,000
b2,093,000
Share earns
.13
.90
b-Includes a $1,974,000 gain from a change in accounting for income taxes.
The company said no revenue was recorded in the 1987 first quarter following restatement for the change in reporting entity for the company's oil and gas investments.


Allegheny Meeting Delay
LEAD: A Federal appeals court judge today postponed the annual meeting of the Allegheny International Inc., at which a proxy fight by a group of dissident shareholders was to take place.


Dispute Is Watched for Omens for Mexican Presidential Vote
LEAD: To celebrate their mayoral candidate's 296-vote victory, supporters of the Institutional Revolutionary Party rallied last weekend with banners, festive music and speeches in the main plaza of this steel and mining center.


Another Diarist, Another Albany Power
LEAD: There's another Cuomo in the Governor's mansion besides the man with the baggy eyes and the well-placed voice.
Her name is Matilda, and she, too, keeps a diary.


Dodgers' Chemistry Is Finally Right
LEAD: Last year at this time, the Dodgers were in the midst of a malaise.


Coca Mines Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca Mines Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,700,200
3,401,400
Net inc
192,500
505,000
Share earns
.02
.06


Spiegel President Sees Bauer as a 'Great Fit'
LEAD: John J. Shea, president and chief executive of Spiegel Inc., sees a ''great fit'' of the Eddie Bauer specialty retail operation with Spiegel's catalogue enterprise.


Irving Takeover Fight Unresolved
LEAD: As the deadlines draw near for the Bank of New York Company's hostile bid for the Irving Bank Corporation, neither company shows signs of giving up.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in some editions yesterday about the Howard Beach racial-assault case incorrectly characterized plea negotiations involving the judge.


Amfac, in a Big Shift, Considers Buyout Bid
LEAD: In a surprise move, Hawaii's largest company, Amfac Inc., said today that it was halting its restructuring plan in midstream and was considering a management buyout proposal of $41 a share, or $913 million.


Tax Reform Has Dealt a Blow to Public Housing; Hurdles of Local Origin
LEAD: To the Editor:


Darling Shares in Mets' Sweep
LEAD: The Mets finally treated Ron Darling to a share in prosperity today, and they did it on a day when he felt so queasy from the flu that he took a two-hour nap in the locker room before trying to pitch.


Douglas E. Moran, 49, Publishing Executive
LEAD: Douglas E. Moran, a vice president and the controller of Macmillan Inc., the publishing and information services company, died Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 49 years old.


Crowley, Milner &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crowley, Milner &amp; Co (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
23,726,711
26,754,939
Net loss
389,263
189,361


German Jewish Group Seeks To Trace Its Missing Millions
LEAD: A West German Jewish organization asked a French bank today for financial records to trace millions of dollars earmarked for survivors of the Nazi genocide that were reportedly embezzled by the group's former leader.


Alternative Movie Houses and Screening Rooms
LEAD: Here are some of the many places where movies can be seen in New York City other than in movie theaters.
THE AMERICAN MUSEUM OF THE MOVING IMAGE, 34-12 36th Street, Astoria, Queens (718-784-4520).
Screenings have been suspended until its new quarters open in September.
When the museum's two small, new theaters open, it will present a film series called ''Glorious Technicolor'' and a video series, ''The Media and the Vietnam War.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Beard Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beard Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,067,000
3,994,000
Net loss
3,453,000
b2,215,000
b-Includes a charge from the cumulative effect of an accounting change of $2,355,000.


Baker Urges Changes In Monetary Structure
LEAD: Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d wants to improve the system of floating exchange rates by refining economic coordination.


Streamlined Accord
LEAD: With streamlined visa and entry procedures, the Canadian-American Free Trade Agreement now being weighed by Congress would make it easier for architects, management consultants, engineers and other professionals, including journalists, to work in either country.


Bio-Medicus Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bio-Medicus Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,590,467
2,890,417
Net inc
585,271
142,366
Share earns
.10
.03
Shares outst
5,821,140
5,258,814
Yr sales
12,018,189
9,403,514
Net inc
1,008,257
b1,422,248
Share earns
.18
.29
Shares outst
5,638,964
4,989,240


Toro Company reports earnings for Qtr to April 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Toro Company (NYSE)
Qtr to April 29
1988
1987
Sales
209,786,000
178,188,000
Net inc
7,803,000
6,009,000
Share earns
.73
.55
9mo sales
490,718,000
406,550,000
Net inc
18,073,000
14,680,000
Share earns
1.67
1.32


Baseball; Cardinals Top Cubs For Fourth Straight
LEAD: Cris Carpenter pitched a four-hitter today for his first major league victory and the St.
Louis Cardinals won their fourth consecutive game, a 5-1 decision over the Chicago Cubs.


Chrysler Air Bags
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation has begun installing driver's-side air bags as standard equipment on three of its models and will add them this week to three more, becoming the first United States auto maker to make air bags standard equipment.
Federal safety regulations require increased use of passive restraints, such as air bags, which inflate in event of a collision, or automatic seat belts.


Auctions
LEAD:  American Masters


Restaurants
LEAD: There are a handful of restaurants in town that, because of their view or viewpoint, capture the unflagging vitality of this metropolis - Windows on the World, the ''21'' Club, Four Seasons and River Cafe among them.
To this list must be added the Sea Grill at Rockefeller Center, a sophisticated subterranean setting facing the ice-skating rink (at this time of year, the area has become a graceful outdoor cafe).


Review/Art; Ilya Kabakov Portrays Communal Soviet Life
LEAD: ''Ten Characters'' is the title of an exhibition by Ilya Kabakov, a Soviet artist, at Ronald Feldman Fine Arts.
It has an amazing experience to offer.
Hardly are we inside the door than we are reminded of the Moscow Art Theater in its heyday, long years ago.
A complete environment is set before us, intact in its every last detail and yet shaped by a guiding imagination.


Kimmins Environmental Servce reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimmins Environmental Servce (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,290,227
3,229,843
Net inc
470,687
204,087
Share earns
.08
.07
Shares outst
5,999,328
3,000,000


Microbilt Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microbilt Corp
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,857,000
3,916,000
Net inc
1,125,000
b727,000
Share earns
.27
.18
b-Includes a gain of $204,000 from an accounting change.
The year-ago first quarter has been restated to reflect an accounting change.


Schwartz Brothers Inc reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schwartz Brothers Inc
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
74,806,792
76,304,115
Net inc
b52,648
699,114
Share earns
.03
.43
b-Includes a gain of $154,814 from an accounting change.
Prior year figures are restated to reflect the adoption of FIFO inventory method.


Bush as His Own Man: A Minuet on an Uncertain Tightrope
LEAD: With a one-sentence statement in a speech laying out parts of his drug policy, Vice President Bush embarked on a journey that aides today justified as necessary if he is to be elected President.


A.T.&amp;T. Computer Sales Are Rising
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company's sales of computers are on the rise, ending more than a year of stagnant or declining sales, the new president of A.T.&amp;T.'s Data Systems Group said.
Robert M. Kavner said in an interview that the group's sales were ''growing dramatically'' and that the business was ahead of its financial plan for 1988.


Alcott Aims for L.P.G.A. Slam
LEAD: Pat Bradley is the only active member of the L.P.G.A.
Tour to have a career grand slam, at least one victory in each of the four women's major tournaments.
The events are the Nabisco Dinah Shore, the Ladies Professional Golf Association championship, the United States Women's Open and the du Maurier Classic of


Sage Energy Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sage Energy Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,471,000
7,436,000
Net loss
1,267,000
329,000
9mo rev
24,131,000
19,255,000
Net loss
958,000
2,988,000
Latest 9-month results include an extraordinary gain of $1,069,000, or 10 cents a share, from the repurchase and retirement of the company's convertible debentures.


IDB Communications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IDB Communications Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,298,000
2,154,000
Net inc
535,000
226,000
Share earns
.11
.06


Review/Art; Arte Povera Installations: Engineering and Alchemy
LEAD: Gilberto Zorio, whose work is on view at the Sonnabend Gallery in SoHo, is a practitioner of Arte Povera, the unusually elegant and poetic installation art that emerged in Italy in the late 1960's and early 70's.
Like their American counterparts - such artists as Richard Serra, Robert Smithson and Robert Morris - the ''poveristi'' avoided portable, studio-made sculpture.


Brawley's Mother Gets Grand Jury Subpoena
LEAD: A grand jury investigating the Tawana Brawley case has subpoenaed the teen-ager's mother, Glenda Brawley, according to Mrs.
Brawley and a family adviser, the Rev.
Al Sharpton.


Times Expects Profit to Be Flat
LEAD: The New York Times Company said yesterday that it expected its second-quarter profit to be about the same as a year earlier, largely because of weaker retail advertising in The New York Times.


Hazel Corbin, Health Expert, Is Dead at 93
LEAD: Hazel Corbin, retired general director of the Maternity Center Association in New York City and a pioneer in maternal and infant health care, died of cardiac failure Wednesday at her home in New Smyrna Beach, Fla.
She was 93 years old.


Empire of Carolina Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empire of Carolina Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,247,000
9,114,000
Net loss
1,820,000
b1,073,000
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


Beazer Extends Bid for Koppers
LEAD: BNS Inc., seeking to take over the Koppers Company for $1.7 billion, extended its hostile tender offer until midnight Wednesday and said it controls more than three-quarters of the Koppers shares.
BNS, led by Beazer P.L.C., a British construction company, and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., said about 73.2 percent of outstanding common shares and about 68.7 percent of outstanding preferred shares had been tendered as of


No Indictment in Harlem High-Rise Fire That Killed 7
LEAD: A Manhattan grand jury said yesterday that widespread negligence and a flawed response by the Fire Department led to the deaths of seven people in a Harlem high-rise fire last year, but said there was not enough evidence to hand up criminal indictments.


On Stage
LEAD:  Stritch as Apple Annie


Reviews/Film; 'I Don't Give a Damn'
LEAD: ''I Don't Give a Damn'' is a soapy Israeli movie composed of the residue of better movies past.
It is about handsome Rafi (Ika Sohar), who is wounded in battle and loses the use of his legs. ''My story ends here in the hospital,'' says Rafi.
Promises, promises.
There is at least an hour more to go, which he spends raging against his condition, breaking things and being mean to the people who want most to help him - relatives, friends, other patients and, especially, pretty Nira (Anat Waxman).


Mavericks Gain Final; Jazz Ties Series; Mavericks 108, Nuggets 95
LEAD: Rolando Blackman scored 9 consecutive points in the fourth period tonight to lead the Dallas Mavericks into their first Western Conference championship series with a 108-95 victory over the Denver Nuggets.


OVERSEAS SPENDING BY U.S. COMPANIES SETS RECORD PACE
LEAD: The weak dollar, which has reduced the cost of manufacturing in the United States relative to that in other countries, should in theory be prompting American companies to halt or scale back expansion of their factories abroad, and even close some of them.


Earthworm Tractor reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Earthworm Tractor
Year to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,652,162
20,041,451
Net loss
302,646
1,058,585


U.S. Accuses Benin of Abetting Libyan Terrorism
LEAD: The United States has accused the West African nation of Benin of allowing Libyan agents to use its territory to foment acts of terrorism, State Department officials said today.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Monday comparing electricity rates on Long Island with those elsewhere gave an incorrect unit of measurement.
The figures were per hundred kilowatt hours.


Monoclonal Antibodies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monoclonal Antibodies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,815,000
1,553,000
Net loss
b1,490,000
5,430,000
Yr rev
6,133,000
7,548,000
Net loss
7,265,000
8,080,000
b-Includes a charge of $514,000 for a writeoff of the cost of technology acquired during fiscal 1987 from Monoclonal Technology Ltd., a research and development limited partnership.


Life of Indiana Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Life of Indiana Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b33,716
c249,520
b-After a capital gain of $51,027 and an extraordinary credit from a tax loss carryforward of $30,500.
c-After a capital gain of $102,184.


Crown Andersen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Andersen Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,788,549
2,697,373
Net inc
255,910
13,526
Share earns
.17
.01
6mo rev
12,398,283
5,377,279
Net inc
153,396
23,712
Share earns
.10
.02


Novar Electronics Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Novar Electronics Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,294,834
4,017,744
Net loss
340,460
b428,965
Share earns
-
.15
b-Net income and includes a gain of $504,400 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Campbell Soup Company reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Campbell Soup Company (NYSE)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Sales
1,207,400,000
1,128,300,000
Net inc
22,400,000
48,100,000
Share earns
.17
.37
9mo sales
3,722,600,000
3,491,600,000
Net inc
b201,900,000
177,200,000
Share earns
1.56
1.36


Yes, Big Science. But Which Projects?
LEAD: To govern is to choose, and when it comes to spending big bucks on science, the Reagan Administration is doing neither.


Chronar Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chronar Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,502,368
982,296
Net loss
1,506,473
3,410,447
Year-ago figures were restated to reflect a $266,531 inventory reduction.


National Computer Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Computer Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
52,036,000
45,597,000
Net inc
2,703,000
b2,640,000
Share earns
.16
.14
b-Includes a gain of $457,000 from discontinued operations.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  International


Book Notes
LEAD:  Trump Reaches for Pen


Citicorp Notes To Yield 9.17%
LEAD: Citicorp is issuing $200 million of 9 1/8 percent notes due in 1992 at a price of 99.85, to yield 9.17 percent, through a group of underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Arbitrage Move Reassessed
LEAD: Bear, Stearns &amp; Company announced yesterday that it was re-examining its suspension of stock-index arbitrage trading.
The firm suspended such program trading both for its own accounts and for its customers last week.


Barrett Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barrett Resources
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,826,000
1,059,000
Net inc
b87,000
c51,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
1,991,000
1,323,000
Net inc
b591,000
c106,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-After a tax charge of $34,000 for the quarter and a tax credit of $119,000 for the 6 months.


Catalina Lighting reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Catalina Lighting
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,973,000
4,613,000
Net inc
241,000
103,000
Share earns
.11
.04
6mo sales
10,834,000
8,963,000
Net inc
393,000
201,000
Share earns
.18
.08
The company went public May 12, 1988.


Central Illinois Public Service Co reports earnings for 12mo April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Illinois Public Service Co (NYSE)
12mo April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
604,164,000
613,706,000
Net inc
77,066,000
70,531,000
Share earns
2.07
1.88


Man Convicted in Series of Rapes On the Basis of a 'Voice Lineup'
LEAD: A man accused of terrorizing the South Shore of Long Island in a four-year series of rapes and assaults was convicted today of 31 counts of rape and burglary, with his voice as the chief evidence against him.
It was the first time in New York State that a conviction was obtained based largely on a recorded ''voice lineup.


Review/Music; The Mozart Requiem In Alternative Version
LEAD: Mozart the man remains as much an enigma today as he must have been in his lifetime.
The exact size and cut of his musical genius are clear, but all the evidence as to his character and his deepest beliefs adds up to fog and ambiguity.
It is therefore fitting that his great final work, the unfinished Requiem, continues to be a maze of contradictions and blind alleys.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Chiat/Day Gets 3 Golds At Art Directors Club
LEAD: Chiat/Day, New York, won all three gold medals for television advertising awarded last night at the 67th annual awards presentation of the Art Directors Club.
They also won two of the five silver awards.


Detection Systems Inc reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detection Systems Inc (OTC)
Year to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,965,000
13,025,000
Net inc
1,176,000
713,000
Share earns
.48
.29
The company said share earnings are restated to give effect to the Aug. 7, 1987, 5-for-4 stock split in the form of a stock dividend.


Mid-South Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid-South Insurance
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
22,320,000
14,123,000
Net loss
4,175
b1,136,000
Share earns
-
.44
b-Net income


The Desert Stays Dry
LEAD: To the Editor:


Comecon Pact Seen Near
LEAD: The European Community and the Soviet bloc's trade council are close to establishing official relations.


Uncommon Recognition
LEAD: The Veterans Administration recently broadened its program of paying for inscriptions citing valor awards on military headstones and markers and, as a result, a Medal of Honor winner from New Jersey is about to acquire his due.


London Journal; But for the Young, a Gypsy Would a-Traveling Go
LEAD: Bubbles Brazil is a matriarch with a mission that gleams like her gold earrings.
She is a leader of the Gypsy traveling folk who linger in odd macadam patches of outlying London districts, like Abbey Wood.
She is a proud Romany with a Cockney accent who loves the wanderer's life but has begun compromising lately for the grandchildren.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Karen Akers


Global Natural Resources Properties LC reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Global Natural Resources Properties LC (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,144,000
7,052,000
Net inc
b2,360,000
c115,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-After a tax credit of $957,000.
c-Net loss and after a tax credit of $246,000.


Zimerman Recital
LEAD: The pianist Krystian Zimerman will give his only New York recital of the season Sunday at 3 P.M. in Avery Fisher Hall.
Tickets are $20, $15 and $10.
Center Charge: 874-6770.


Hosposable Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hosposable Products
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,475,126
3,585,698
Net loss
478,988
199,819


Soviet Strengthens Economic Links to Northern Afghanistan
LEAD: Some towns and villages in these arid northern Afghan plains have already been connected to the Soviet Union's electrical power grid.
The landscape is dotted with fertilizer factories, irrigation canals and natural gas pumping stations built with Soviet aid.


New York Taxi Commissioner Is Reported Ready to Resign
LEAD: The New York City Taxi and Limousine Commissioner, appointed less than two years ago by Mayor Koch, is expected to resign today to take a job in private industry, city and taxicab-industry officials said yesterday.


Seahawks Sign Their Top Choice
LEAD: The Seattle Seahawks announced today that they have signed a former University of Miami wide receiver, Brian Blades, their first draft pick.


Southern Union Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Union Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
78,123,000
79,438,000
Net inc
6,857,000
b4,912,000
Share earns
.62
.42
c-After a loss of $276,000.


Sports of The Times; Oh, the Old Celtics
LEAD: ELIMINATION?
The Celtics?
In only the semifinals of the Eastern Conference playoffs?
Why, they've been in the National Basketball Association finals for the last four years running, and it appeared only last week that they might do it again.


The Murder of Rosa Urena
LEAD: Notes from talks with New York City detectives:


Rainy-Day Blues Mount
LEAD: Bad weather is causing an overflow of major league doubleheaders and potential problems for pitching staffs.
Bad weather had forced the postponement of 28 games before yesterday.
Only 27 were wiped out last season.


8 3/4% Offering Set By Xerox Credit
LEAD: The Xerox Credit Corporation, a unit of the Xerox Corporation, is offering $150 million of 8 3/4 percent notes due in 1991 at a price of 99.95, to yield 8.77 percent, through a group of underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Marsteller Gains
LEAD: Burson-Marsteller has received the go-ahead from South Korea's Mnistry of Finance to open an office in Seoul, which brings its offices in Asia to seven.
The public relations firm had set up a small staff in Seoul a few years back to take care of the Seoul Olympic Organizing Committee account.


Fordam President Named to Election-Law Board
LEAD: The Koch administration has named the president of Fordham University to head the review board charged with administering and enforcing New York City's new law on public financing of municipal election campaigns, senior officials said yesterday.


Pop/Jazz; The Return Of Strayhorn And Carter
LEAD: In the last five years, the art of Benny Carter and Billy Strayhorn, two of jazz's greatest composers, has begun to reassert itself, center stage, after decades of benign neglect.


Review/Cabaret
LEAD: A pop singer who returns to the cabarets after 30 years of retirement is bound to be affected by such a long absence.
But while Monica Lewis, who is in Danny's Skylight Room at the Grand Sea Palace on West 46th Street) through tonight, is not the same singer that she was 30 years ago, she has skillfully retained her basic qualities as a performer.


Review/Theater; 'Wonderful Town'
LEAD: When Betty Comden and Adolph Green wrote the lyric ''Life is gay, life is sweet/Interesting people on Christopher Street,'' they were looking back to the idealized 1930's, when Greenwich Village was a crossroad between Ohio and Paris.
The tone of ''Wonderful Town,'' one of two New York musicals the lyricists wrote with Leonard Bernstein - the other, of course, is ''On the Town'' - is suffused with joyful innocence.


Weaver Arms Deal
LEAD: The Weaver Arms Corporation will make semiautomatic rifles in China that are similar to the Israeli Uzi.
Weaver, based in San Diego, will sell the first shipments of its 9-millimeter Nighthawk carbines in the United States and plans to sell the guns to American police agencies, private citizens and the military in developing nations, Robert Weaver, company president, said.


Tech Data Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tech Data Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
58,110,743
33,281,177
Net inc
2,143,974
1,062,183
Share earns
.44
.22


Treasures in Tableaux at Library Fete
LEAD: It's a challenge to please New York's diehard benefit-goers near the end of the social season.


Review/Film; Australian Vagabond Comedy
LEAD: Not every road movie sends its characters off to do their rambling in a Bentley, but then ''Rikky and Pete'' is substantially out of the ordinary.
A charmingly offbeat comedy from Australia, it breaks the road-movie tradition at every turn.
The title characters are not runaway lovers or freewheeling pals; instead, they're a well-heeled brother and sister who've simply run out of options in Melbourne for the time being.


3 Fraternity Members Are Charged in a Rape
LEAD: Three fraternity members have been indicted in the rape of an 18-year-old Florida State University student who was near death from drinking.


Hotel Investors Corporation Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hotel Investors Corporation Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,693,000
17,596,000
Net inc
b1,214,000
b1,281,000
Share earns
.10
.10
b-Includes investment gains of $530,000 and $153,000 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


Trinity Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinity Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
172,093,000
123,034,000
Net inc
6,295,000
bc1,157,000
Share earns
.35
-
Yr sales
632,931,000
491,147,000
Net inc
13,045,000
b3,986,000
Share earns
.74
.25


John Kennedy, 90, Led The Opera in St. Louis
LEAD: John Kennedy, who directed the productions of the St.
Louis Municipal Opera from 1941 to 1967, died last Friday in Vancouver, British Columbia, after a brief illness.
He was 90 years old.


Yonkers Loses a Bid To End Housing Pact
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday rejected a request by Yonkers to withdraw an agreement it made to build 200 units of low-income housing in mostly white neighborhoods and rebuked elected officials for ''nurturing the hope that the housing will never be built.''


Prime Financial Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Financial Partners (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
803,616
-
Net inc
10,610
-
Comparative figures are not available because the company started up in mid-1987.


Faradyne Electronics Corp reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Faradyne Electronics Corp
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,185,256
8,979,158
Net inc
321,574
89,545
Share earns
.20
.05


Corrections
LEAD: An article and a picture caption on Wednesday about Vice President Bush's visit to an irrigation project misidentified the site.
It was the California State University at Fresno.


Optical Radiation Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Optical Radiation Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,841,000
26,308,000
Net inc
2,303,000
2,446,000
Share earns
.31
.29
9mo sales
74,257,000
73,956,000
Net inc
6,372,000
5,737,000
Share earns
.82
.69


Insituform Group Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Insituform Group Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,818,812
1,965,029
Net inc
158,035
89,678
Share earns
.02
.01
Figures are translated to dollars from U.K. pounds at the rate of $1.89 a pound for the latest quarter and $1.61 a pound for the year-ago period.


Horse Field Runs The Wrong Way
LEAD: A horse race has been declared void after it was discovered that the field was directed the wrong way along the course.


Steinberg Disbarred Over Law Exam Exemption
LEAD: Joel B. Steinberg, the lawyer charged in the beating death of the 6-year-old girl he had helped raise, was disbarred yesterday.


Airgas Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airgas Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
38,307,000
29,206,000
Net inc
b1,218,000
c903,000
Share earns
.20
.19
Shares outst
6,498,000
5,369,000
Yr sales
130,452,000
103,613,000
Net inc
b4,391,000
c2,557,000
Share earns
.83
.60
Shares outst
5,733,000
4,906,000


Jury That Cleared U.S. Judge Unaware He Lied, Panel Told
LEAD: The trial jury that acquitted Federal District Judge Alcee L. Hastings of conspiracy charges five years ago never knew he lied under oath about crucial phone calls and submitted false papers to conceal his involvement in a bribery plot, a House impeachment panel was told today.


Leiner, P Nutritional Prodcts reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leiner, P Nutritional Prodcts (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
24,225,000
20,820,000
Net inc
1,013,000
1,215,000
Share earns
.29
.35
Yr sales
72,132,000
73,264,000
Net inc
3,002,000
3,493,000
Share earns
.86
1.01


Syrian Forces on Alert in Beirut
LEAD: Seven thousand Syrian troops in southern Beirut were put on alert today as clashes between Shiite Moslem militias intensified in the suburbs nearby.


Lodgistix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lodgistix Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,492,179
5,748,644
Net loss
653,401
b781
9mo rev
18,055,069
14,742,932
Net loss
685,891
590,012
b-Net income


At Golden Temple of Sikhs, the Debris of Battle
LEAD: Shattered glass, marble and pieces of brick were scattered across the silent Golden Temple complex this evening as bomb disposal squads and Red Cross teams searched its rooms and shrines for explosives, weapons and bodies.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  A FLAMENCO-JAZZ BEAT


Greyhound Notes
LEAD: The Greyhound Corporation is offering $150 million of speculative-grade 13 percent notes due in 1995 at a price of par through a group of underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.
Noncallable by the company for three years, the notes are rated B-2 by Moody's and B by S.&amp;P.


Showtime Buys Film Rights
LEAD: Showtime/The Movie Channel agreed yesterday to pay an estimated $100 million to $150 million for a five-year distribution agreement with Carolco Pictures.
The amount will depend on how much the films make in theatrical release.


Varlen Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Varlen Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
50,426,000
44,666,000
Net inc
2,522,000
1,837,000
Share earns
.62
.45


Japan-U.S. Farm Talks
LEAD: Japan is coming under increased pressure from its own businessmen to settle its dispute with the United States over its restrictions on beef and orange imports, Japanese businessmen said today.


Encore Computer Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Encore Computer Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,001,000
3,510,000
Net inc
b649,000
c1,735,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo rev
16,541,000
5,728,000
Net inc
b1,019,000
c3,563,000
Share earns
.05
-


Using Rules Tactic, Helms Stalls Senate Approval of Arms Treaty
LEAD: Senator Jesse Helms succeeded today in delaying action on the new arms treaty by refusing to bring forward amendments that he and other treaty opponents seek.


LVI Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LVI Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
112,668,000
109,033,000
Net inc
b1,280,000
b1,040,000
Share earns
.04
.05
Shares outst
19,755,000
20,064,000
b-After tax loss carryforwards of $344,000 for the latest first quarter and $225,000 for the year-ago period.


Malibu Grand Prix Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Malibu Grand Prix Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,298,000
6,482,000
Net loss
46,000
b1,470,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income and includes a gain of $1,649,000 on restructuring of debt.


Wisconsin Public Service Corp reports earnings for 12mo April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wisconsin Public Service Corp (NYSE)
12mo April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
602,182,000
567,553,000
Net inc
56,643,000
49,684,000
Share earns
2.28
1.98


Iranian Boats Attack Tanker
LEAD: Iranian assault craft today launched their second tanker attack in two days in the Strait of Hormuz in waters far from United States warships.


Central Jersey Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Jersey Savings &amp; Loan Assn (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,040,215
898,301
Share earns
.82
.71
Yr net inc
4,156,675
3,321,529
Share earns
3.26
2.70


Biotech Research Laboratoies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biotech Research Laboratoies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,994,602
1,990,634
Net inc
725,990
72,927
Share earns
.12
.01


Imperial Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Industries Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,321,000
2,299,000
Net inc
b114,000
c146,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Included a gain of $277,000 from the sale of surplus real property.
c-Net loss


James River Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* James River Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 24
1988
1987
Sales
1,394,885,000
1,191,363,000
Net inc
59,056,000
45,817,000
Share earns
.66
.53
Yr sales
5,097,978,000
4,479,001,000
Net inc
209,010,000
169,864,000
Share earns
2.36
2.03


Oh, but to Be Able to Administer Sunny Justice
LEAD: In compiling a list of desirable judicial posts, an ambitious lawyer might well look first to New York, the acknowledged center of the legal world.
Washington, with its regulatory and political challenges, would certainly make the list, along with Chicago, Los Angeles, Houston and Miami, to name a few.


New York City Fire and Rescue Department
LEAD: To the Editor:


SmithKline to Acquire Stake In a Drug Research Concern
LEAD: The SmithKline Beckman Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to invest $49 million in the Nova Pharmaceutical Corporation, a small research-oriented drug company based in Baltimore.


Trans-National Leasing Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans-National Leasing Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,394,491
1,577,828
Net loss
40,045
215,084
9mo rev
4,228,853
5,020,715
Net loss
115,325
412,210


Man Kills Robber and Is Arrested
LEAD: A man and his wife walked into their Queens apartment yesterday afternoon and surprised two burglars, one of whom was shot to death by the man when the burglar attacked the couple with a long screwdriver, the police said.


Tom Pierson Big Band
LEAD: Tom Pierson is to lead his big band on Sunday from 3 to 6 P.M. at the Jazz Center of New York, 380 Lafayette Street (505-5660).
Admission is $5.


Company Items On Cable TV
LEAD: Investors News Release Watch, a new service that will offer corporate news briefs four times a day on cable television, was announced yesterday by PR Newswire and the Financial News Network, which will provide the service.


Wet-Weather Competition
LEAD: Tom Seaver, the former Met pitcher, lining up a putt yesterday at the pro-am segment of the Nynex/Golf Digest Commemorative at Sleepy Hollow Country Club in Scarborough, N.Y.
The seniors tournament begins today.
Page.
D21.


Chemical Leaman Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Leaman Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
59,240,071
56,752,769
Net loss
908,729
b223,782
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


Cucos Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cucos Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 3
1988
1987
Revenue
2,651,663
2,287,927
Net inc
6,443
3,724
9mo rev
8,956,596
7,912,374
Net inc
45,690
b489,348
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Dresser Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dresser Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,067,700,000
787,100,000
Net inc
b24,500,000
c3,700,000
Share earns
.35
-
6mo rev
1,868,600,000
1,504,200,000
Net inc
b68,700,000
c11,500,000
Share earns
.97
-


Why the Selective Tolerance of Dissent? At a Vital Time, Some of It Aids Gorbachev
LEAD: Americans who are puzzled these days by the apparent contradictions of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's Soviet Union might try to look at it the way many Soviet intellectuals do, as a country in the grip of an all-consuming political contest.


Laser Industries Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laser Industries Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,746,000
8,850,000
Net loss
405,000
b1,288,000
Share earns
-
.29
b-Net income and after a reversal of a tax credit of $197,000.


Homac Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homac Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
898,000
1,896,000
Net loss
798,000
755,000
6mo rev
2,286,000
3,940,000
Net loss
1,315,000
1,307,000


Fay's Drug Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fay's Drug Co (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
122,435,000
110,636,000
Net inc
916,000
81,000
Share earns
.07
.01


Reviews/Jazz; Adam Makowicz, His Piano and Friends
LEAD: The pianist Adam Makowicz began a series of four varied, nightly concerts at Weill Recital Hall on Wednesday evening with a program of the music of Irving Berlin.
Mr.
Berlin's music has been inescapably ubiquitous since celebrations of his 100th birthday began last week, but Mr.
Makowicz managed to give a notably distinctive flavor to his performances.


Mellon Financial's $150 Million Issue
LEAD: The Mellon Financial Company, a unit of the Mellon Bank Corporation, is offering $150 million of floating-rate, rating-sensitive notes with a final maturity in 1993 through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Victory for Flaxman
LEAD: Richard Flaxman Partners/ABP has been named to handle theCentral Federal Savings account.
The initial budget is $2 million, with other projects to be developed.
The other finalists were Altschiller Reitzfeld; Ephron, Raboy &amp; Tsao, and MGA.
The previous agency was Sturtevant &amp; Hildt.
The savings bank, with almost $2 billion in assets, has offices in Manhattan and in Nassau and Suffolk Counties.


Steel Industry Sees Decline
LEAD: Executives of several steel companies predicted today that industry shipments and profits would decline slightly in the second half of this year, saying they expected weaker overall demand from the automobile, appliance and home construction markets.


Kappa Networks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kappa Networks Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,731,319
2,598,415
Net inc
36,016
b115,053
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sales
5,658,405
5,251,646
Net inc
66,491
b210,822
Share earns
.04
-
b


Staff Builders Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Staff Builders Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
37,301,000
9,032,000
Net inc
778,000
268,000
Share earns
.11
.15
Shares outst
6,194,035
2,565,470
The company changed its name from Tender Loving Care Health Care Services Inc.


What Women Can Do At 65 Years and Up
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance; Season's First 'Bayadere'
LEAD: The American Ballet Theater production of ''La Bayadere'' has proved to be one of the company's most popular staples.
And on Tuesday, when Ballet Theater presented the work at the Metropolitan Opera House for the first time this season, the three-act spectacle received a fine performance from Martine van Hamel as Nikiya, the young temple dancer or bayadere, Kevin McKenzie as Solor, who loves and is loved by her, and Cynthia Gregory as Gamzatti, the Rajah's daughter and Solor's fiancee.


MCM Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCM Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b164,000
b1,391,000
Share earns
.04
.30
b-Includes net realized investment gains of $84,000 and $1,001,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively, and the year-ago period also includes a tax credit of $390,000.


Bridge
LEAD: The vast difference between ''single dummy'' and ''double dummy'' can be illustrated by the diagramed deal.
It was supplied by Bruce Bell of New Zealand, one of the world's most respected bridge journalists.


Cuba Seeks Extension
LEAD: The executive committee of the International Baseball Association has granted a request from the Cuban Olympic committee to extend by one week the entry deadline for teams that will participate in the Summer Olympics, an association official said.


Court Is Asked to Act On Sentencing System
LEAD: The Reagan Administration urged the Supreme Court today to use an expedited procedure reserved for cases of ''imperative public importance'' to decide the constitutionality of the new Federal system for sentencing convicted criminals.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; New Ideas For Paying Agencies
LEAD: WHITE SULPHUR SPRINGS, W.Va., May 19 - Members of the American Association of Advertising Agencies who are meeting here at the Greenbrier Hotel consider the matter of compensation a vital one, especially since the traditional 15 percent media commission has long been under attack.





The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly  DISARMAMENT COMMISSION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council  ECONOMIC COMMITTEE - 12 P.M.
SOCIAL COMMITTEE - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Lionel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lionel Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
52,582,000
41,207,000
Net loss
b3,118,000
c948,000
b-After a tax benefit of $1,911,000.
c-After a tax benefit of $1,626,000 and a gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change of $1,552,000.


PROSECUTION LOSES A WEDTECH RULING
LEAD: In a blow to the prosecution, the judge in the racketeering trial of Representative Mario Biaggi reversed an earlier ruling yesterday and permitted the defense to question a chief Government witness on the disappearance of his second wife.


Bonds and Notes Halt 3-Day Slide
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes moved slightly higher in lethargic trading yesterday, braking a three-day slide.


Alden Electronics Inc reports earnings for Year to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alden Electronics Inc (OTC)
Year to March 26
1988
1987
Revenue
22,944,624
18,817,490
Net inc
906,779
850,820
Share earns
.42
.40


Texaco May Seek Stock Buyback
LEAD: Texaco Inc.'s management is leaning toward a stock buyback and away from selling to its shareholders its stake in Texaco Canada, according to participants in the company's talks with Carl C. Icahn, its largest stockholder.


Tax Reform Has Dealt a Blow to Public Housing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Self Magazine Editor Is Named
LEAD: Anthea Disney, editor of US magazine, has been named editor in chief of Self magazine effective July 5, Conde Nast Publications Inc., Self's parent, announced yesterday.


Inmac Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inmac Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
62,245,000
46,532,000
Net inc
2,676,000
2,417,000
Share earns
.28
.25
9mo sales
168,393,000
121,316,000
Net inc
7,292,000
5,877,000
Share earns
.77
.64


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Some Nynex Business To Goldsmith/Jeffrey
LEAD: The Nynex Business Yellow Pages, the big brown directory published by Nynex Information Resources, is doing its first advertising and has given its business to Goldsmith/Jeffrey.
The seven-figure budget will go toward consumer and trade advertising, with a print campaign expected to get under way by summer.


Delta Data Systems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delta Data Systems Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,302,000
3,339,000
Net inc
b75,000
c2,108,000
6mo rev
8,054,000
9,305,000
Net inc
b126,000
c2,046,000
b-Includes tax credits of $29,000 for the quarter and $44,000 for the 6 months.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Rapp, 62, Will Retire From Rapp &amp; Collins
LEAD: Stan Rapp, 62 years old and the chairman and co-founder of Rapp &amp; Collins, an Omnicom company, has decided to retire from the agency to go on the lecture circuit and finish a second book.


Peru Will Investigate Report That Troops Killed Peasants
LEAD: President Alan Garcia has ordered an investigation of reports that troops killed dozens of peasants in reprisal for an ambush by leftist Shining Path guerrillas, a legislator of Mr.
Garcia's party was reported today as saying.


Howard Beach Suspect Appears in Closed Court
LEAD: A defendant in the Howard Beach racial-attack case appeared at a closed court proceeding yesterday, and lawyers for other defendants expressed concern that the teen-ager who appeared had secretly pleaded guilty.


Federal Resources Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Resources Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,731,000
4,722,000
Net inc
113,000
251,000
Share earns
-
.01


Hormel, George A &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hormel, George A &amp; Co (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
535,729,000
556,944,000
Net inc
7,615,000
10,049,000
Share earns
.20
.26
6mo sales
1,090,616,000
997,424,000
Net inc
19,792,000
14,502,000
Share earns
.52
.38


General Parametrics reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Parametrics (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,158,000
5,727,000
Net inc
1,024,000
994,000
Share earns
.13
.12
6mo rev
11,685,000
11,312,000
Net inc
1,994,000
1,974,000
Share earns
.24
.23


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Boston Nonconformists


A Gloomy Report on F.S.L.I.C.
LEAD: The General Accounting Office said today that the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation was likely to need a new infusion of capital to deal with the more than 500 savings and loan institutions now insolvent.


Anglo Energy Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anglo Energy Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,357,000
8,983,000
Net loss
b827,000
c5,318,000
6mo rev
30,327,000
16,169,000
Net loss
b7,079,000
c12,541,000
b-Includes $3,116,000 and $8,465,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, of expenses related to debt service on secured obligations which are being retired in connection with the company's reorganization, and gains from the sale of assets of $2,454,000 for the quarter and $2,757,000 for the 6 months.


Valspar Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valspar Corp
Qtr to April 29
1988
1987
Sales
128,800,000
120,309,000
Net inc
5,271,000
4,797,000
Share earns
.47
.43
6mo sales
223,602,000
192,423,000
Net inc
7,059,000
6,158,000
Share earns
.63
.55


Motor Club of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Motor Club of America (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,662,000
12,759,000
Net inc
538,382
b791,466
Share earns
.26
.35
b-Includes a tax credit of $338,000.


Colombian Tied To Drug Empire Is Found Guilty
LEAD: Carlos Lehder Rivas, a reputed leader of a violent Colombian drug ring that is believed responsible for most of the cocaine brought to this country, was found guilty today of smuggling tons of cocaine into the United States.


Sugar Output Forecast
LEAD: World sugar production in 1988-89 is expected to be a record of about 103.9 million metric tons, slightly more than the 103.8 million tons produced in 1987-88, the Agriculture Department said Wednesday.
The latest estimate was revised downward from the department's first forecast issued on May 4, which indicated production at 104.1 million metric tons in 1988-89.


Corrections
LEAD: A music review on Sunday about the Riverside Opera Company's production of Zandonai's ''Giulietta e Romeo'' omitted the date of the final performance.
It will be at 3 P.M. this Sunday at Rutgers Presbyterian Church, 236 West 73d Street.


In Poland, Rumblings of More Liberalization
LEAD: Poland's Communist leadership appears to be facing increased pressure from within its ranks to step up the pace of change, following the resolution of strikes at major industrial installations last week.


Trial of Arizona Ex-Governor Begins
LEAD: Barnett Lotstein, left, and Michael Cudahy, prosecuting attorneys in the trial of former Gov.
Evan Mecham, as prospective jurors filled out questionnaires yesterday in Phoenix.
Mr.
Mecham, who was impeached earlier this year for misconduct, is being tried along with his brother on charges of concealing a $350,000 campaign loan.


BUSH AND REAGAN SEEM TO DISAGREE ON NORIEGA TALKS
LEAD: President Reagan and Vice President Bush seem to have agreed to disagree on how to deal with Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, and aides to both men say further disputes between them are likely as the political campaign accelerates.


IIS Intelligent Information Systems Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IIS Intelligent Information Systems Ltd
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,054,000
4,886,000
Net inc
902,000
702,000
Share earns
.23
.18
Figures are translated from Israeli shekels at the March 31, 1988 rate of 1.56 shekels to the dollar.


Alexander Hirschfeld, Psychiatrist, Dies at 73
LEAD: Dr.
Alexander Herzog Hirschfeld, a psychiatrist who was a leader in the field of occupational medicine, died of respiratory failure Wednesday at the Marin General Hospital in Green Brae, Calif.
He was 73 years old and lived in Mill Valley, Calif.


Japan Auto Export Limit
LEAD: Japan plans to end its voluntary limit of automobile exports to the United States effective next April, according to a news report disputed by the Government.


Morgan Keegan &amp; Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan Keegan &amp; Co Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
19,763,881
23,802,956
Net inc
1,216,871
1,983,914
Share earns
.22
.36
9mo rev
55,280,880
64,524,331
Net inc
2,168,183
5,288,569
Share earns
.38
1.06


Cellular Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cellular Communications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,642,000
6,128,000
Net loss
b3,505,000
5,033,000
b-After an aggregate gain of $1,657,000 on the sales of a partnership interest in California and on the company's shares of American Cellular Network Corp., and after an extraordinary loss of $807,000 related to the extinguishment of notes.


Orion Pictures reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orion Pictures (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
146,665,000
125,940,000
Net inc
3,773,000
8,340,000
Share earns
.21
.43
Shares outst
17,774,000
22,428,000
Yr rev
426,948,000
327,638,000
Net inc
12,159,000
9,833,000
Share earns
.68
.44
Shares outst
20,126,000
13,167,000


THE PREAKNESS
LEAD: Tomorrow at Pimlico Race Course. 3-year-olds.
Distance: 1 3/16 miles.
Purse: $536,200.
P.P./Horse: 6 Brian's Time  Jockey: Cordero  Speed Figures: 70 ... 68 ...65  Comment: Blinkers may help fastest Derby finisher.
Morning Line: 12-1  P.P./Horse: 4 Forty Niner  Jockey: Day  Speed Figures: 73 ...


Sports People; Johnson-Lewis Races
LEAD: Ben Johnson of Canada and Carl Lewis of the United States, the premier sprinters in international competition, are scheduled to meet twice this summer in 100-meter races: at Paris on June 27 and at Zurich on Aug. 17.
Primo Nebiolo, the president of the International Amateur Athletic Federation, the world governing body of track and field, said yesterday in Rome that the elite sprinters may also meet in a 200-meter race in the Italian seaside resort of


Analog Devices Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analog Devices Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
109,608,000
93,700,000
Net inc
9,513,000
4,721,000
Share earns
.20
.10
6mo sales
210,815,000
174,667,000
Net inc
15,875,000
7,504,000
Share earns
.33
.16


Famiglia Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Famiglia Brands
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
555,180
515,444
Net loss
576,417
355,404
Yr sales
2,284,553
1,373,020
Net loss
1,676,009
1,246,847


Elder Eases His Way Back Into Golf
LEAD: He plays less and has devoted practically no time to practice since suffering a heart attack three days before Thanksgiving, but the quality of Lee Elder's golf game is beginning to reach high standards again.


Senators Seeking to Overhaul War Powers Resolution
LEAD: The Senate majority leader and senior members of key Senate committees introduced legislation today to overhaul the War Powers Resolution, a 1973 law originally intended to give Congress a greater policy voice when American troops are introduced into hostile situations short of full-scale war.


Sasson Jeans Settlement
LEAD: Federal Bankruptcy Judge Burton Lifland yesterday approved a 100 percent repayment plan for creditors of Sasson Jeans Inc., despite the objections of Paul Guez, the company's founder.


Terex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Terex Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
68,046,000
43,135,000
Net inc
2,526,000
661,000
Share earns
.35
.12
Year-ago first quarter is restated to reflect adoption of FAS 96.
The company said improved results reflect the acquisition of Terex Equipment Ltd.


Fei Yi-ming, Hong Kong Publisher, 80
LEAD: Fei Yi-ming, a Hong Kong publisher who was one of China's top advisers in this British colony, died of a stroke Wednesday, his newspaper reported today.
He was 80 years old.


Satellite Information reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Satellite Information
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
491,558
555,277
Net inc
1,989
b79,118
9mo rev
1,408,488
1,489,278
Net inc
168,031
b240,738
Share earns
.06
-
b-Net loss


Fiscal Squeeze Renews Debate on Arms Burden
LEAD: By almost every measure, the United States carries a greater military and financial share of the burden for the common defense than does any ally or combination of the nation's allies in Europe and Asia.


Intermark Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermark Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
163,888,000
137,707,000
Net inc
12,637,000
2,262,000
Share earns
1.64
.27
Yr rev
600,445,000
512,971,000
Net inc
b6,417,000
c3,319,000
Share earns
.81
.38


About Real Estate; Rentals in Princeton Area Get Country Club Setting
LEAD: Traveling through East Windsor, N.J., a visitor might be forgiven for assuming that the attached homes just completed along One Mile Road are the usual suburban-style condominium developments that offer residents a country club setting with a plethora of recreational goodies.


Guy Lumia, 51, Violinist
LEAD: Guy Lumia, a violinist and one of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra's two concertmasters, died of liver failure due to diabetes Wednesday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 51 years old, and lived in Manhattan.


12-Chef Farewell Meal for Claiborne
LEAD: Twelve of the country's leading chefs prepared a dinner at the Four Seasons restaurant in Manhattan on Tuesday night to honor Craig Claiborne, who recently announced his retirement as food editor of The New York Times.
The dinner - organized by Paul Kovi and Tom Margittai, owners of the Four Seasons, and Pierre Franey, a columnist for The Times and Mr.


17 of Suffolk's Legislators Denounce a Shoreham Deal
LEAD: All but one of Suffolk County's 18 legislators today denounced as an ''economic bailout'' the negotiated settlement being discussed by the Long Island Lighting Company and the State of New York that would result in a shutdown of the Shoreham nuclear power plant.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; TV Ads Up 12.6%
LEAD: The Television Bureau of Advertising reported that commercial television advertising in the first quarter of this year rose 12.6 percent, to $5.74 billion, from $5.1 billion in the period last year.
Network television advertising, which reflected expenditures of the Winter Olympics, totaled $2.46 billion in the first quarter, up 17.3 percent from $2.09 billion during the period in 1987.


In Taiwan, the Towering Chiang Image Is Losing Its Luster
LEAD: Even in death, Chiang Kai-shek still towers over this nation.
A vast marble memorial to the former President stands in the heart of Taipei.
At the center, poised high up a flight of stone steps, his robed figure smiles down beneficently.


At The Bar
LEAD: Thirty years ago Bruce Bromley, the legendary litigator of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, regaled some Federal judges with tales from his early days in practice.
He recounted how he would exhaust the opposition by dragging out even the simplest cases ''almost to infinity,'' and how what was good for the client was also good for Cravath.


Reviews/Film; Manic Film Noir Thriller as Midnight Cult Film
LEAD: Billed as ''a film noir in living color,'' ''Kiss Daddy Good Night'' offers the expected seamy, noirish life that inevitably leads to murder.
But its unexpected heroine is a more threatening version of Susan Seidelman's harmlessly crooked downtown women.
Laura's life of petty crime owes something to ''Smithereens'' and ''Desperately Seeking Susan,'' though she has an unusually intriguing modus operandi.


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed some distribution of The New York Times.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


Commonwealth Edison Co reports earnings for 12mo April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Edison Co (NYSE)
12mo April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,596,894,000
5,403,604,000
Net inc
988,396,000
1,032,900,000
Share earns
4.22
4.56


MCO-Maxxam Tie
LEAD: Charles E. Hurwitz, the Houston investor, completed the consolidation of two companies that he controls by merging MCO Holdings Inc. and Maxxam Group Inc.
The combination had been delayed because of shareholder litigation over the proposed terms.
Under the revised terms, MCO, a Los Angeles-based real estate and energy company, agreed to increase by $1 a share the cash that shareholders will receive.


Oxoco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oxoco Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,269,747
3,274,678
Net inc
38,391
88,557
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
6,954,061
10,122,464


Drug Use Tied to Hepatitis A
LEAD: Type A hepatitis, a liver disease usually linked to poor hygiene, is showing up increasingly among drug abusers, Federal researchers report.


Audiotronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Audiotronics Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,396,000
1,429,000
Net loss
339,000
b36,000
Share earns
-
.03
9mo sales
4,015,000
4,388,000
Net loss
788,000
b44,000
Share earns
-
.04
b


Dewey Electronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dewey Electronics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,100,000
2,900,000
Net loss
42,000
bc74,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
7,800,000
7,600,000
Net inc
5,000
c95,000
Share earns
-
.07


Ormand Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ormand Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,449,000
2,807,000
Net inc
325,000
278,000
Share earns
.18
.17


Japan-U.S. Trade Talks Lag
LEAD: Japan and the United States remain very far apart in negotiations on the beef and citrus issue, the United States trade negotiator, Michael Smith, said today.
Mr.
Smith, the deputy United states trade representative, held informal talks with Japanese Agriculture Ministry officials on Thursday that failed to produce results.


Security Tightened in Aruba As Drug Fugitive Is Arrested
LEAD: Security on the Dutch Caribbean island of Aruba has been tightened to prevent the escape of a Colombian wanted by the United States for his role in a major cocaine ring, an Aruban official in the Netherlands said today.


Crown Brands Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Brands Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,325,000
14,587,000
Net inc
477,000
590,000
Share earns
.16
.24
Shares outst
3,053,297
2,455,556


Analysis &amp; Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analysis &amp; Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,350,000
19,346,000
Net inc
707,000
552,000
Share earns
.33
.27
Yr rev
79,297,000
69,929,000
Net inc
2,837,000
1,897,000
Share earns
1.33
.92


Fed Decided in March To Push Rates Higher
LEAD: Top policy makers at the Federal Reserve, worried about growing inflationary pressures, decided in late March to push interest rates slightly higher, according to a record of the discussions released today.


To House the Poor, First Help Basic Housing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Honoring America's Mariners
LEAD: Vice Adm.
D.
C.
Thompson of the Coast Guard, left, speaking yesterday at Maritime Day celebration in Battery Park.
The United States Merchant Marine Academy marching band, above, joined in the festivities honoring those serving in the Merchant Marine or on Navy Sealift vessels. (NYT/Don Hogan Charles)


Brown, Robert C &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brown, Robert C &amp; Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,882,167
4,322,637
Net loss
b278,775
c377,482
Share earns
-
.14
b-After a gain of $190,292 from the early retirement of debt.
c-Net income and includes a gain of $59,147.


Charles Butler, 71, Cartoon Voice
LEAD: Charles Dawson Butler, the voice of Yogi Bear, Huckleberry Hound, Quick Draw McGraw and dozens of other cartoon characters, died Wednesday of a heart attack at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.
He was 71 years old.


Coast Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coast Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
193,000
b2,621,000
Share earns
.05
.65
b-Includes a tax credit of $1,000,000.
The company attributed the decline in net income to a reserve provision of about $500,000 recorded as a charge to 1988 first quarter earnings, a change in accounting method resulting in an earnings reduction of about $600,000 and a reduction in the accretion of loan discounts.


Review/Film; Directors' Daydreams Become the Stuff of Opera
LEAD: Giuseppe Verdi never cried out ''I want my MTV,'' but he's gotten it anyhow.
So have Wagner, Puccini and the other composers whose work has been given the rock-video treatment by 10 opera-loving film directors in ''Aria,'' the composite film that opened yesterday at the Regency.
The best of ''Aria'' isn't any more than cheerful kitsch, and a lot of it is junk.


A Curious Retreat on School Desegregation
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.13
7.04
6.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.27
6.14
5.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.60
6.54
6.13
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.01
8.96
8.62
30-YR.


Colombia's Cocaine Lords: Conviction in U.S. Poses Little Threat to Power
LEAD: The dominant Colombian groups that control the world's cocaine trade, often called the Medellin cartel, are unlikely to be deterred by the conviction of one of the cartel's founders, experts on drug trafficking say.


Poland Cuts Sentences for Solidarity Figures
LEAD: Three Solidarity figures jailed for labor unrest this month won reduced sentences today in appeals courts, apparently as part of a Government promise to follow a nonrepressive policy.


Reagan Is Interviewed For Soviet Television
LEAD: President Reagan sat down with two television correspondents from Moscow today for a 30-minute interview that will be broadcast in the Soviet Union on May 27, two days before he begins summit talks with Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Microsemi Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microsemi Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Sales
20,793,000
10,691,000
Net inc
b166,000
1,372,000
Share earns
.02
.15
6mo sales
35,727,000
20,572,000
Net inc
b1,035,000
2,640,000
Share earns
.12
.29


Bridge; The opening leader's partner may do well by signaling 'count.'
LEAD: Experts have varied opinions about the best signaling procedure for the partner of the opening leader.


Corrections
LEAD: A correction in this space yesterday about an article last Tuesday misstated the date on which Gov.


Dukakis Moves In on G.O.P.'s Issues
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis today staked a Democratic claim on issues involving crime, drugs and the family while pressing his assault on the Reagan Administration for its dealings with Panama's ruler.


Transcisco Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transcisco Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,278,000
8,270,000
Net inc
b5,538,000
c599,000
Share earns
1.24
.13
b-Included income of $489,000 from discontinued operations and a gain of $4,938,000 on disposal of business segment.


Boston Airport Urged to Stall A Plan to Raise Landing Fees
LEAD: The Department of Transportation ordered an inquiry Friday into plans to double and triple landing fees for smaller airplanes at Logan International Airport in Boston.


Seabrook Utility Wins Extension
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge granted the Public Service Company of New Hampshire at least four extra months to come up with a reorganization plan, and he may grant another two months after that.
After a seven-hour hearing on Thursday, Judge James Yacos said the utility was entitled at least to a four-month extension because ''the first 120 days have been used for organization in a rather unique case.


Joseph Smolens, 77, Immunology Professor
LEAD: Joseph Smolens, professor emeritus of immunology and microbiology at Temple University Medical School, died of liver cancer Thursday at his home in Wynnewood, Pa.
He was 77 years old.


Hungarian Party Opens Talks
LEAD: The national conference of the Communist Party, called to renew the party's leadership and policies, opened today without any indications of the internal contest that the session is intended to resolve.


Dollar Ends Little Changed In Light, Aimless Trading
LEAD: The dollar meandered with little change in light trading yesterday as the financial markets showed scant reaction to a report of higher consumer prices in the United States.


DEMOCRATS DIFFER ON MILITARY FUNDS
LEAD: A group of prominent Democratic politicians urged their party's platform writers today to emphasize a strong defense, even if it meant more military spending.
But they were challenged by liberals who said that grassroots Democrats wanted to cut the Pentagon's budget, not increase it, The debate, which took place at a forum sponsored by the Democratic Party platform committee, turned on a concern among conservative Democrats that the party and its Presidential nominee might be labeled ''soft on defense'' by the Republicans in the general election campaign,


Kansas Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
117,774,000
113,335,000
Net inc
16,130,000
19,123,000
Share earns
.41
.45


Court Halts Distribution Of Hubbard Biography
LEAD: A Federal judge has issued a temporary restraining order prohibiting Henry Holt &amp; Company from distributing additional copies of a biography highly critical of L. Ron Hubbard, the founder of the Church of Scientology.


More Mortgage Data Required
LEAD: Savings institutions will be required beginning Oct. 1 to offer prospective borrowers a clear and concise description of their adjustable-rate mortgage programs, the Government said today.
The Federal Home Loan


Review/Film; Mariel Hemingway in Role Of a Suicide Club's Client
LEAD: A company that calls itself Suicide Productions Inc. really seems to be asking for it. ''The Suicide Club'' won't really prove them wrong, but this Mariel Hemingway vehicle is not the truly terrible film you might expect.
It appeared without advance press screenings after a couple of delayed opening dates.


Activision Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Activision Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
13,105,000
4,649,000
Net inc
b874,000
c7,914,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr sales
45,261,000
26,621,000
Net inc
b3,621,000
c14,634,000
Share earns
.10
-


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, MAY 21, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Greater Washington Investrs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greater Washington Investrs Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
567,863
626,795
Share earns
.14
.15


Settlement Reached on 'Missing' Lawsuit
LEAD: A settlement has been reached in an unusual lawsuit that was filed two years ago by the author of ''Missing'' - the story of an American who disappears during a coup in Chile -against the book's hardcover and paperback publishers.


Towle Manufacturing Company reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Towle Manufacturing Company
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,719,000
15,407,000
Net loss
2,295,000
3,417,000
9mo sales
53,058,000
66,011,000
Net loss
3,025,000
13,359,000
The 1988 and 1987 results are pro forma and assume that the business combination of Towle and Airport Road Corp.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allied-Signal Inc., Morristown, N.J., an aerospace and automotive technology company, said its Garrett Turbocharger division had received a $250 million contract from Navistar International Corp.'s Transportation Corp. unit in Chicago.


IN FURS FOR FALL, A SHOCK OF PINK OR BLUE
LEAD: The basic coat for fall is 48 to 52 inches long, stops just above the ankles, swings easily from broad shoulders and is made of dark mink skins, most furriers agree.
Shorter coats, 38 to 48 inches long, are destined for the woman who already owns a fur coat, is not too tall, feels overwhelmed by the longer styles, or is fashionably addicted to short skirts.


Jennifer George, a Designer, Is Wed to Marc Cohn
LEAD: Jennifer George and Marc Craig Cohn were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
George W. George in Stamford, Conn.
The bridegroom is a son of the late Sarane Cohn and the late Harry Cohn of Shaker Heights, Ohio, and the stepson of Ruth H. Cohn of Cleveland.
Rabbi Richard J.


International Microcomputer Software Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Microcomputer Software Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,253,303
1,014,103
Net loss
256,390
85,242
9mo rev
3,339,635
3,106,910
Net loss
952,303
225,002


Long Shots Out Front at Cannes
LEAD: With only three days left in the 41st Cannes Film Festival, two extremely dark horses have emerged as leading contenders for the Palme d'Or, which will be awarded to the best film here Monday night.


Easley Plans to Retire
LEAD: Kenny Easley, a five-time All-Pro safety for the Seattle Seahawks, said at a fund-raising dinner Thursday night that he planned to announce his retirement from professional football in two months.
Easley was diagnosed as having a serious kidney condition when he failed a physical examination for a trade to the Phoenix


For Canada's Art, a Home of Its Own
LEAD: As if Canadians could never quite persuade themselves that their art was worthy of a building of its own, governments here procrastinated for more than a century before heeding the urgings of the National Gallery of Canada for a permanent home.
Having started in a walk-up over a fishing exhibit in the 1880's, the gallery spent half a century sharing space with another museum before moving to a converted office building in 1959.


Gymnast to Head Home
LEAD: A little more than two weeks after she suffered what may be permanent paralysis of her arms and legs during an accidental fall while warming up for a vault competition in Tokyo, 15-year-old Julissa Gomez will begin her return home to Blue Springs, Mo., today in a respirator.
Her parents, Ramiro and Otilia Gomez, who arrived in Tokyo two days after the accident, will accompany her, as will two doctors from the United States who made the flight arrangements after consultation with Japanese doctors.(


Gleason's Revives Era Of Small Fight Arenas
LEAD: The small fight club that used to be an essential part of the boxing scene is by now mostly a historic remembrance.


Longtime Chief to Quit Research Foundation
LEAD: M. J. Rossant, director of the Twentieth Century Fund for 20 years, will leave the foundation at the end of the year.
He informed the board last week that he planned to pursue writing.


Blessings Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Blessings Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to April 23
1988
1987
Sales
26,924,600
20,737,100
Net inc
1,907,400
1,555,200
Share earns
.59
.48


Policy Shift By Brazil
LEAD: The Brazilian Government has announced a new industrial policy intended to reduce the state's participation in the economy and stimulate technological development.


Proffitt's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Proffitt's Inc
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
11,355,033
9,440,203
Net inc
413,973
394,535
Share earns
.11
.14
Shares outst
3,794,000
2,747,400


British Inflation Rate Up
LEAD: Britain's annual inflation rate rose to a faster-than-expected 3.9 percent in April from 3.5 percent in the previous month, the Government said today.
Consumer prices rose 1.6 percent in April from March, the Department of Employment said.
The index rose four-tenths of a percent in March from the previous month.


N.A.A.C.P. Fund Aid
LEAD: Arden Shelton, a soprano, will sing songs by Schubert, Strauss, Faure, John Carter and Robert De Gaetano, at 5:30 P.M. today at Weill Recital Hall, as a benefit for the N.A.A.C.P.
Legal Defense and Educational Fund Inc.
Tickets are $25; $75 tickets include a reception after the concert.
Reservations: 219-1900.


Slain Police Officers Remembered
LEAD: Officer Thomas Bellini playing taps yesterday at a Peace Officers Memorial Day service at Police Headquarters in Manhattan.
At left, Mayor Koch kissed Linda Scheu, the widow of Officer George Scheu, who was fataly wounded near his home in Queens last year. (NYT/Jack Manning)


200 Hurt in Protests on Taiwan
LEAD: More than 200 people were injured and scores were arrested on Friday night during battles between police officers and rock-throwing demonstrators, the police said today.


Emerson Radio Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emerson Radio Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
131,152,000
192,185,000
Net loss
b5,225,000
c1,625,000
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
36,369,000
39,042,000
Yr sales
728,837,000
807,924,000
Net loss
b16,690,000
c26,606,000
Share earns
-
.72


MSI Data Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MSI Data Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Revenue
23,793,000
21,043,000
Net inc
1,498,000
659,000
Share earns
.27
.17
Shares outst
5,609,574
3,967,995
Yr rev
90,215,000
70,733,000
Net inc
4,932,000
1,339,000
Share earns
.99
.34
Shares outst
5,003,010
3,922,812


DEAL FOR NORIEGA TO LEAVE PANAMA REPORTED GAINING
LEAD: The Administration's chief negotiator in talks with Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega flew home for consultations tonight amid reports that progress had been made toward a deal that would remove the military leader from power in Panama.


Israel Chides State Dept. Aide For Removing Antique Coins
LEAD: The Israeli Government said today that it had written a stern letter to Abraham D. Sofaer, the State Department's legal adviser, warning him not to take archeological artifacts out of Israel without a permit.


Andros Analyzerz Inc reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andros Analyzerz Inc (OTC)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Sales
4,315,900
4,583,100
Net inc
558,700
426,200
Share earns
.17
.17
Shares outst
3,363,300
2,578,100
9mo sales
12,331,900
10,916,900
Net inc
1,449,200
964,100
Share earns
.46
.38
Shares outst
3,151,600
2,526,000


Fan Teasers
LEAD: Some baseball fans in the Midwest yesterday were teased by a fleeting suggestion they become part owners of the Chicago White Sox.
Others were encouraged to buy and preserve the 76-year-old Tiger Stadium in Detroit.


Brady, W H Co ()) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brady, W H Co ())
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
39,697,000
32,914,000
Net inc
2,984,000
1,805,000
Share earns
.38
.23
9mo sales
112,867,000
93,772,000
Net inc
8,218,000
6,454,000
Share earns
1.09
.86


Driver Arraigned as Crash Victims Are Buried
LEAD: Larry W. Mahoney being escorted from court in Carrollton, Ky., after pleading not guilty to 27 counts of capital murder in the deaths of members of a church group in a fiery bus crash last week.
Funeral services for 14 of the victims were held yesterday.
The police say the victims, most of them schoolchildren, were killed when Mr.


Famous Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to April 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Famous Restaurants (OTC)
Qtr to April 24
1988
1987
Revenue
20,380,000
22,401,000
Net inc
209,000
776,000
Share earns
.03
.13


National Imaging Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Imaging Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,182,496
1,076,581
Net loss
394,999
374,222
9mo rev
3,436,539
3,191,511
Net loss
2,736,564
835,831
The latest 9 months included a loss of $1,042,202 on arbitration settlement.


Farmers Head Sees Victory
LEAD: Leo E. Denlea Jr., chairman of Farmers Group Inc., told shareholders today that he expects to defeat a proxy contest that urged holding acquisition talks with the hostile suitor B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C.
The British concern has made a takeover bid of $4.3 billion for the Los Angeles-based insurer.


'Junk' Phone Calls: Danger on the Line?
LEAD: When a child collapsed not long ago in his home in Amsterdam, N.Y., his mother grabbed the telephone to call an ambulance.
She could not get a dial tone.
All she heard was a recorded sales pitch that kept on playing even after she hung up and tried to dial again.


Suitor Wants to Split Media General
LEAD: The Hollywood producer Burt Sugarman, who is waging a proxy fight for three seats on the board of Media General Inc., proposed today that the company be split into two publicly held communications companies.


Kencop reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kencop
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,775,990
3,567,538
Net inc
253,232
b869,607
Share earns
.06
-
9mo rev
12,487,841
9,750,652
Net loss
2,634,263
2,945,080
b-Net loss


Records Unit of Motown May Be Sold
LEAD: Motown Records, once known as the premier record company for black artists, may soon be sold, well-placed industry experts said yesterday.


Mortgage Rise by V.A.
LEAD: The Veterans Administration said today that it was raising its maximum interest rate for federally backed V.A. home mortgages by half a percentage point, to 10.5 percent.


Micro Biological Sciences Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micro Biological Sciences Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,198,000
5,334,000
Net inc
121,000
b1,007,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss  The year-ago quarter has been adjusted to reflect sale of a unit in the third quarter of 1987.


As Police Cheer, Killer of Officer Draws 50 Years
LEAD: After reading aloud from a letter from the widow of a police detective, who declared that the man convicted of killing her husband ''must never be able to attack again,'' a Brooklyn judge yesterday sentenced the 41-year-old defendant to 50 years to life in prison.


Francis J. Griffith, Educator, 79
LEAD: Dr.
Francis J. Griffith, a former assistant schools superintendent in New York City, died of heart failure Tuesday at St.
Francis Hospital in Port Washington, L.I.
He was 79 years old and lived in Port Washington.


Swank Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Swank Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
27,212,000
24,155,000
Net loss
344,000
529,000


American Land Cruisers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Land Cruisers Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,438,000
8,467,000
Net loss
1,051,000
b368,000
b-After an accounting change gain of $175,000.


Micro Display Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micro Display Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,532,787
1,760,680
Net loss
556,414
b64,067
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
6,650,630
3,919,380
Net loss
1,321,440
b254,667
Share earns
-
.04
b


John E. Bowman, 67; Led Exchange Group
LEAD: John E. Bowman, a former executive director of the Council on International Educational Exchange, died of cancer yesterday at Nyack (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 67 years old and lived in Pomona, N.Y.


WROTE ABOUT LOS ANDGELES BARRIO
LEAD: Daniel Lewis James, who startled the literary world when he was revealed to be the author of a prize-winning novel about a Mexican-American family in a Los Angeles barrio, died Wednesday at the Community Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula in Monterey, Calif.
He was 77 years old and lived in Carmel Highlands, Calif.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This market has hurt some people over the last month or two.
It's like a stampede on a worm farm.
This market stays like this, and you'll lose another 25,000 people out of the brokerage business.'' - Michael C. Aronstein, a money manager, on the sluggish market.  [ 37:5. ]


Zinc Price Up in Europe
LEAD: The price of zinc, a metal used mainly in galvanizing steel, hit a three-year high on the London Metal Exchange today as big European producers raised their official prices, citing increased demand.
French, Belgian and West German producers set their base prices at $1,100 a metric ton, up from $1,070.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 2-5, 32  A deal with Panama's leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, may be close, and it would remove him from power, officials said.
The chief U.S. negotiator flew to Washington for consultations.
Page 1  Propaganda billboards in Moscow are being removed.


Fish Tale: Mississippi To Moscow
LEAD: With a deftness born of four years on the filleting line of the Delta Pride Catfish Company plant in Indianola, Miss., Elizabeth Smith fluidly cut into a two-pound farm-bred fish.
The leftover bone dropped away and the prime pinkish-white meat went onto a conveyor belt, carried away to another part of the chilly plant to be frozen for shipping.


Incinerator Plan Fans Town Dispute
LEAD: As in so many other communities around the country, it was only a matter of time before the local landfill overflowed with the trash produced by the 17,000 residents of this old colonial port and surrounding Kent County.


Servico Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Servico Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 24
1988
1987
Revenue
38,646,000
35,852,000
Net loss
4,757,000
1,516,000
9mo rev
138,247,000
135,869,000
Net loss
3,805,000
b1,986,000
Share earns
-
.52
b-Net income


Sister of Drug Trafficker Is Killed in Firebombing
LEAD: The invalid sister of a major drug dealer was killed early yesterday morning when their mother's home in Queens was firebombed, the police said.


Clothestime Inc reports earnings for Qtr to May 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clothestime Inc (OTC)
Qtr to May 2
1988
1987
Sales
37,798,000
40,884,000
Net loss
b819,000
c2,556,000
Share earns
-
.18
b-After a $663,000 gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.
c-Net income


Your Money; How to Cut Back As Costs Increase
LEAD: If it seems a lot harder to make ends meet, that is not surprising.
Living costs for an upper-middle-income family have risen 9 percent in the last year, according to a survey of the 24,000 members of the Atlanta-based International Association for Financial Planning, the largest professional group in the financial-planning industry.


U.S. Caution On Trade Gap
LEAD: The United States trade representative, Clayton K. Yeutter, warned today that the sharp reduction in the nation's trade deficit in March was not necessarily part of a trend.


Analyzing Jung: Neither Nazi Sympathizer Nor Anti-Semite; Freud, Essentially
LEAD: To the Editor:


Military Puts Brakes on Routine Expenses
LEAD: Government accounting practices and the drive to reduce the Federal budget deficit prompted the Pentagon today to stop buying office supplies, ban overtime and limit civilian hiring for at least the next six weeks.


Ca Blockers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ca Blockers Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
33,528
57
Net loss
294,147
2,367
9mo rev
60,119
103
Net loss
495,666
4,552


Opus Computer Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Opus Computer Products
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,797,788
2,714,792
Net inc
b63,287
c246,949
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
6,999,760
5,867,067
Net inc
b140,226
c628,825
Share earns
.03
-
b-After tax credits of $25,320 for the quarter and $56,120 for the 6 months.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Briefing column of the Washington Talk page on May 2 misstated the role of George F. Kennan in establishing the American Committee on U.S.-Soviet Relations in 1974.
The idea for the committee came from Dr.
Fred Warner Neal, emeritus professor of the Claremont Graduate School.
The first co-chairmen were Mr.


Angels' Bats End Clemens's Streak
LEAD: Facing the Boston ace Roger Clemens, Butch Wynegar was happy when the California Angels changed the bunt sign to hit and run.


De Tomaso Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* De Tomaso Industries Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
55,409,609
55,452,769
Net loss
4,701,141
3,237,785
All amounts translated into dollar equivalents from Italian lira at the exchange rate prevailing on March 31.


2 Officers Charged With Beating Homeless Man
LEAD: Two New York City police officers were indicted yesterday on charges that they beat a homeless man after an argument outside Madison Square Garden on Feb. 20.


Allied Research Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Research Associates (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,265,880
1,042,486
Net inc
548,520
b685,145
Share earns
.14
-
b-Net loss


Comcast Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comcast Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
98,238,000
70,871,000
Net loss
1,796,000
4,973,000
The company said the latest quarter results include the effect of consolidating Comcast Cablevision of Maryland Limited Partnership, acquired Feb.


Apple Owners' Computer Net
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. and Quantum Computer Services Inc. are starting an information network for owners of Apple II and Macintosh computers.


PEC Israel Economic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PEC Israel Economic Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,420,844
4,845,833
Net inc
2,812,118
2,008,766
Share earns
.38
.27


G.M. Push on Car Sales
LEAD: The chairman of the General Motors Corporation said today that the company would not renounce hopes of regaining its share of the auto market, which has fallen in recent years.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Maleeva Upset in Geneva Open: Unseeded Isabelle Demongeot of France upset top-seeded Manuela Maleeva of Bulgaria, 7-5, 6-4, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the $100,000 Geneva Open. ''I've never beaten a top 10 player in my life,'' said Demongeot, a 21-year-old from St.
Tropez, after defeating Maleeva, the world's sixth-ranked player.


Tigera Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tigera Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
238,000
80,000
Net inc
65,000
b1,456,000
b-Net loss and includes a loss of $1,501,000 from discontinued operations.


Cablevision Near Wometco Deal
LEAD: Cablevision Industries, a cable television operator in Liberty, N.Y., is close to acquiring some of the assets of the Wometco Cable Company, from the Robert M. Bass Group of Texas, according to industy executives.
The stock deal is valued at about $750 million, according to industry sources.


Brougher Insurance Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brougher Insurance Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b17,423
c123,555
Share earns
-
.04
b-After a realized investment gain of $477,822.
c-Net income and includes a realized investment gain of $8,215.


Mets Continue to Show Their Might by Defeating Dodgers
LEAD: Some of the mystery of Sid Fernandez was shed tonight when he pitched the Mets into the seventh inning with a three-run lead over the Los Angeles Dodgers in his longest performance of the season.


Total Research Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total Research Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,037,848
1,495,655
Net inc
56,280
77,837
Share earns
.01
.02
Shares outst
7,735,000
5,051,666
9mo rev
5,290,045
4,251,841
Net inc
251,251
280,817
Share earns
.03
.04
Shares outst
7,735,000
4,922,956


National Healthcare Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Healthcare Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,139,922
927,830
Net inc
b25,199
b21,359
Share earns
.01
.01
b-Includes a tax credit of $3,763 and $3,550 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Xebec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xebec Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1988
1987
Sales
7,870,000
22,600,000
Net loss
2,851,000
2,101,000
6mo sales
15,511,000
50,184,000
Net loss
3,919,000
3,067,000


Robbery Suspect Released
LEAD: Filiberto Ojeda Rios was released on $1 million bail today, ending a record 32 months of pretrial detention on charges he helped mastermind a $7 million robbery of a Wells Fargo depot in West Hartford in September 1983 to finance a violent separatist movement in Puerto Rico.
While awaiting trial with 15 other defendants, Mr.


Eastern Environmental Servces reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Environmental Servces
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,252,757
2,331,520
Net inc
108,526
312,167
Share earns
.03
.09
Shares outst
4,253,511
3,400,000
9mo rev
8,744,761
6,423,816
Net inc
1,062,673
843,506
Share earns
.25
.25
Shares outst
4,336,192
3,400,000


National Gas &amp; Oil Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Gas &amp; Oil Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,248,171
9,761,973
Net inc
2,020,862
1,430,395
Share earns
.67
.48
Share earnings for the year-ago quarter are restated for a 7-percent stock dividend in December 1987.


Paul M. Kaufmann, Investment Banker, 85
LEAD: Paul M. Kaufmann, an investment banker with L. F. Rothschild &amp; Company, died of heart failure Thursday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 85 years old and lived in Mamaroneck, N.Y.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD:  Questions appear on page 16.


Vader Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vader Group (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,259,481
10,430,276
Net loss
342,534
b603,473
Share earns
-
.22
6mo rev
16,859,924
19,315,916
Net loss
421,743
b1,009,636
Share earns
-
.36


RB Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RB Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
25,561,000
26,039,000
Net loss
2,779,000
b590,000
Share earns
-
.17
9mo rev
74,812,000
80,864,000
Net loss
570,000
b3,561,000
Share earns
-
1.05


A Janacek Cantata
LEAD: The Collegiate Chorale and orchestra will perform Janacek's cantata ''Amarus'' and Verdi's Four Sacred Pieces at 8 o'clock tonight at Carnegie Hall.
Soloists are Curtis Rayam, tenor, and Karen Williams, soprano; Robert Bass conducts.
Tickets are $27, $22, $18 and $13.
Carnegie Charge: 247-7800.


PENTAGON MOVES TOWARD SLOWING ANTI-MISSILE PLAN
LEAD: The Pentagon's program to defend the nation against nuclear missile attack is heading toward fundamental changes that would reduce spending and bring a more gradual move toward putting anti-missile weapons in space, according to senior officials.


About New York; Crown and Brim: A Serious Search For a Chapeau
LEAD: Say a man wanted to buy a hat.
Except for a little humid spell yesterday afternoon, it feels as though it has been raining in this town since about 1947, and the man had had four umbrella wrecks in three days, and though he had grown accustomed to being gouged in the pocketbook he felt he should not be made to put up with a sharp stick in the eye.


Bobbie Brooks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bobbie Brooks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
762,000
842,000
Net loss
417,000
510,000


Political Marketing; Independent Groups Join TV Chorus
LEAD: While the Presidential candidates pitch their claims to the White House on television this fall, groups outside their campaigns will spend millions of dollars to add their voices to the electronic chorus in the hope of influencing the election, or at least the political debate.


Properties of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Properties of America
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
356,185
187,207
Share earns
.12
.10
9mo net inc
b1,514,052
680,709
Share earns
.64
.36
b-Includes an accounting change gain of $250,000.


American National Petroleum Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American National Petroleum Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,411,000
1,603,000
Net inc
85,000
112,000
Share earns
.02
.02


Search for Chairman
LEAD: When Jose Torres officially resigned yesterday after more than three and a half years as chairman of the New York State Athletic Commission, speculation began as to who Governor Cuomo would appoint as his successor.
All a spokesman for the Governor, Francis Sheehan, would say was: ''We're at work to find a replacement.


Marion G. Romney, 90, President Of the Mormon Council of Twelve
LEAD: Marion G. Romney, a high official of the Mormon Church, died yesterday at his home in Salt Lake City.
He was 90 years old.
Church officials said his death resulted from ''causes incident to age.''


Betty McD. Leslie-Melville Is Married
LEAD: Betty McDonnell Leslie-Melville of New York and Nairobi, Kenya, and Vice Adm.
George Peabody Steele, U.S.N., retired, of Philadelphia were married yesterday at the United States Naval Academy Chapel in Annapolis, Md.
Lieut.
James P. Morgan performed the Episcopal ceremony.


John Hancock Income Securiies Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* John Hancock Income Securiies Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,361,594
3,432,402
Share earns
.36
.37
Net income represents net investment income.
The net asset value at March 31 was $145,712,213 for the latest period, compared with $155,338,992 for year-ago period.


JACKSON NARROWS FUND-RAISING GAP
LEAD: Despite defeats at the polls, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson kept pace financially with Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's money operation in April, according to reports that the Presidential campaigns that were made available today.


Waterloo Music Festival
LEAD: A chamber music concert featuring works by Bach, Brahms, Poulenc and Schubert is to open the 13th Waterloo Festival and School of Music on June 17 at 8:30 P.M. at Waterloo Village, Stanhope, N.J.
The Waterloo Festival is to run through July 25 and feature appearances by Vladimir Feltsman, Rudolf Firkusny, Andre Watts, Nathaniel Rosen and Dmitri Sitkovetsky; the conductors are to include Gerard Schwarz, James DePriest and Maxim Shostakovich.


45 Killed and 100 Wounded in Attacks in Punjab
LEAD: At least 45 people were killed and more than 100 were wounded on Friday in attacks blamed on Sikh extremists in Punjab and the neighboring state of Himachal Pradesh as the situation across northern India worsened.


Intelligent Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intelligent Electronics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
27,775,000
19,222,000
Net inc
1,140,000
472,000
Share earns
.27
.17
Shares outst
4,250,000
2,143,000
6mo rev
47,885,000
35,509,000
Net inc
1,862,000
837,000
Share earns
.44
.30
Shares outst
4,249,000
2,143,000


American First Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American First Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
761,585
13,055,926
Net loss
b164,410
c1,584,766
b-After net from discontinued operations of $322,979.
c-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $546,495.


Sports of The Times; Her Master's Voice
LEAD: Two days before Gary Stevens rode Winning Colors in the Kentucky Derby, the 25-year-old jockey stopped by the 3-year-old filly's stall on the Churchill Downs backstretch.


Appeals Judge Temporarily Halts Closed Sessions on Howard Beach
LEAD: The judge in the Howard Beach racial-attack case was directed by an appeals court justice yesterday not to hold further closed proceedings until the appeals court rules on their legality.


Why They Cross The Road
LEAD: I came out of the restaurant picking my teeth reflectively and digesting a heavy breakfast, which probably accounted for the reflective mood since you can't eat a heavy breakfast anymore without thinking about the undertaker, such is the power of the health lobby.


Boston Barely Steers Clear of Exit
LEAD: According to the schedule, one game remains to determine whether the Boston Celtics or the Atlanta Hawks will advance to the Eastern Conference final of the National Basketball Association playoffs.


George Washington Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* George Washington Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b270,825
c50,048
Share earns
-
.02
b-After capital gains of $22,484.
c-Net income and includes capital gains of $43,220.


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed distribution of The New York Times in some areas.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


Eastco Industrial Safety reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastco Industrial Safety
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,603,636
5,019,888
Net inc
100,440
11,189
Share earns
.04
.01
9mo sales
25,200,529
13,559,520
Net inc
231,645
12,850
Share earns
.10
.01


Bank Building &amp; Equipment Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank Building &amp; Equipment Corp of America (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
23,897,000
18,885,000
Net inc
539,000
b430,000
Share earns
.38
-
6mo rev
45,668,000
36,469,000
Net inc
804,000
b926,000
Share earns
.57
-


Applied DNA Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied DNA Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
302,395
176,750
Net loss
302,948
b49,908
b-Net income


Mischer Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mischer Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,671,000
8,714,000
Net loss
3,034,000
1,914,000


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 54.


Argonaut Group
LEAD: Officials of Argonaut Group Inc. said that the company had received and rejected takeover inquiries but that the insurer was not for sale at this time.
Last year, Argonaut, based in Los Angeles, backed out of a $620 million leveraged buyout with Gibbons, Green van Amerongen after failing to come to terms over an unsolicited offer from Clarendon Group Ltd., a Bermuda insurer.


Flanigan's Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flanigan's Enterprises Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
8,346,000
7,882,000
Net inc
b280,000
c585,000
Share earns
.30
.63
6mo sales
17,221,000
16,090,000
Net inc
b696,000
c1,187,000
Share earns
.75
1.27


INSIDE
LEAD:  Boston Loses, Boston Wins


AOI Coal Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AOI Coal Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,273,000
13,773,000
Net inc
26,000
580,000
Share earns
-
.04


Neiman-Marcus reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neiman-Marcus (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
276,467,000
259,590,000
Net inc
4,293,000
10,199,000
9mo rev
949,420,000
886,868,000
Net inc
b18,455,000
38,840,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-After a charge of $14,255,000 from an accounting change.


Analyzing Jung: Neither Nazi Sympathizer Nor Anti-Semite
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Drug Lords From Colombia
LEAD: The dominant groups in Colombia that control the world's cocaine trade are unlikely to be deterred by the conviction this week of a leading trafficker, experts on the drug trade say.


Powell Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Powell Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
20,725,000
18,886,000
Net inc
397,000
b867,000
Share earns
.04
.09
6mo rev
34,950,000
35,271,000
Net inc
44,000
b868,000
Share earns
-
.09


Gantos Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gantos Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
35,521,000
29,657,000
Net inc
209,000
b1,970,000
Share earns
.05
.37
Shares outst
4,422,000
5,264,000
b-Includes a gain of $1,224,000 from an accounting change.


Noble Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noble Insurance
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b199,000
b1,543,000
Share earns
.04
.31
b-Includes capital gains of $540,000 and $251,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


CONSUMER PRICE INDEX
LEAD:
Feb.
March
April
Index
Pct.
Pct.
for
chng. from
chng. from
April '88
March '88
April '87
Revised
*2*ALL ITEMS
U.S.
117.1
0.4*
3.9
N.Y.
122.6
0.9
5.1
*2*FOOD AND BEVERAGE
U.S.
116.5*
0.6*
3.5
N.Y.
124.0
1.2
5.8
HOUSING
U.S.


Budget Help for the President-to-Be
LEAD: While George Bush and Michael Dukakis continue to duck the biggest issue likely to face the next President - the budget deficit - a new National Economic Commission has already started work that could help the winner.
Congress created the commission in hopes that the endless deficit deadlock might finally be broken by bipartisan compromise.


View of French Tennis Open Served by Information Boom
LEAD: France has been in the midst of a communications revolution for a while, and the French Open tennis tournament, which begins here Monday at Roland Garros Stadium, has steadily made its way into the new information age with the rest of French society.


Whose 'Great Books' Are They, Anyway?; Politics as Literature
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviet and South Korea
LEAD: The Soviet Union wants to open a trade office in Seoul soon after the Olympic Games, which end Oct. 2 in the South Korean capital, a Korean electronics company executive said today.
Koo Yong Su, a senior official at the Goldstar Company, told reporters that an official of the Soviet Chamber of Commerce had told him of the plan.


Stifel Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stifel Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 29
1988
1987
Revenue
16,112,000
22,743,000
Net inc
106,000
1,184,000
Share earns
.03
.31
9mo rev
52,841,000
69,682,000
Net loss
1,297,000
b4,061,000
Share earns
-
1.06


Senators a Well-to-Do Group, Data Disclose
LEAD: Senators gave the public a peek at their personal finances today, disclosing a generally well-to-do group that loves to talk for money.


Airship International Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airship International Ltd
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
725,000
770,000
Net inc
104,000
68,000
Share earns
.02
.01





Guitarist at the Seaport
LEAD: Charlie Byrd, a guitarist, is to lead a trio tonight at 8 and 10 at Jazzport, 210 Front Street, at the South Street Seaport (608-7889).
Tickets are $18.50.


Senate Rebuffs Foes of the Missile Treaty
LEAD: In a series of votes signaling the breadth of Senate support for the new missile treaty, senators today rejected by wide margins the first wave of ''killer amendments'' offered by opponents of the arms accord.


Chandler Readmitted
LEAD: After suffering his second small stroke in a week, A. B. (Happy) Chandler, the former commissioner of baseball, was readmitted to the University of Kentucky Medical Center Thursday.
Chandler, 89 years old, a former Governor of Kentucky and a member of baseball's Hall of Fame, was released from the hospital early Thursday after he had apparently recovered from a mild stroke he suffered


Books of The Times; Seedy Denizens of a Menacing Downtown World
LEAD:  Bad Behavior  By Mary Gaitskill  203 pages. Poseidon Press. $15.95.


Chevron Sells Stake in Amax
LEAD: The Chevron Corporation said it had sold all of its 15.16 million shares of Amax Inc. for $23 a share, or $349 million, in cash plus limited future appreciation rights.
Chevron said that proceeds of the sale would be used to reduce debt.


Regents Pass Rules for Schooling The Children of Homeless Families
LEAD: The Board of Regents, ending years of disputes among suburban school districts over who is responsible for educating the children of homeless families, approved regulations today that let parents choose where their children will attend school.


Peter Dean, Singer, 77
LEAD: Peter Dean, a singer and former artists' representative, died of cancer Tuesday in Anna Maria, Fla.
He was 77 years old.


Grow Ventures Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grow Ventures Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
385,000
378,000
Net loss
1,040,000
c2,538,000
9mo sales
1,257,000
712,000
Net loss
b3,288,000
c4,597,000
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $841,000.


Dean Witter Unit to Buy Levolor
LEAD: The family that owns Levolor Lorentzen Inc., a Parsippany, N.J., maker of window blinds that has been riddled by infighting, announced yesterday that it had agreed to sell the company for an undisclosed price.


Heico Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heico Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,993,000
12,359,000
Net inc
536,000
1,891,000
Share earns
.25
.86
6mo sales
18,873,000
24,443,000
Net inc
1,323,000
4,089,000
Share earns
.62
2.04


Jazz; Benny Carter Improvises, But Not the Usual Way
LEAD: The great saxophonist and composer Benny Carter opened his two-week stay at Carlos 1, 432 Avenue of the Americas, between Ninth and 10th Streets, on Tuesday night with Cole Porter's ''You'd Be So Nice to Come Home To.''


Phone Service: Avoid the Bite
LEAD: New York Telephone, like other regional telephone companies, is offering customers a way to avoid unnecessary service charges - for a price.


At the Bottom Line
LEAD: The John Cale Band featuring Chris Spedding on guitar and Strange Cave is to play a rock double bill tonight at the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street (228-6300).
Shows begin at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; tickets are $12.50.


MCO Holdings Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCO Holdings Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,987,000
16,605,000
Net inc
1,155,000
b442,000
Share earns
.18
.07
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $375,000.


House Owned by Drug Dealer's Mother is Firebombed
LEAD: Louise Coleman, foreground, the mother of Lorenzo (Fat Cat) Nichols, a convicted drug dealer, outside her gutted home in South Jamaica, Queens.
Mrs.
Coleman's invalid daughter, Mary Nichols, 50 years old, was killed in the fire. (NYT/John Sotomayor) Page 35.


Television Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Television Technology Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,729,052
1,704,577
Net inc
b69,768
c143,746
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
7,745,612
4,677,360
Net inc
b53,095
c124,116
Share earns
.01
-


India-Vietnam Oil Deal
LEAD: An Indian company and Vietnam have signed a 25-year contract to explore for and extract oil off Vietnam's southern coast, the Vietnam News Agency said today.


Cheese Museum Officially Opens. So There!
LEAD: The Museum of Cheese - which to some symbolizes much that is bad in government and to others much that is good - opened here Thursday night after more than two years of upstate-downstate bickering and the spending of $175,000 in state money.


Koch Defends Muslim's Right To Give Speech
LEAD: Mayor Koch, in the latest of a series of gestures aimed at salving his relations with blacks, yesterday defended the Rev.
Louis Farrakhan's right to speak at a kosher catering hall in Queens tonight and condemned those who would try to block the Black Muslim minister's appearance.


Coping/With Summer Driving
LEAD: If your summer calls for a lot of driving, now is the time to plan strategies for making your time in the car more pleasant.
Summer traffic can turn an easy ride into a nightmare.


Charles Shoots a Record 63
LEAD: Soft greens and fairways and ideal playing conditions brought low scores today at the opening round of the Nynex/Golf Digest Commemorative at Sleepy Hollow Country Club.


Lifetime Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lifetime Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
92,622,000
34,116,000
Net inc
958,000
b404,000
Share earns
.03
.01
b-After a gain of $552,000 from discontinued operations and a tax credit of $181,000.


Castelfidardo Journal; Poud Craft Fades to a Foreign Beat
LEAD: Nothing has been the same in this little town since the Beatles started turning young men's thoughts to electric guitars.


End Game for Nuclear Power
LEAD: With a dozen nuclear power plants in various stages of completion around the country, eyes everywhere are fastened on the political end game at Shoreham, the finished $5.3 billion plant on Long Island.


Opera; Glass and Poe Combine In Gothic Goings-On
LEAD: Philip Glass's operatic ambitions seem to be shifting slightly, from big, dreamy, imagistic works of musical theater to English-language librettos with real stories that work themselves up into real climaxes.


European Inquiry On I.B.M. Dropped
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation, confirming an important legal victory, said the European Community commission had dropped an antitrust inquiry against the computer maker.
The commission inspected I.B.M.'s computer leasing operations in the Netherlands last year in response to complaints by three Dutch leasing companies that I.B.M.


Samuel Foosaner, 81, Tax Lawyer and Writer
LEAD: Samuel J. Foosaner, a tax lawyer, writer and philanthropist, died of prostate cancer Thursday at his home in Cocoa Beach, Fla.
He was 81 years old and had formerly practiced in Newark and Millburn, N.J.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on May 12 about the growth of American law firms abroad misidentified firms involved in two takeover deals.
Squires, Sanders &amp; Dempsey advised the Bridgestone Corporation in its takeover of the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company.
Two firms, Coblence, Warner, Hamilton &amp; Smith and Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue, represented Hachette S.A.


Easy Opener for Lendl
LEAD: Barring upsets, Ivan Lendl, the defending champion, could have a fourth-round meeting with John McEnroe at the French Open, setting up a possible replay of their memorable final four years ago.


Ausimont Study On Possible Sale
LEAD: Ausimont N.V., a specialty chemical maker largely owned by Montedison S.p.A. of Italy, said it had hired the Morgan Stanley Group to study the possible sale of all or major parts of its businesses.
Ausimont's shares jumped $4.625 today, to $31.50.
The 17.2 percent gain was the day's largest on the New York Stock Exchange.


New Soviet Motto: Down With Slogans!
LEAD: In a quiet attack on urban blight and public cynicism, Moscow and other Soviet cities have begun methodically dismantling the huge political slogans that are among the best-known features of the Soviet skyline.


U.S. Officials Report Huge Medicare Fraud
LEAD: Almost 1,000 doctors in Pennsylvania and New Jersey received kickbacks as part of a Medicare fraud scheme, Federal officials say.


Metromedia Wins Control of Orion
LEAD: Ending months of speculation about a possible takeover fight for the Orion Pictures Corporation, John W. Kluge, chairman of the Metromedia Company, has reached a deal to take control of the movie and television production concern.


EDITOR WHO WROTE THAT HE HAD AIDS
LEAD: Bill Cox, a newspaper editor in Kentucky and Hawaii who wrote an editorial column that disclosed he had AIDS, died yesterday in Manhattan Beach, Calif., of complications from that disease.
He was 39 years old.


Honeybee Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Honeybee Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,390,060
7,037,173
Net loss
784,485
b215,062
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income  The company said the loss in the latest quarter included $395,000 of expenses related to the purchase of a majority ownership of Honeybee by Spiegel Inc., and to a proposed merger of Honeybee with a Spiegel unit.


Big B Inc reports earnings for Qtr to May 7
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Big B Inc (OTC)
Qtr to May 7
1988
1987
Sales
70,165,000
63,627,000
Net inc
b2,728,000
1,934,000
Share earns
.37
.25
b-Included a one-time credit of $503,000 from a tax adjustment.


Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,806,987
5,828,765
Net inc
410,735
238,785
Share earns
.16
.09


Union at Goodyear Endorses Contract in Four Early Votes
LEAD: A tentative contract between the United Rubber Workers and The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company has been approved by four of five union locals that voted on it, a union spokesman said today.


Covington Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Covington Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,406,000
20,936,000
Net loss
1,049,000
b69,000
b-Net income and includes a tax benefit of $12,000.


Donegal Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donegal Group Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,594,314
6,974,347
Net loss
b77,871
c568,864
Share earns
-
.19
b-After a realized loss of $110,258.
c-Net income and includes a realized investment gain of $304,872.


U.S. Surplus In April Off
LEAD: Last-minute income tax payments gave the Federal Government a $13.89 billion budget surplus in April, the Treasury Department said today.
But the surplus fell short of analysts' expectations and was below last year's April surplus of $38.91 billion.


American Oil &amp; Gas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Oil &amp; Gas Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
40,260,000
16,461,000
Net loss
1,699,000
1,530,000


Brawley Mother May Be Charged With Contempt
LEAD: A grand jury investigating the Tawana Brawley case has decided to seek contempt charges against the girl's mother if she carries out a threat to ignore a subpoena to testify Tuesday, an official close to the investigation said yesterday.


Polifly Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Polifly Financial
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,071,000
986,000
9mo net inc
3,158,000
3,219,000
Polifly Financial is the holding company for Polify Savings &amp; Loan Association.
Polifly Savings converted to a New Jersey-chartered stock savings and loan association effective April 7, 1988.


N-W Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* N-W Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,567,000
17,728,000
Net loss
216,000
b2,575,000
Share earns
-
.30
b-Net income and includes a gain of $4,044,000 on settlement of debt.


Music; A Trio Plays the Basics, Plus One Novelty
LEAD: The Yuval Trio, which appeared Tuesday night at the 92d Street Y, counts as an Israeli ensemble, but it has strong ties to New York.
It was founded in 1969, and consists of Jonathan Zak, a pianist who studied at the Juilliard School; Uri Pianka, another Juilliard graduate and currently concertmaster of the Israel Philharmonic, and Simca Heled, a cellist who was formerly principal cellist of the Israel Philharmonic and who now runs the Concerts Plus series at the Merkin Concert


Dutch Masterpieces Stolen
LEAD: Thieves smashed a window in the Municipal Museum early today and stole three works, by Vincent van Gogh, Paul Cezanne and Johann Jongkind.


Beirut Shiites Step Up Fight; P.L.O. Factions Clash Anew
LEAD: Clashes between rival Lebanese Shiite Moslem militias intensified in southern Beirut today and were compounded by new fighting between opposing factions of the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Greenwood Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greenwood Holdings (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
564,000
2,844,000
Net inc
122,000
b1,844,000
Share earns
.01
.32
b-After a $2,645,000 gain from the sale of an Italian subsidiary.
The company said its year-ago first quarter revenue excluding the results of the sale of the subsidiary totaled $299,000.


Platinum Soars by Over $11, Pacing Precious Metals Rise
LEAD: Reflecting concern about inflation, platinum futures prices jumped more than $11 an ounce yesterday, leading other precious metals higher.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article yesterday reported that several former New York City employees had told investigators about the alteration or destruction of some personnel records in 1986 to delete references to patronage affiliations of job applicants.
The article failed to name those former employees because The Times's unnamed sources refused to permit the identification.


FPA Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FPA Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
27,234,000
18,913,000
Net loss
b1,441,000
c605,000
9mo rev
75,989,000
61,865,000
Net loss
b4,506,000
c3,007,000
b-After net of $147,000 for the quarter and a loss of $1,506,000 for the 9 months both from discontinued operations.


National Lampoon Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Lampoon Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,187,900
1,206,000
Net loss
136,600
b483,000
b-Includes a charge of $300,000 from merger expenses.


ECI Telecom Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ECI Telecom Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,466,000
5,796,000
Net inc
496,000
44,000
Share earns
.10
.01


Del Webb Deficit
LEAD: The Del E. Webb Corporation, citing a decline in the present real estate market, announced it expects to have a loss for 1988.
The company, which had a $96.6 million deficit in 1987, previously reported a 1988 first-quarter loss of $4.1 million.


SBE Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SBE Inc
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
3,065,000
2,000,000
Net inc
b198,000
c103,000
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo sales
5,908,000
3,993,000
Net inc
b413,000
c347,000
Share earns
.02
.02
b-Included tax credits of $68,000 for the quarter and $144,000 for the 6 months.


U.S. May Confiscate Cocaine Smuggler's Property
LEAD: Jurors who on Thursday convicted the reputed leader of a Colombian drug ring decided today that the Government should confiscate from him millions of dollars in Bahamian real estate and several airplanes.


Texas Utilities Inc reports earnings for 12mo April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Utilities Inc (NYSE)
12mo April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,122,115,000
3,999,228,000
Net inc
697,845,000
647,036,000
Share earns
4.58
4.52
Shares outst
152,267,000
143,113,000


Marlton Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marlton Technologies (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,240
535,970
Net loss
231,040
b2,606,212
b-After a loss of $1,876,438 from an unconsolidated subsidiary.


Whose 'Great Books' Are They, Anyway?; The Subversive Austen
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gregory Huffman, 35, a Dancer
LEAD: Gregory Huffman, a leading dancer in the Joffrey Ballet from 1972 to 1983, died of complications resulting from AIDS yesterday at New York University Medical Center.
Mr.
Huffman, who had been ill with pneumotoxis pneumonia for the last two months, was 35 years old.
He lived in Manhattan.


Dyansen Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dyansen Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,966,000
5,185,000
Net loss
58,000
b271,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


Ashton-Tate Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashton-Tate Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
72,363,000
60,211,000
Net inc
11,064,000
9,098,000
Share earns
.43
.36
Shares outst
25,938,000
25,154,000


To House the Poor, First Help Basic Housing; Modular Noose
LEAD: To the Editor:


Oilers Turn On Their Power
LEAD: The Oilers waited just long enough for the Bruins to make this game dangerous.
Provoked by a 2-2 tie, Wayne Gretzky slid into the slot and gave Edmonton a 3-2 lead.
One empty-net goal later, the Oilers were halfway to their fourth Stanley Cup championship in five seasons.


CONSUMER INDEX, LED BY APPAREL, CLIMBS BY 0.4%
LEAD: Prices at the consumer level rose four-tenths of 1 percent in April, one-tenth less than the increase in March, the Labor Department reported today.


Military Chip Contract Awards
LEAD: The Pentagon selected four contractor teams today to develop a new type of high-speed, gallium arsenide computer chip.


Athletics Continue Their Winning Ways
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics, whose monuments are in the middle of the batting order rather than beyond the outfield wall, hit and scored in double figures last night in pounding out an 11-3 victory over the Yankees at the Stadium.


Reporter's Notebook; At Ad Agency Convention, Cheers for the Commercials
LEAD: One would expect advertising executives to be jaded, to have seen it all.
But at a major industry convention this week, they laughed, cheered and sighed like starstruck fans at the work of their peers and competitors.


The Editorial Notebook; Fashion and the Liberal Arts
LEAD: Accountants and lawyers now fill the high-rise factories in central Manhattan where garment workers once produced $18.95 knock-offs of Hattie Carnegie's ''little black dress.'' Yet the city still has a fashion industry.
To catch its beat, one need only walk a few blocks south of 34th street to the crisp concrete buildings of the Fashion Institute of


ASA International Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ASA International Ltd
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,106,000
4,728,000
Net loss
357,000
b187,000
b-Net income and share earnings are less than one cent a share.
The company said the loss is because of the decline in sales and an increase of about $200,000 in selling, general and administrative expenses, of which $120,000 were non-recurring costs.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Thursday about John J. Foley of the Suffolk County Legislature referred incorrectly to his wife.
It is not she who works for a major backer of Mr.
Foley's bill on video-display computer terminals; the backer's employee is the wife of Mr.
Foley's chief aide.


Cancer Drug Therapy Urged For All After Breast Surgery
LEAD: In a major change of a longstanding policy, the National Cancer Institute is urging that all women who have breast cancer should have chemotherapy or hormonal therapy after the initial surgery, even if there is no evidence that the cancer has spread.


Quinlan Leads L.P.G.A. By Two
LEAD: Sally Quinlan celebrated her 27th birthday on a golf course today by taking the second-round lead in the Mazda L.P.G.A.
Championship.


COMMENCEMENTS
LEAD:  The Juilliard School


Bermuda Star Line reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bermuda Star Line (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,452,000
9,064,772
Net loss
1,209,737
491,206
9mo rev
44,312,801
29,854,905
Net loss
3,036,160
b1,422,028
Share earns
-
.43
b-Net income


Best Buy Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Best Buy Co (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
106,574,000
70,756,000
Net loss
520,000
b1,617,000
Share earns
-
.20
Yr rev
439,040,000
239,496,000
Net inc
2,768,000
7,742,000
Share earns
.34
.98


Whose 'Great Books' Are They, Anyway?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prime Capital Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Capital Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,939,357
5,799,649
Net loss
536,690
b122,461
b-Net income


Top U.S. Bond Yield Rises to 9.34%
LEAD: Treasury securities dealers marked down prices of bills, notes and bonds yesterday in a largely futile effort to attract investors.
While the mood was decidedly bearish, dealers noted that sellers were almost as scarce as buyers.


Robinson Nugent reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Robinson Nugent (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,252,000
12,505,000
Net inc
b1,222,000
587,000
Share earns
.17
.09
9mo sales
38,850,000
33,526,000
Net inc
b2,505,000
c2,563,000
Share earns
.36
-


U.N. Will Urge Ethiopians to Allow Food Aid
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar will seek to persuade the Ethiopian Government to allow the return of the International Committee of the Red Cross and other famine relief agencies it expelled last month, United Nations officials say.


Dionics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dionics Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
540,500
833,000
Net loss
110,800
b80,800
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income  Share earnings results are adjusted for a 2-for-1 stock split paid last December.


Ceramics Process Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ceramics Process Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
907,000
949,000
Net loss
2,100,000
1,100,000


United Artists Communicaions Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Artists Communicaions Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
184,105,000
158,665,000
Net inc
5,099,000
b249,000
Share earns
.13
-
b-Net loss  The results for the latest first quarter were after pre-tax restructuring charges of $970,000 and charges of about $750,000, also pre-tax, from expenses resulting from the termination of certain proposed acquisitions.


United Security Financial Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Security Financial Corp of America
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b365,900
c118,490
Share earns
-
.02
b-Includes investment losses of $2,278.
c-Net income and includes capital gains of $24,733.


Electronics That Do Everything but Huff and Puff
LEAD: This year more and more people are shaping up for summer on high-tech exercise machines at home.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the second day of Shabuoth, the Jewish Feast of Weeks, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City on Monday.
Other regulations remain in effect.


New York Plans to Add Welfare Hotel Services
LEAD: Services for thousands of homeless families living in welfare hotels across New York State would be stepped up under regulations proposed yesterday by Social Services Commissioner Cesar A. Perales.


2 Slain, 1 Fatally Wounded, in Chelsea Basement
LEAD: Two men were shot to death and a third was mortally wounded yesterday in a cavernous basement storage area in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, the police said.


Photographic Sciences Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photographic Sciences Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,724,000
2,367,000
Net inc
32,000
21,000
Share earns
.01
.01


IN ISSUING VITAL NEW ON CANCER, INSTITUTE CHOSE MAIL, NOT MEDIA
LEAD: The National Cancer Institute, which considered its findings on breast cancer so important that it made the information public unusually rapidly to doctors, was unusually subdued in getting the news to the nation's press.


New British Films Made By Blacks
LEAD: Isaac Julien, a 28-year-old graduate of the St.
Martin's School of Art in England, is one of a new generation of young black British film makers.
This month, two full-length movies and three short works by Mr.
Julien and his compatriots begin a nationwide tour here.


The Preakness Stakes; An Upset Won't Be Much of a Surprise
LEAD: The Preakness Stakes at Pimlico on Saturday is being widely billed as a rematch of the Kentucky Derby two weeks ago, where the filly Winning Colors held off Forty Niner by just a neck at the finish.
But five colts who finished behind them are making another attempt, and a case can be made for any of the five to spring an upset, especially since the race is likely to be run over a sloppy track.


Koch Urges Ethics Panel To Call Aide
LEAD: Mayor Koch yesterday urged the State Commission on Government Integrity to allow his special assistant to rebut allegations that the aide altered or destroyed city personnel records to delete references to patronage affiliations.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Zytec Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zytec Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
682,794
908,846
Net inc
31,047
67,003
Share earns
.01
.02
6mo rev
1,328,730
1,394,636
Net loss
93,298
b167,021
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Merger Bid Is Rejected By Irving
LEAD: The Irving Bank Corporation said yesterday that its directors had unanimously rejected a merger offer from the Bank of New York Company and had also erected a new roadblock to Bank of New York's takeover attempts.


GUIDEPOST: Barbecue Starters
LEAD: Barbecue equipment is coming out for the season, and it's time to choose a way to light the fuel, usually charcoal or briquettes.
Lighter fluid (liquid or gel; the gel is safer) is the most popular method, but it can flavor the food, as can briquettes or plastic starters treated with lighter fluid.


Rocky Mountain Undergarent reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocky Mountain Undergarent (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,046,000
8,805,000
Net inc
b50,000
b168,000
Share earns
.02
.06
b-After tax benefits of $19,000 for the latest first quarter and $74,000 for the year-ago period.


Trivial Pursuit Taken From Coleco
LEAD: Coleco Industries, which is battling to avoid bankruptcy, has lost its license to market the popular Trivial Pursuit board game.
The West Hartford toy maker also faces the possibility of losing its valuable license to market Cabbage Patch Kids products and dolls.


Slayer Found Dead After Attack on School Kills Boy, 8
LEAD: A woman wielding a pistol walked into an elementary school in this wealthy Chicago suburb today and opened fire apparently at random, killing an 8-year-old boy and critically wounding five other pupils.


Wedtech Figure Says Meese Ally Offered Aid
LEAD: The former lawyer for Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d offered legal assistance to four Wedtech Corporation executives in late 1986 when they were being investigated by Federal prosecutors, one executive testified yesterday.


Contras Agree to Talks But Disagree on a Site
LEAD: The Nicaraguan rebels agreed today to the dates proposed by the Government for the next round of peace talks in the country's civil war, but the rebels suggested a different location.


Chemclear Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemclear Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,984,000
4,667,000
Net loss
991,000
397,000


Diversified Human Resources Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Human Resources Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,151,393
5,239,885
Net inc
34,295
b196,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Commonwealth Mortgage of America L P reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Mortgage of America L P (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
26,437,000
48,711,000
Net loss
13,932,000
b5,826,000
Share earns
-
.16
9mo rev
109,899,000
129,573,000
Net loss
12,787,000
b8,214,000
Share earns
-
.23


Music Zubin Mehta Conducts His First Mahler Ninth
LEAD: There are ways for a parachutist to prepare for his first jump, but at some point it is necessary to step out onto air and pull the rip cord.
Zubin Mehta, who had never in an extensive career conducted Mahler's Symphony No. 9, took the plunge with the New York Philharmonic on Thursday evening.
Any trepidation he may have felt in advance could easily be understood: the Philharmonic has a Mahler tradition dating back to the composer himself and under Leonard Bernstein played a major role in bringing these massive symphonies to their present state of popularity.


Takeover Era Increases Risk Of Lawyer Conflict of Interest
LEAD: John L. Duncan, president of the Murray Ohio Manufacturing Company, was shocked last month when an executive of the Electrolux Group told him it was making an unsolicited offer to buy Mr.
Duncan's company.


Gencor Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gencor Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,690,000
11,262,000
Net inc
860,000
685,000
Share earns
.53
.43


Tucker Holding reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tucker Holding (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,880
453,465
Share earns
-
.49


MMI Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MMI Medical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 29
1988
1987
Revenue
9,811,000
7,596,000
Net inc
591,000
209,000
Share earns
.22
.06
Shares outst
2,684,097
3,226,198
Yr rev
35,895,000
28,191,000
Net inc
1,935,000
220,000
Share earns
.65
.07
Shares outst
2,992,081
3,226,539


Transit Police Planning Cutback In Patrols of the Subways at Night
LEAD: The New York City Transit Police Department, facing the loss of 162 officers, said yesterday that it would discontinue the practice of having a police officer on every subway train at night.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a Company News report in some editions of Business Day on Thursday, about the Meritor Financial Group, omitted the context for a pessimistic remark by the company's chairman.
In saying ''we are not going to make it'' if current interest rates hold, he was referring to the company's prediction of steady operating earnings by the end of the year.


Callon Petroleum Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Callon Petroleum Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
632,000
2,933,000
Net inc
163,000
b1,253,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss and after a gain of $2,810,000 from settlement of its industrial revenue bond obligation.


Rockwood Holding Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rockwood Holding Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
34,978,000
42,348,000
Net loss
2,268,000
b3,728,000
Share earns
-
.94
b-Net income and after a tax loss carryforward of $1,035,000.
The company said revenue included realized investment gains of $488,000 and $3,061,000 for the 1988 and 1987 periods, respectively.


Alpharel Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpharel Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
628,000
4,115,000
Net loss
3,631,000
b243,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


'Nightline' Excerpts On Israel to Be Shown
LEAD: Excerpts from Ted Koppel's ''Nightline'' programs, broadcast from Jerusalem April 25 to 29 on ABC, will be shown on Channel 13 on June 1 from 9 to 11:30 P.M.


CONFEREES REACH ACCORD ON DRUGS IN MEDICARE BILL
LEAD: House and Senate negotiators today resolved a dispute over prescription drug benefits, the major obstacle to an agreement on a bill to protect 32 million Medicare beneficiaries from the expense of catastrophic illness.


New Governor of Arizona Spent Thousands on Gifts
LEAD: Gov.
Rose Mofford, who has often said that as Arizona's Secretary of State she paid for her office decorations and most expenses from her own pocket, spent thousands of dollars in state money on gifts and decorations, records show.


Red Eagle Resources Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Red Eagle Resources Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,086,000
5,196,000
Net inc
500,000
137,000
Share earns
.04
.01
Shares outst
12,904,000
11,666,000
6mo rev
5,586,000
8,262,000
Net inc
594,000
530,000
Share earns
.05
.05
Shares outst
12,904,000
10,950,000


NRM Energy Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NRM Energy Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,712,000
11,312,000
Net loss
12,204,000
14,711,000


Piedmont Mining reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Piedmont Mining
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
594,122
671,899
Net loss
432,959
192,538


Seoul Students Attack U.S. Embassy
LEAD: Students scaled the walls of the United States Embassy and tossed homemade bombs at its buildings today in protests commemorating a demonstration eight years ago that was crushed by the military.


Col. Peter J. Ortiz, 75, Legendary Marine Officer
LEAD: Col.
Peter Julien Ortiz, a legendary officer in the Marine Corps, died of cancer Monday at the Veterans Medical Center in Prescott, Ariz.
He was 75 years old and lived in Prescott.


American May Buy 100 Boeing 757 Planes
LEAD: American Airlines is considering buying about 100 Boeing 757 airplanes, an order that could be valued at more than $4 billion to the Boeing Company.


Testimony on Bush Meeting With Panama Ambassador
LEAD: A senior aide to George Bush said today that he and the Vice President emerged from a December 1985 meeting with the Ambassador to Panama with ''the sense'' that Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega may have been involved in drug trafficking.


Magnolia Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magnolia Foods Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
380,767
346,398
Net loss
b27,976
199,589
b-Includes a gain of $62,900 from conversion of debt to equity.


Dance; 'Bayadere' Double-Header at the Met
LEAD: That the leading roles of ''La Bayadere'' can be interpreted in several different but equally valid ways was made evident Wednesday at the Metropolitan Opera House when American Ballet Theater offered two performances of this 19th-century classic about ancient India.


Abigail Robinson Wed in Greenwich To T. M. Bowers
LEAD: The marriage of Abigail Phipps Robinson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Robinson of Greenwich, Conn., to Thomas Michael Bowers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Bowers of Greenwich, took place last evening at the home of the bride's parents.
Rabbi Albert Ginsberg performed the ceremony.


Adding Warriors to the Drug War
LEAD: The politics of drugs suddenly alters the mood of Congress.
Alarmed by rising public concern over drug-related crime and corruption, members are rushing to enlist the Defense Department in a literal war on drugs.
Both the Senate and the House propose using the military to stop drug smugglers.


New Jersey Guide
LEAD:  MUSIC IN MONTCLAIR  The flamboyant Canadian Brass quintet will combine forces with the Salvation Army Band of Montclair for a concert Friday evening at Montclair High School.


Correction
LEAD: An article on April 24 about a record-setting human-powered flight across the Aegean Sea referred incorrectly in some copies to the hometown of one standby pilot.
The pilot, Greg Zack, is from Wilmington, N.C.


Ethiopia Frees 7 Relatives of Haile Selassie
LEAD: The Marxist Government of Ethiopia today set free seven members of the deposed royal family who had been imprisoned without trial since the 1974 revolution in which Emperor Haile Selassie was overthrown.


A Bar Where the Food Surprises
LEAD: PETER'S INN in East Northport may look like a neighborhood bar, but the food is certainly not pub grub.
First-timers are startled to find jalapeno pasta, carpaccio, Cajun shrimp with wild rice and lobster pasta on the menu.
Mixed grill at Peter's breaks the mundane mold with filet mignon au poivre, rare duck breast in a green peppercorn and brandy sauce and a grilled veal chop.


Do You Like the Stricter Balk Rules
LEAD: An overwhelming yes.
I can't wait to tell my grandchildren of the exploits of great umpires like Doug Harvey, John McSherry and Dave Pallone in the banner year of '88. ''But Granddad, just how far could Strawberry really hit one in his prime, and how awesome was Gooden in 1985?'' ''Sonny, those trivial feats were nothing compared to the hundreds of exciting balks I witnessed in the summer of '88.


Ups And Downs
LEAD: CHINTZES BLOOMING WITH CABBAGE roses, lilies or carnations have flowered into overabundance during the past few years, but decorators are now looking to quieter, more subtle patterns.


Student to Be Wed To Ms. Shlufman
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Martin A. Shlufman of Plainview, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Suzanne Joy Shlufman, to Mitchell Schuster, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Schuster of Dix Hills, L.I.


GOVERNMENT BY BECHTEL
LEAD:  FRIENDS IN HIGH PLACES  The Bechtel Story:  The Most Secret Corporation  and How It Engineered the World.
By Laton McCartney.
Illustrated. 273 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Philharmonic Sets Season For 1988-89
LEAD: Zubin Mehta, in his 11th season as music director of the New York Philharmonic - the longest tenure of any modern conductor - will lead the orchestra in 16 weeks of its 36-week 1988-89 subscription season at Avery Fisher Hall, the orchestra has announced.


Suzanne Forelli Is Married To M. H. Aubrey, Producer
LEAD: Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Roman Catholic Church in Centerport, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Suzanne Forelli, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore Forelli of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., to Michael Hansom Aubrey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stever Aubrey of Lyme, Conn.
The Rev.
John J. Fitzgerald performed the ceremony.


The Day I Quit Playing Baseball for Good
LEAD: BASEBALL was never my best game.


Do You Like the Stricter Balk Rules
LEAD: The purpose of calling balks is to protect the runner on base.
A pitcher must come to a discernible stop before pitching.
How can a pitcher be called for a balk when his team is going to intentionally walk the hitter?
Umpires have every right to call violations of the rules and regulations of the game, but let's call them only when there is clearly an infraction.


How to Repair Concrete Steps
LEAD: CONCRETE steps outdoors frequently crack and chip.
Concrete is brittle and requires stable support from beneath as well as reinforcement within to withstand even moderate stress.
Particularly damaging are rapid temperature fluctuations in spring.


Should Baby Read?
LEAD: THE IMAGE OF A 2-YEAR-OLD reading aloud from ''The Cat In the Hat,'' and laughing at the silly parts, warms the hearts of many young parents.
Parents who are themselves intellectual and upwardly mobile want their children to have all the privileges they have had - and then some.
How better to assure their children's success than to get them started early, to teach them to read during that brief shining time when kids absorb knowledge as naturally as they breathe?


Julia Anne Kosasky Wed To William Lane Hallisey
LEAD: Julia Anne Kosasky, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Kosasky of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married there yesterday to William Lane Hallisey, the son of Col. and Mrs.
William Joseph Hallisey of Riverside, Calif.
Bishop John B. Coburn, who is retired from the Episcopal Diocese of Massachusetts, performed the ceremony at the Church of the


'NO FAMILY HAD BEEN SO VEXED'
LEAD:  THE GIRL FROM CARDIGAN  By Leslie Norris.  164 pp.
Layton, Utah:  Gibbs M. Smith/Peregrine Smith Books. $15.95.


PRACTICAL Traveler; Scheduling Flights to Beat Jet Lag
LEAD: WHEN jet lag was first named, an acquaintance of mine who affected only modish problems said that she was suffering a really bad case because she had taken the shuttle plane to Washington three times in the previous week.
Of course, the worst part of jet lag - flying across time zones too fast for the body to adapt - has nothing to do with one-hour trips in the same zone.


THE WORLD: Pizza, Pepsi and the President; The Russians Indulge Their Taste For American Taste
LEAD: THOSE who believe in the eventual convergence of the Soviet and American systems could take heart last week.
An ''Astro Pizza'' truck from New Jersey, parked on the Moscow river embankment, was doing a brisk business selling pizzas at stratospheric prices.
The score from ''Porgy and Bess'' blared from car radios Wednesday afternoon, and each evening, slick American commercials, translated into Russian, splashed across television screens promoting Pepsi-Cola and Visa credit cards.


In Ontario All This Town's A Stage
LEAD: TYRONE GUTHRIE, the Stratford Festival's first artistic director, had a genius for publicity, and over the years he burnished his version of the festival's beginnings in 1953 to a fine sheen.
In Guthrie's story, a boy from a bucolic Ontario town was fired by the proverbial high school English teacher with a passion for Shakespeare.


HOW LABOR BROADENED ITS BEACHHEAD IN THE IVY LEAGUE
LEAD: Labor leaders had called it the watershed white-collar organizing drive of the decade, but the narrow union victory last week at Harvard University did not convince outsiders that efforts to organize private-sector office workers will be all downhill from here. ''Harvard was a very significant event,'' said Joel M.


Clown Takes Act To Soviet
LEAD: SCRUNCH, squeak, pop!
From bursts of air into a handful of string balloons, a shy swan slowly emerges as its creator's stubby fingers work with the delicate dexterity of a surgeon.


PLOTTING A THEORY OF THE BRAIN
LEAD: IT IS NEAR THE END OF A THREE-HOUR conversation that Dr.
Gerald M. Edelman leans across the conference table and looks me in the eye.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Two years ago we had a plank oak floor installed in our kitchen and dining room over a concrete slab.
In the summer, the last 18 inches of this floor warps, even when we use a dehumidifier.
In the winter the floor returns to normal except for a few spots that are starting to show signs of permanent damage.


Julie Eckhardt Weds S. I. Allen
LEAD: At the Presbyterian Church in Tenafly, N.J., Julia Ann Eckhardt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert J. Eckhardt Jr. of Tenafly, was married yesterday to Stephen Ignatius Allen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert K. Allen of Erie, Pa.
The Rev.
John D. Potter Jr. performed the ceremony.


COPING WITH CALIBAN
LEAD:  ARIEL  By Jose Enrique Rodo.
Translated by Margaret  Sayers Peden.
Prologue by Carlos Fuentes.  156 pp.
Austin:  University of Texas Press.
Cloth, $16.95.
Paper, $7.95.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Welsh Onions, Revived


The Subway, Palatial and Political
LEAD: AFTER a few days of bumping along on the official Soviet bus tour, from armories to monasteries to government buildings, visitors usually grasp what they are missing in Moscow's urban scene: the familiar traffic din of a city in motion.
Travelers weary of what can be an alienating, one-dimensional view of Moscow can find relief about 200 feet beneath the streets.


New Point-and-Shoot for Kodak's Anniversary
LEAD: ONE hundred years ago, George Eastman introduced a revolutionary idea in picture making: photography for everybody.
His first roll-film camera, introduced in 1888 and called the Kodak, allowed dilettantes and duffers to take photographs easily without the bother of carting around glass plates, tripods and other paraphernalia.


DECLINE TO GLORY
LEAD:  THE FALL OF THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE  By Donald Kagan.
Maps. 455 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.:  Cornell University Press. $39.50.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  CARL SANDBURG: His Life and Works.
By North Callahan. (Pennsylvania State University, $29.75.) ''A biography, Sirs, should begin with the breath of a man when his eyes first meet the light of day,'' Carl Sandburg once wrote.
Adopting this philosophy in covering Sandburg's 89 years, North Callahan has written a creditable biography of the writer and the man, often using his own extensive recollections of the poet whose ''reckless ecstasies of the language'' have become part of the American tongue.


Short Shortcuts
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME IS WHERE THE ART IS
LEAD:  WITTGENSTEIN'S MISTRESS  By David Markson.  240 pp.
Elmwood Park, Ill.:  The Dalkey Archive Press. $20.


FICTION
LEAD:  THE THIRD FRIDAY.
By George Bellak. (Morrow, $18.95.) Hot on the heels of the Government's insider trading cases and Oliver Stone's film ''Wall Street,'' there promises to be a spate of business-oriented novels.
After all, if the business of America is business, what better place to set a crime thriller for our times than on Wall Street, where fortunes are gained and lost quicker than it takes a body to fall 32 floors?


Correction
LEAD: The Executive Computer column last week misstated the capacity of two computer storage devices.
A 256K dynamic random access memory chip, or D-RAM, holds 256 kilobits of data.
A one-megabit single in-line memory module, or SIMM, holds 1,000 kilobits of data.


Tighter Federal Drug Dragnet Yields Cars, Boats and Protests
LEAD: The Federal Government's two-month-old policy of seizing boats, cars and other vehicles on which even small amounts of illegal drugs are found is causing dismay among civil libertarians and howls of protest from those whose property is confiscated.


Melbourne
LEAD: To the Editor: Julian West's piece on Melbourne (Travel, April 3) was most informative but left out one important segment under Shopping.
Little Collins Street, which parallels Collins Street, is Melbourne's equivalent of New York's 47th Street insofar as opal dealers are concerned.
Here are to be found black opals from Lighting Ridge as well as fire opals from Coober Pedy and stones from other mines.


Discriminating Against the Dead
LEAD: IT HAS been illegal for some time in New York City to discriminate against handicapped people.
In January 1987 a State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan extended the legal protection to the dead as well as the living.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  COUNTY BIKE TOURS  Dan and Robbin Sweeney, a young Mamaroneck couple, this month started a business called Criss-Cross Bicycle Tours.
They will lead a group of about 14 cyclists around the county on a variety of routes every weekend through the end of September.


Guatemala Silences a Dissident TV Station
LEAD: The Government of President Vinicio Cerezo has shut down a television station that criticized it during a news report.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: An Exchange of Words ALTHOUGH the summer season isn't officially here, there have already been fireworks in Westhampton.
At the finale of the Westhampton Writers Festival last Saturday night, Budd Schulberg took on Dakin Williams, brother of the late Tennessee Williams.


Nurse, Heal Thyself
LEAD: NOWHERE has the current crisis in nursing been more palpable than on Long Island, where the Nassau County Medical Center has been forced to deny admission to patients because of a dangerously low nurse-patient ratio.
As the shortage of nurses worsens, other hospitals, across the state as well as the country, are being compelled to limit services and to turn away patients.


Antietam
LEAD: To the Editor: I read with interest ''Serene Now, Antietam'' (Travel, April 10) and searched in vain for mention of my great-great grandfather, Col.
Harrison S. Fairchild, leader of the 1st Brigade (9th, 89th and 103d New York regiments), whose men forded Antietam Creek bypassing Burnside Bridge, routing a South


Sabine Jacob Weds Lance Jon Kimmel
LEAD: Sabine Jacob, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Willy Jacob of Wilhelmshaven, West Germany, and Lance Jon Kimmel, a son of Adele Kimmel of Forest Hills, Queens, and Irwin Kimmel of New York and Westhampton, L.I., were married yesterday in Ensenada, Baja California, Mexico.
Judge Maria Eugenia Campuzana de Garcia-Cacho of the Civil Register in Ensenada performed the ceremony at Villamar Las Rosas by-the-Sea.


Singapore Releases 3 Held as Political Detainees
LEAD: The Government of Singapore last week released 3 of 11 people detained without trial since mid-April under the country's Internal Security Act.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about a decline in the elephant population in Africa misidentified Dr.
David Western.


A Novelty Search Is Endless
LEAD: NO game other than chess puts such a premium on novelty.
That is what the relentless search to produce a new move, a new plan, is all about.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  CHILDREN'S THEATER


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  A MASQUE BY MILTON  When the New Haven Colony was founded in 1638, John Milton was putting the finishing touches on ''Comus,'' a masque he had been commissioned to write in celebration of the appointment of the Earl of Bridgewater as Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland.
At 3 P.M. today, to comemmorate the 350th birthday of New Haven, the Yale Center for British Art is to present a concert reading of the Milton work with the original, 350-year-old incidental music composed by Henry


Johannes Lichtenstein, 62, Importer, Dead
LEAD: Johannes Lichtenstein, a wine consultant and importer, died after a heart attack Thursday at New York Hospital.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


He Started By Buying A Theater
LEAD: ALL the while Martin Kaufman was growing up in Hewlett Harbor, he was in love with show business.
At Lynbrook High School, he was a self-described ''bookish kid'' who got ''pushed into debates'' and acted in school plays.


Long Island Interview: Herbert Beckhard; A Protege of Breuer Fights 'Faceless' Architecture
LEAD: WHEN Herbert Beckhard designs a building, he sticks to the basics: wood, stone and concrete.
Mr.
Beckhard, a protege and former partner of Marcel Breuer, the Bauhaus architect who played a major role in shaping 20th-century architecture and design, is known for buildings that wed innovative design with keen attention to function.


Center of Russian Study Struggling in New York
LEAD: St.
Sergius High School in Manhattan, one of the few secondary schools in the nation to emphasize the teaching of Russian language and culture, is struggling to survive.


Anne Cudlip Has Wedding
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y., Anne Simpson Cudlip, the daughter of Nancy Clapp Cudlip of Waccabuc, N.Y., and William J. Cudlip of Grosse Pointe, Mich., was married yesterday to Wilfred Augustin Finnegan 3d, a son of Mrs.
John G. Finnegan of Rye and Green Lake, Me., and the late Dr.


Steady Alcott Takes a Two-Stroke Lead
LEAD: When a golfer is playing for victory in a tournament, coming out of trouble to save a par on a hole can be more important than getting a birdie.
A save allows the subsequent birdies to have considerably more meaning and can prevent loss of ground.


Middle America Can Relax
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Behind the 'Crocodile' Smile Lie Australia's Tears
LEAD: Australians like to see themselves as the dancing boys and girls of the Southwest Pacific, innately honest, able to deal with anyone on the level of their humanity.
You see that knockabout side of the Australian character even in Australian politics.
People on the street and in shopping malls, encountering the Prime Minister, the personable Bob Hawke, call him by his first name.


U.S. Aides See Summit Pomp, Not Substance
LEAD: President Reagan, heading a contingent of about 600 Americans, will meet five times with Mikhail S. Gorbachev during next week's Moscow summit meeting, which is expected to be heavy with symbolism and ceremony.


ACCORD IS SOUGHT BY U.S. AND SOVIET ON MENTAL WARDS
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union are moving toward an agreement that would allow American psychiatrists to visit Soviet mental hospitals to determine if dissidents are being imprisoned in the hospitals, according to a top State Department official.


Do You Like the Stricter Balk Rules
LEAD: I pay to see Mookie Wilson run out a triple.
I don't go out to Shea to see the ump wave his arms like a traffic cop.
JEREMY EPSTEIN  Brooklyn


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Can Hartford Beat the Housing Squeeze?
LEAD: HARTFORD has an office vacancy rate of just 8 percent, one of the lowest in the country.
But this upbeat market has its down side.
The city has a severe housing shortage and monumental traffic and parking problems caused by the 125,000 commuters who pour into a square-mile business district each day.


KABUL FAULTS PAKISTANIS ON ARMS FOR GUERRILLAS
LEAD: Afghanistan has charged that Pakistan is continuing to allow shipments of weapons to Afghan guerrillas while Soviet troops withdraw from the country.


1800's Turkish Treasure Ship Found by Greeks in Aegean
LEAD: Greek divers have found a treasure-laden Turkish warship sunk by Greek revolutionaries in the Aegean Sea in 1822.


Outdoors; Atlantic Salmon Are Returning
LEAD: THOSE who labor on behalf of the Atlantic salmon, which many regard as the world's supreme food and game fish, have always struggled with the difficulty of how to enlist broader public support of their effort.


Monique Miron, Engineer, to Wed
LEAD: Monique Miron, a mechanical engineer with Boyle Engineering Consultants in Newport Beach, Calif., and Lieut.
Jonathan E. Cayle of the Navy Medical Corps, a surgical intern at the Balboa Naval Hospital in San Diego, plan to marry in August.
The parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Lane Miron of Poughkeepsie, N


DATA UPDATE: May 22, 1988
LEAD:
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Mar. 88
Feb. 88
Mar. 87
Nation
$88,700
$88,300
$85,200
Northeast
143,100
140,800
128,900
Midwest
67,800
67,300
68,300
South
84,000
85,300
81,200
West
117,100
113,800
105,900
*4*(Source: National Association of Realtors)


Those Hot Pizzas Are Burning Up the Road
LEAD: TO hear Sharon Bulova tell it, it's enough to scare the most fearless adult. ''Domino's delivery people are running out of their stores, jumping out of their cars and tearing out of the parking lots,'' said Ms.
Bulova, who is the elected supervisor of the Annandale district in Fairfax County, Va. ''The potential for mishap is huge.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Ill-Fitting Auden  It's interesting to see a famous, eccentric poet in an unfamiliar role.
In ''The Poet Auden: A Personal Memoir'' (Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson), A. L. Rowse describes an Americanized Auden in an Army uniform.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.  $335,000  90 Briary Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old brick ranch; family room, basement with kitchen and wet bar, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $5,279.
New Rochelle, N.Y.  $282,500  66 Linwood Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 68-year-old stucco/stone Tudor; deck, den, basement with office and separate entrance; taxes $2,780.


Why Do N.B.A. Champions Not Repeat?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending May 7  MANHATTAN  Madison Square Area  $275,000  425 Park Avenue South (29th St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. loft co-op in a recently renovated prewar building; part-time doorman, large kitchen, East River view; maintenance $865, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)


In New Jersey, Town Confronts Teen-age Drinking
LEAD: It was the night when a high school-age friend of one of her sons showed up at her door drunk and driving his father's car that Joan Houlihan decided something had to be done.


Rollicking Rogues
LEAD:  THE GREAT McGINTY  Directed and written by Preston Sturges.
With Brian Donleavy (in  photo). 1940.
MCA Home Video. 83 minutes. $29.95.


correction
LEAD: A listing of tourist offices on May 1 with a guide to music festivals abroad omitted Barbados.
The Barbados Board of Tourism is at 800 Second Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017; the telephone number is 212-986-6516.


Golf; Charles Shoots 67 For 3-Shot Advantage
LEAD: After setting a course record with a seven-under-par 63 on opening day, Bob Charles of New Zealand shot a three-under-par 67 today at the Nynex/Golf Digest Commemorative tournament.


New Wiring for the Information Age
LEAD: IN 1984, with great fanfare and great expectations, the Federal Express Corporation introduced a service called Zapmail.
Customers could have their documents delivered door-to-door within two hours via couriers and high-speed digital facsimile systems - fax machines.
It was a novel, ingenious approach to image transmission, and forecasters were quick to predict its rosy future.


RISKY BUSINESS
LEAD: Bravo to Susan Jacoby for her common-sense remarks on the distinctions between sex and love in her article ''Risky Business'' (Hers column, April 24).
I'm delighted to hear a woman say that ''Sex may precede love, follow it or have nothing to do with it,'' and that ''Sexual experience is valuable in and of itself.


Florence L. Buchanan Weds Steve Spelman
LEAD: Florence Leggett Buchanan, a daughter of George H. P. Buchanan of London and the late Janet H. Buchanan, was married yesterday to Steve Nelson Spelman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest N. Spelman of Westfield, Mass.
Acting Justice Robert M. Haft of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at the Cafe in Grand Central


Biden Is Out of Hospital
LEAD: Senator Joseph Biden was released from a hospital today after surgery to correct an aneurysm near his brain.
The 45-year-old Delaware Democrat underwent surgery May 3 at Walter Reed Medical Center for his second aneurysm since February.
Mr.
Biden, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, dropped out of the Democratic Presidential race before the first aneurysm was discovered.


A Lifetime of Upstaging by Little Brother
LEAD: TWENTY-SIX days after my glorious fourth birthday an unpleasant hired lady, who had just arrived at our St.
Louis home, took me by the hand and led me to my parents' upstairs bedroom.
She said she had a wonderful surprise for me.


W. S. Straus Wed To Ms. Weinstein
LEAD: Lynne Jaeger Weinstein, a photo reporter for Life magazine, and William Sachs Straus, a vice president of the Manhattan Recording Company, were married yesterday at the New York Academy of Art.
The Rev.
Janice Garrett performed the nondenominational service.


Hard Questions About Exhibiting U.S. Art Abroad
LEAD: Finally awakened by the general uneasiness about the lackluster way American art has been represented abroad, the United States Government has done what it often does after being made aware of a problem: provide more money and appoint a committee.


Taxi Panel Head Quits for a Job in Business
LEAD: The chairman of New York City's Taxi and Limousine Commission, Gorman Gilbert, resigned last week.


Swinging John Henry's Hammer
LEAD: ON THE AFTERNOON BEFORE the Dance Theatre of Harlem departs for its first tour of the Soviet Union, Arthur Mitchell, D.T.H.'s founder and artistic director, is in his closet-sized office, dancing.
Jammed in among a desk, some chairs and a staircase, he stutter-steps and swivels, his arms whipping jubilantly back and forth.


Young Performers in Free Showcases
LEAD: BEFORE they scatter for summer vacations, dozens of Connecticut's finest young soloists and groups will be showcasing their talents in free concerts, two this afternoon and another next Sunday.


Ellen Kennedy Becomes Bride Of Timothy Flick
LEAD: St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford, N.Y., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Ellen Elizabeth Kennedy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Paul Kennedy of Bedford, and Timothy J. Flick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald J. Flick of Lancaster, Pa.
Msgr.
Thomas Gartland officiated.


Prince Twice Is Still Prince Charming
LEAD: In one of the most enjoyable and peculiar career moves of the 1980's, Prince has completed two albums so far this year.
The first, ''The Black Album'' (no catalogue number, cassette only), was announced and then, just before its planned release, withdrawn from the market on Prince's orders.
Albums that had been pressed in Great Britain were scrapped, but not before bootlegs of ''The Black Album'' had begun to circulate.


Making Europe a Mighty Market
LEAD: THE battle between Europe and ''non-Europe'' is coming to a head.
With less than five years to go before a self-imposed deadline, the European Community is racing to remove the hundreds of trade barriers that bedevil its 12 member countries.


Zambians Kill Mozambicans
LEAD: Zambian troops crossed into Mozambique this week in pursuit of right-wing Mozambican rebels, destroying two bases and killing 73 of the guerrillas, a Secretary of State for Defense and Security, Alex Shapi, said today.
Mr.
Shapi said the cross-border attack followed a raid by the Mozambique National Resistance on the Zambian border village of Chadiza.


Correction
LEAD: A correction in this space last Sunday misidentified the holder of the men's world record for the 400-meter run and gave an incorrect time.
The record is 43.86 seconds; it was set by Lee Evans of the United States in the 1968 Olympic Games in Mexico City.


KOCH ADVISER GETS JUDGE NOMINATION
LEAD: Stella Schindler, Mayor Koch's chief adviser on homeless issues, has been nominated to serve as a judge on the Family Court.


Teachers Must Earn Their New Salaries
LEAD: Our 702-student high school budget for next year is projected at just under $6.7 million, representing an increase of almost 12 percent.
Such double-digit increases in educational budgets, commonplace throughout Fairfield County, are incurring strong resistance by Boards of Finance and by the taxpayer.


Susan Lisa Alfin Weds Michael T. F. Johnson
LEAD: Susan Lisa Alfin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Alfin of Sands Point, L.I., and Michael Thomas Finley Johnson, a son of Mrs.
John H. Hapeman Jr. of New Boston, N.H., and Gardiner Porter Johnson of Dallas, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Thomas LaMont performed the ceremony at the Community Reformed Church in Manhasset, L


Questions About Sterling Forest
LEAD: INTENSITY is probably the last feeling evoked by the pristine lakes and deep woods of Sterling Forest, but the peace that surrounds this magnificent woodland straddling the New Jersey-New York border belies the intensity of interest now being generated over the forest's future.


The Celtics Lose on Wall Street
LEAD: THE Boston Celtics have usually been winners on the basketball court but on Wall Street the team has been as well-received as an air ball.


KING PARADE: ONE MAYOR, NO MARSHALLS
LEAD: The list of no-shows among New York City's black elected officials at the Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Memorial Parade last Sunday seemed almost as long as the 21st annual parade itself.


Skyway Work Set for Today
LEAD: THE Pulaski Skyway's northbound lanes will be closed today from 6 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the installation of sign posts.
Also, motorists using Route 46 in Parsippany-Troy Hills will find the ramp from Route 46 East to Interstate 80 East closed until mid-June.


Amy Trapp Wed To Robert Young
LEAD: Amy Sayre Trapp, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis A. Trapp Jr. of Plandome, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert C. Young, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Young of Flushing, Queens.
The Rev.
C.
Leslie Hughs performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Manhasset, L.I.


Headliners; Voice of Justice
LEAD: The wrong head rolled in the Justice Department last week, in the view of critics of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d.
Mr.
Meese dismissed his chief spokesman, Terry Eastland, saying, ''We could use some new leadership'' in the agency's public affairs department.
Mr.
Eastland, who is popular in conservative circles, said he was fired because Mr.


Curbs Sought on a Big National Guard Camp
LEAD: Citizens angered by expanded use of the nation's largest National Guard training base are pressing ahead with legal action to restrain activities at Camp Grayling here, invoking the name of a local lumber baron who donated some of the land 75 years ago.


JULIO BOCCA IN 'BAYADERE' DEBUT
LEAD: Julio Bocca, the young Argentine dancer who joined American Ballet Theater last year, is at only the beginning of his career.
Yet an astounding ability to transform himself in every role, to understand characterization and style, bespeaks a performer blessed with inborn maturity.


How Many Air 'Czars' Does It Take? One.
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kate Lind Bride Of Mark Geoffroy
LEAD: The marriage of Kate Humbird Lind, a daughter of Mrs.
Carl C. Ulstrup and John D. Lind, both of New York, to Mark Lee Geoffroy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Geoffroy of Portland, Ore., took place yesterday at the Old Meeting House on the Hill in Yarmouth, Me.
The Rev.
Dorothy Greene, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.


Congress Bill on Hate and Violent Acts Gains
LEAD: A bill requiring the Government to keep figures on violence that is motivated by prejudice is on its way to the Senate, complete with a requirement for tabulating crimes against homosexuals.


An Opportunity to Talk the Cold War to Death
LEAD: ONE week from today, when President Reagan arrives in Moscow for his fourth meeting with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the evolution of Soviet-American relations will have completed a dramatic cycle.
From a surge of cooperation in the early 1970's and then into a tense period of frozen hostility, the two powers have now emerged into what may prove to be the healthiest relationship in their postwar history.


Israelis Protest in Occupied Territory
LEAD: An Israeli soldier ordering journalists from the area of a demonstration yesterday by a peace group in Nablus in the occupied West Bank.
The protest was against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza and the continuing detention of thousands of Palestinians arrested in recent unrest. (Agence France


Watered-Down Westway, or a Great New Hudson River Park?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Smithsonian Adjunct Is the Ultimate Attic
LEAD: One Friday afternoon in 1973, when the Smithsonian Institution was fairly groaning under the strain of its enormous holdings, Porter Kier, the director of the National Museum of Natural History, remarked to one of his curators that he would like to decorate his office with a zoological specimen ''a little bigger'' than the stuffed groundhog perched on his desk.


Lakers Put End to Upset Bid
LEAD: Less than 48 hours after being humiliated by Utah, the Lakers, rejuvenated and apparently bent on revenge, eliminated the Jazz today from the National Basketball Association playoffs, 109-98.
The victory was the first seventh-game triumph in a decade for the Lakers and bailed them out of a series they'll not soon forget.


The Hartford Gives Moilere a Modern Look
LEAD: WHAT, in modern times, is one to make of a play in which a middle-aged man sets standards for the perfect wife like simple-mindedness and submissiveness?


Reagan Sees Bush and Top Aides On Merits of Talks With Noriega
LEAD: President Reagan met at length with senior advisers at the White House today for what officials described as a complete assessment of whether the United States should continue to seek a negotiated settlement with Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, Panama's military ruler.


On Third Hand Play
LEAD: ONE of the oldest rules of thumb in the game, dating back to whist, is ''third hand high.'' Whist-players, with no dummy in view to help them, followed this guideline blindly.
Bridge players are better off and can recognize the obvious exceptions.
At the first trick the third player usually preserves a high card that is poised over an honor in the dummy.


Maple Sugar Season: Quality Over Quantity
LEAD: Maple syrup production was up by 225,000 gallons this year, but producers did not have the banner year they had been hoped for.
The auality was what counted most, a Federal official said.


Protection Of Aquifers Starts at Pawcatuck
LEAD: AN underground water source in the Pawcatuck River Basin has become the first federally protected aquifer in the state.


SOVIET DISMISSES TWO PARTY CHIEFS IN TENSE REPUBLICS
LEAD: The Communist Party leaders of Armenia and Azerbaijan were dismissed today after fresh outbreaks of ethnic tensions in the two southern republics, the official press agency Tass reported.


'Jesus Christ Superstar': The Singing Stands Out
LEAD: IN 1971, two major musical versions of the Bible opened in New York.
One, ''Godspell,'' by Stephen Schwartz and John-Michael Tebelak, was an adaption of the Gospel According to St.
Matthew.
The other was the rock opera ''Jesus Christ Superstar,'' by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice, about the crucifixion of Jesus


Public Safety Officers' Role on Campus
LEAD: I would like to respond to the recent article on the drinking problem on college campuses today  [ ''Campus Drinking: Colleges Confront 'Issue of the 80's' '' ]  and, more specifically, the role of public safety departments in the ''administration of penalties'' for infractions of campus alcohol regulations.


Fostering the Memorial Day Tradition
LEAD: JOSEPH SLOBODA is a World War II veteran who saw action in the Pacific when his Navy Seabee unit participated in both the battle of Okinawa and the capture of Admiralty Island.


Connecticut Tremblors Defy Research on Cause
LEAD: From last Sept. 17 to Oct. 22, more than 175 small earthquakes occurred near the town of Moodus, Conn.
Many were accompanied by sounds like gunshots; the strongest vibrated a van.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE


Aspiring to Life in the Slow Lane
LEAD: LONG ISLAND commuters show a special, spiritual quality.


Paris
LEAD: To the Editor: I took advantage of your suggestion (Travel, Oct. 18) and stayed at the Hotel des Grands Hommes (17 Place Pantheon) for $75 a night in Paris.
I enjoyed a view of the Pantheon and such riveting traffic noises as to be convinced that Parisian cars are not equipped with mufflers.
In fact, such noises were ever present and make me wonder why this is not the case in New York City.


High Stakes
LEAD:  HOUSE OF GAMES  Starring Lindsay Crouse and Joe Mantegna (in photo), Mike  Nussbaum, J. T. Walsh, Lilia Skala.
Directed by David Mamet. 1987.
HBO Video.  101 minutes. $89.99.
Rated R.


At Leading Harlem Church, an Opening for Change at the Top
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
Samuel D. Proctor, pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church, one of New York City's most influential black institutions, plans to retire in June 1989, and has proposed as his replacement his assistant, the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, according to church officials and members.


Panel Opposes Toxins In Anti-Lamprey Plan
LEAD: Plans to use chemicals to destroy Lake Champlain's fish-killing sea lampreys could harm rare birds along tributary rivers in Vermont, a state-sponsored panel of naturalists has warned.


CARDS TOP ASTROS ON PENA'S HOMER
LEAD: Tony Pena hit a three-run homer with one out in the 11th inning, lifting the Cardinals over the Houston Astros, 7-4, tonight.


Soft-Shell Crabs, Three Ways
LEAD: NOW that the weather has finally warmed up, soft-shell crabs are coming into the market.
The most common way of cooking them is simple: dust them with flour and fry them in butter.
But soft-shell crabs beget a challenge to chefs, who come up with all sorts of interesting and unusual ways to prepare them.


Risen Star Wins
LEAD: The colt, with Eddie Delahoussaye up, winning the Preakness Stakes.
Winning Colors, Derby winner, was third. (AP) Section 8.


Bearing Gifts
LEAD: To the Editor: To your list, in Q &amp; A (April 24), of small gifts to take to the Soviet Union should certainly be added picture postcards of American sights and landscape.
We were asked for these everywhere we went - mostly by children and teen-agers, who always were ready with postcards for us.
Sew-on patches (not those with political motifs) would also be highly regarded.


Another Big Year for New York Cheese: 647 Million Pounds
LEAD: For the 12th year in a row, cheese production in New York State rose to a record level in 1987, according to figures released this week by the New York Agricultural Statistics Service.


Rightists in U.S. Aid Mozambique Rebels
LEAD: A small group of wealthy American businessmen, ideological conservatives and evangelical Christian missionaries have joined forces in an effort to aid guerrillas of a right-wing movement fighting the nominally Marxist Government of Mozambique.


Russia's Ring Of Towns Crowned With Golden Domes
LEAD: AS you approach Suzdal on a sunlit day, one thing stands out from afar: the dome over the entrance gate of the Convent of the Intercession, a lone patch of gold that seems to catch the sunlight and send it, shimmering, into the long, level distance.


A Stalwart for the Summer Months
LEAD: PRUNE suckers from magnolias and water sprouts (upright shoots) from dogwoods.
Plant geraniums, begonias, ivy, petunias, vinca, impatiens, torenia, salvia, marigolds, zinnias and other showy annuals in tubs, planters and window boxes.
Set out started seedlings of peppers, tomatoes, eggplants, melons and sow cucumbers and sweet corn in hills.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  EVE AND THE APES.
By Emily Hahn. (Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, $17.95.) Intentionally bypassing famous female primatologists (such as Jane Goodall and Dian Fossey), Emily Hahn, who herself has owned a number of apes, focuses in this book on a second tier of women who have had a particular fascination with these animals.


The Holocaust's Toll
LEAD: To the Editor:


Discipline for Data
LEAD: To the Editor:


From Key West, Key Limes
LEAD: EXACTLY how long Key lime pie has been around no one can say with certainty, although one of the young girls rolling out pastry dough at Theresa Bakery in Key West solemnly volunteered: ''Always.
Even the pirates ate Key limes.''


MAKING SURE DOCTORS GET ENOUGH SLEEP
LEAD: It was 4 A.M., nap time for a second-year resident who had been on duty at a Long Island hospital for 20 hours.
As she dozed off, her beeper sounded.
A patient was having a seizure.
She gave him the drug he needed, keeping close watch on his heart monitor.
To stay awake, she sang along with the radio in his room.


For the Bookshelf Of the Enthusiast
LEAD: AMONG the brightest events this spring is the arrival of a book that should spur the enthusiasm of new collectors and re-excite those for whom collecting crafts is habitual.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article on April 24 about school aid to Long Island incorrectly described State Senator Norman J. Levy's position on the ''save harmless'' formula, which sustains school aid despite a decline in enrollment.
He favors it.


Ornery - And Proud of It
LEAD: MY MATERNAL grandmother, Annie Sparks, lived with our family during the while I was growing up.
When I came home from school, after having made a detour to the kitchen to pour a glass of milk and fix a thick peanut butter sandwich on easy-to-tear white bread, I would go up to her sitting room.
She would put aside her crossword puzzle - which she did in ink - and tell me stories about our family.


Caroline Meade Rudd to Be Married To Nicolas Woolworth Combemale
LEAD: Caroline Meade Rudd's engagement to Nicolas Woolworth Combemale, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard F. Combemale of New York and Winthrop, Me., has been made known by her parents, Julia Meade Rudd and O. Worsham Rudd, both of New York and Cape Neddick, Me.


'IS THERE A CHIC WAY TO GO?'
LEAD:  BLUE BLOOD  By Craig Unger.
Illustrated. 432 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.95.


Do You Like the Stricter Balk Rules
LEAD: The delicate and beautiful balance of the game has been upset by the ease of base stealing.
Pitchers should be given more, not less opportunity to hold runners on.
When every single, walk and hit batter turns out to be the same as a two- or three-base hit, the game is distorted.
The baserunning game should be high drama.


Puckering Up
LEAD: AN APOCRYPHAL STORY HAS IT THAT IN THE early 1950's, Joseph Haspel, a founder of Haspel Brothers, the New Orleans company that introduced washable seersucker, attended a business meeting in Florida dressed in one of his firm's new wash-and-wear suits.
When his colleagues doubted the properties he claimed for it, Haspel strolled into the ocean fully clad.


3 Bomb Attacks in Greece
LEAD: Two bombs exploded in the Athens suburb of Nikaia early today, and a third was thrown from a car in the port of Piraeus.
There were no injuries, the police said.
All three attacks were claimed by a local left-wing terrorist group, Revolutionary Popular Struggle.


Mary Beth Pendley Marries Sheldon Lavell Ray Jr.
LEAD: The marriage of Mary Elizabeth Pendley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sylvan B. Pendley of New Orleans, to Sheldon Lavell Ray Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray of Monroe, La., took place yesterday at the St.
Charles Avenue Presbyterian Church in New Orleans.
The Rev.
Dean Lindsey performed the ceremony.


SHRINKS AND SHRUNKEN HEADS
LEAD:  THE JEALOUS POTTER  By Claude Levi-Strauss.
Translated by  Benedicte Chorier.
Illustrated. 250 pp.
Illinois:  University of Chicago Press.


Q and A
LEAD:  On Hudson Bay


THE ELDERLY AND THE POLITICS OF HEALTH CARE
LEAD: The graying of America has become an indisputable fact of political life.


FOCUS: Lexington; Intruders In Famed Bluegrass
LEAD: FOR almost three decades the thoroughbred horses at the 600-acre Mill Ridge Farm just outside Lexington, Ky., were surrounded by nothing but bluegrass.
But these days the serenity of an area known as a breeding ground for Kentucky Derby winners is being disturbed.


Do You Like the Stricter Balk Rules
LEAD: Baseball has been vastly improved by the enforcement of the balk rule.
PAUL ADAMSBAUM  Ridgefield, Conn.


Easy Does It
LEAD: THERE ARE TIMES WHEN even the most devoted cook looks for a way out of the kitchen.
Clearly, plenty of shortcuts exist today, but these have more to do with getting a meal on the table in a hurry than creating pleasurable dishes.
Fast food, however, doesn't have to look or taste that way.
It can be as simple as grilled fish, poultry or meat, or it can give the illusion of complexity.


Sandra Lee Shaw Is Married to Gregory R. Strong
LEAD: At the Nassau Presbyterian Church in Princeton, N.J., Sandra Lee Shaw, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin D. Shaw Jr. of Princeton, was married yesterday to Gregory Robert Strong, a son of Moira Strong of Titusville, N.J., and Robert Strong of Washington Crossing, N.J.
The Rev.
Stanley E. Johnson, an


INTO THE HEART OF OLD ALBANY
LEAD:  QUINN'S BOOK  By William Kennedy.  289 pp. New York:  Viking. $18.95.


Dance; Balanchine's 'Bugaku' By the City Ballet
LEAD: The heroic dancers of the New York City Ballet might have been expected to look exhausted after the unimaginable work put into the company's just-ended American Music Festival.
But the dance was fresh and interesting on Wednesday, the second night of the company's return to repertory in its spring season at the New York State


Pamela Marcus, Physician, Weds Jeffrey Erskine
LEAD: Dr.
Pamela Stacey Marcus, the daughter of Dianne Wallace of New York and Alan J. Marcus of New York and Atlantic Beach, L.I., was married last evening at the Pierre in New York to Jeffrey Allan Erskine, a son of Phyllis E. Small of New York and the late Victor Erskine.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony.


How Tyranny Creeps
LEAD: When American reporters and editors talk about freedom of the press, some people react skeptically.
The press is self-important, they say.
It exalts its own freedom above others'.
At the slightest inconvenience it cries out that the First Amendment is falling.


A Shrewd Return to the Leather-Rich Lap of Luxury
LEAD: I PAID a dollar for the least expensive car I've ever owned.
It was the first of two Chryslers that lived at my house, and, not surprisingly given the price, it was a fairly terrible automobile.


Anne Connors Marries James Joseph Seuffert
LEAD: The marriage of Anne Carter Connors, a daughter of Mary M. Connors of Morristown, N.J., and Dudley Edward Connors of Rye, N.Y., and James Joseph Seuffert took place yesterday.
The bridegroom is a son of Mrs.
Donald C. Seuffert of Shrewsbury, N.J., and the late Dr.
Seuffert.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.


Farms Defy Trade Sense
LEAD: Obviously food is the most basic human need.
There is an underlying shame that in a world where some 10 million face starvation and hundreds of millions suffer malnutrition, the most abrasive trade problem is agricultural surpluses.


South Jersey Divided Over Hunting on Reserves
LEAD: THE opening shots in a civil war of sorts have been fired over a Federal proposal to open two National Wildlife Reserves to hunting.
The dispute pits resident against resident and even animal protectionist against animal protectionist.


Correction
LEAD: A caption on page 23 of the Arts and Leisure section today gives an incorrect location for one concert by the Atlanta Symphony.
The concert, on Wednesday, will be at Carnegie Hall, not Avery Fisher Hall.


India Sending More Troops to Punjab as Toll Rises
LEAD: Hundreds of paramilitary troops are being transported to Punjab state to strengthen security forces after more than 190 people were killed this week in attacks attributed to Sikh extremists, police officials said today.


Carole B. Kerr, Executive, Weds F. E. Guest 2d on L.I.
LEAD: Carole Baldoff Kerr, a daughter of Ann Baldoff of Pittsburgh and the late John C. Baldoff, and Frederick E. Guest 2d, a son of the late Helena McCann Charlton of Oyster Bay, L.I., and the late Winston F. C. Guest of Roslyn, L.I., were married yesterday at Old Westbury Gardens in Old Westbury, L.I., by the Rev.


CAMBODIANS TEST HANOI FOR SIGNS OF WITHDRAWAL
LEAD: Friday was a National Day of Hate in Cambodia.
On these annual occasions, the Government in Phnom Penh asks Cambodians to remember the terror of Pol Pot and to redouble their efforts to prevent his return.


Music; Julio Iglesias: Romance
LEAD: Julio Iglesias was in an unusually loquacious mood Thursday evening at Radio City Music Hall, where he opened the first of nine sold-out shows.
Admitting to some nervousness, the Spanish pop star spoke of his continuing eight-year struggle to learn the English language.
And in a gently rueful tone, he dismissed the image of himself as an arrogant Don Juan, saying, ''You should see my skinny legs.


Political Peril of Using the Military in the Drug War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Music; Premieres By Kronos Quartet
LEAD: The Kronos Quartet ended its first, sold-out and by all accounts highly successful series at Alice Tully Hall Friday night with a generous program that included three scores partly commissioned by Lincoln Center.


Belmont Plot: Stevens vs. Stephens
LEAD: WEARING only a towel around his middle, Gary Stevens was talking about what he considered to be the moment of truth in yesterday's Preakness for Winning Colors, the filly that won the Kentucky Derby.


Tourists Welcome at Stamford Mall
LEAD: FOR some time, the Stamford Town Center, the huge indoor shopping complex in downtown Stamford, has used the slogan ''Just Another Reason Why It's Worth a Trip to Town.''


Stacie Bowman Is Married
LEAD: At the Coveleigh Club in Rye, N.Y., Stacie Ann Bowman and Cary Pincus, graduates of the Georgia Institute of Technology, were married yesterday by Msgr.
Donald Pryor, a Roman Catholic priest.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Earle Lindell Bowman Jr. of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Her father is an executive vice president of Doral Hotel and Resorts Management.


Advice for the Bewildered Graduate: Relax
LEAD: THIS season, tens of thousands of young men and women are being awarded college degrees.
At their commmencements, they and their parents are listening to rhetoric wrapped in a mantle of hope to the effect that the world is their oyster.


Taking the Business Beyond Tomato Sauce
LEAD: UNTIL a few years ago, getting a pizza meant going to the nearest pizzeria and ordering a flat pie, topped with cheese and tomato sauce.
Product diversification?
You could probably get sausage, pepperoni, mushrooms, green peppers and anchovies.
And in New York and a handful of other cities, sometimes you could get a thick Sicilian crust.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''When we teach math to elementary students, now for numbers we have them count the homes the Israelis have demolished or the number of Palestinians they've put in prison.''  - Mahdi Abdul Hadi,  a former Palestinian educator.  [ 3:2. ]


'Master Harold' Moves Into McCarter Theatre
LEAD: TO ONE who has attended a half-dozen performances of '' 'Master Harold' . . . and the boys,'' it is amazing how Athol Fugard's masterpiece still has the power to startle.


Miss Perry Wed To Bruce Welty
LEAD: The Annisquam (Mass.) Village Church was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Rachel Lyman Perry, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Curtis Perry of Lincoln, Mass., and Annisquam, to Bruce Edward Welty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Thompson Welty of Concord, Mass., and Isle of Springs, Me.
The Rev.


Haunting Chronicle of a Death Foretold
LEAD: ''If I don't get no relief,'' said the condemned murderer Edward Earl Johnson, looking at a date circled in black on his wall calendar, ''they're gonna kill me.''


THE PROMISE OF WIND AWAITS A NEW ENERGY CRISIS
LEAD: The fierce spring winds now whipping through California have brought little cheer to the hearty band of entrepreneurs who turn nature's power into electricity.
Thousands of turbines, some shaped like eggbeaters, some like huge propellers, are humming now, driven by the winds that sweep across California's Central Valley, through Tehachapi Pass and into the Mojave Desert below.


Mostly Mozart Series Plans Haydn Marathon
LEAD: Haydn will play a major part in this summer's Mostly Mozart Festival at Lincoln Center.
A week devoted to his music will include a daylong, eveninglong ''Haydn Marathon,'' two concerts on original instruments conducted by Christopher Hogwood, and talks by the Haydn scholar and biographer H. C. Robbins


The Bentham Effect
LEAD: To the Editor:


Catherine Huse Lilly Marries Peter Frisch
LEAD: The marriage of Catherine Huse Lilly, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Lilly of London and Essex, Conn., to Peter Osborne Frisch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Frisch of Rye, N.Y., took place yesterday at Christ's Episcopal Church in Rye.
The Rev.
Sharon Chant performed the ceremony.


MCA DRAWS ON SOME FAMOUS OLD NAMES
LEAD: MCA classics has been making its presence felt on many fronts since it entered the classical-music fray not long ago.
Musical comedy, operetta and original and licensed recordings from abroad have been among its ventures, along with some of the earliest entries in the midpriced compact disk field.


New Rules on Benefits For Disabled Veterans
LEAD: President Reagan has signed legislation making it easier for hundreds of thousands veterans to receive disability benefits for exposure to radiation from the World War II atomic blasts in Japan or from nuclear test explosions.


A New Look at Trade
LEAD: FOR centuries, trade statistics have tracked the course of human history.
Exports and imports have documented the rise and fall of civilizations.
They marked the progress, for example, of mercantile Britain and Germany as well as the emergence of the United States and Japan as industrial giants.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on May 8 about political developments in Singapore incorrectly described a statement by eight detainees charging police mistreatment.


Colorado Man Faces Charges In a Threat Against Jackson
LEAD: A stockyard worker is free on bond after being arrested on Federal charges that he made a death threat against the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


A Top State Deserves Professional Sports
LEAD: THE Connecticut sports fan is homeless.
I, for example, must support teams from either Massachusetts or New York.
The only legitimate Connecticut pro sports franchise is the Hartford Whalers, who finished in fourth place.
Connecticut is one of the richest states in the nation and could easily finance a beautiful arena for any sports team willing to play.


Federal Judges, Nassau Politics
LEAD: ''We've been seeing an interesting evolution with Al D'Amato,'' a political analyst, Norman Ornstein, said the other day. ''He's moved up in the Senate, he's gained stature, he's become a lot sharper and more sophisticated.'' New York's junior Senator has indeed come some distance from the political machine in which he started.


Works bythe New and by the Eccentric
LEAD: CONNECTICUT has not lacked for up-to-date art: the Matrix Gallery of the Wadsworth Atheneum and the alternative space Real Art Ways have seen to that for a decade or more.
All the same, new heights have been scaled with the appointment of Klaus Ottmann as curator of exhibitions for the Zilkha Gallery, at Wesleyan University, in


Marjorie McCourt Weds
LEAD: At St.
Virgil's Roman Catholic Church in Morris Plains, N.J., Marjorie Fay McCourt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. McCourt of Morris Plains, was married yesterday to Thomas Savage Clement, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick T. J. Clement of Gladwyne, Pa.
The bride, a graduate of the University of Rhode Island, is a medical representative in Morristown, N.J., for Abbott Laboratories.


At the Morgan: Flopsy, Mopsy and Cottontail
LEAD: When Beatrix Potter's achievement as a writer and illustrator of books for children was set out at the Tate Gallery in London last year, people came in the tens of thousands and stood in line forever to get into the show.
Substantially the same exhibition can now be seen, through Aug. 21, at the Pierpont Morgan Library.


American Lawyers Land on Their Feet in Tokyo
LEAD: JAPANESE, as a rule, treat lawyers with the same affection that they reserve for trade deficits.
They tend to view foreign lawyers as outright afflictions.


Restaurateur Says U.S. Witness Bilked Him
LEAD: An investor in a restaurant has charged that a Government witness embezzled $200,000 from the business and that the Federal authorities are blocking efforts to recover the money.


Portrayer of the Intimate Copes With Celebrity
LEAD: ON a May morning, the sense of well-being on the quiet tree-shaded street of Tudor homes in Hamden where the author Maggie Scarf lives with her husband, Herb, seems to run counter to the malaise in American domestic life she has documented in her two best-sellers, ''Unfinished Business: Pressure Points in the Lives of Women'' and ''Intimate Partners: Patterns in Love and Marriage.


Penelope Bryant Wed to Grady Catterall in Capital
LEAD: Penelope L. R. Bryant, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward W. M. Bryant of Rockport, Mass., and Washington was married yesterday to Grady Clopton Catterall, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick William Catterall 3d of Dallas.
The Rev.
Caroline S. Pyle performed the ceremony at St.
Alban's Episcopal Church in


Tiny Churches
LEAD: To the Editor: An article on April 3 described a visit to the ''smallest church in England,'' Exmoor's Culbone Church, a building 35 feet long and capable of seating 33.
England evidently has more than one smallest church.
In its description of Wasdale Head and Wastwater, the Ordnance Survey's Leisure Guide to the Lake District notes that of six churches that lay claim to the title of smallest, St.


Gorbachev to Ask U.S.-Soviet Mars Trip in Talks
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev will ask President Reagan to approve a joint United States-Soviet unmanned flight to Mars during their summit meeting in Moscow next week, according to an interview with the Soviet leader that appears in The Washington Post for Sunday.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: IF the phrases sound familiar, it's because almost everyone has heard them countless times. ''We must have lunch  [ or dinner ] '' and ''We must get together soon.'' The words are different, but they mean the same thing: nothing.
Anyone who takes them as a statement of intent, who harbors the hope that the ephemeral is going to become concrete, is either naive or recently arrived from a South


Jennifer Slingluff Is Wed in Jersey
LEAD: At St.
George's-by-the River Episcopal Church in Rumson, N.J., Jennifer Grant Slingluff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Haines Slingluff Jr. of Rumson, was married yesterday to Patrick Malone Robinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Miller Robinson Jr. of Nashville.
The Rev.
George Willis performed the ceremony.


Orioles Forged Own Tradition
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


No. 1 Draft Pick Goes to Clippers
LEAD: The Clippers, the ''other'' Los Angeles team, took a step yesterday toward establishing a winning identity.
The troubled franchise, which last made the playoffs in the 1975-76 season when it was still based in Buffalo, won the draft lottery and the right to Danny Manning of the University of Kansas, the college player of the year.


Dance; Focusing on Ice Skating's Choreographic Aspect
LEAD: The affinity between ice skating and theatrical dancing came to the fore again in an unusually creative evening presented on Friday night by two Canadians, Gary Beacom and Gia Guddat.
The program also featured new solos by John Curry, the former British Olympics champion.


Diverse Moods on Guitar
LEAD: John Johns, a guitarist on the faculty of Vanderbilt University, played in Weill Recital Hall Monday night and showed himself a first-rate performer in almost all respects - the ''almost'' only because he stops short of the technical virtuosity that can put a crowning touch on a recital.
One hardly felt the lack as his sure fingers and firm musical sense made such a stylish thing of the opening Suite in A by Robert de Visee and traced the quickly shifting moods of Richard Rodney Bennett's short


Bush Remark on Armenians' Deaths Stirs Debate
LEAD: Statements by Vice President Bush characterizing as genocide the deaths of more than a million Armenians in Turkey in the early 1900's have rekindled a debate in Congress and made it appear that Mr.
Bush is taking a position different from that of the Reagan Administration.


The Siren Song Of Broadway Is a Warning
LEAD: Since I function both as an engaged theater practitioner and as a detached observer of the theater scene, I sometimes find myself in contorted positions, juggling refractory problems.
Perhaps the most knotty of these is how to preserve personal principles while trying to nurture a practical theatrical operation, congenial to all its members.


Horticulturist Is Wed To Felicia B. Garrow
LEAD: Felicia Blanche Garrow and Manuel Wilfredo Guzman-Valiente were married yesterday at the Stella Maris Roman Catholic Church in Condado, P.R.
The Rev.
Jose Angel Borges performed the ceremony.


Yanks Exhale as Relief Comes Through
LEAD: In the aftermath of their 11-3 belittling at the hands of the Athletics Friday night, there was a measure of embarrassment in the Yankee clubhouse.
Last night, there was a measure of respect regained.


Two New Movies Suggest That Shock Tactics Are Best Muted In a Work of Art
LEAD: One of the minor obsessions of the British writer Cyril Connolly was the murder of Lord Erroll in Kenya in 1941.
But fascinating though he found the case (and officially, it has never been solved), there came a point when he couldn't help noting down his distaste for most of the characters involved.


TALKING: Managers; Keeping Control in A Co-op
LEAD: CO-OPS commonly turn over many day-to-day responsibilities for running their buildings to managing agents.
An agent, for instance, ordinarily is empowered to write checks against a co-op's bank account, to collect maintenance charges, to pay routine bills and to keep corporate records, including such vital papers as proprietary leases.


Community Colleges And Tuition Costs
LEAD: In response to the article ''Concern Growing on College Costs'' on March 20, I would like to point out that Norwalk Community College and 11 other members of the Connecticut system of regional community colleges offer low-cost alternatives to rocketing college tuition increases.


3d Victim Identified in Manhattan Slayings
LEAD: Detectives investigating the execution-style shootings of three workers Friday in the basement of a plumbing supplier in Manhattan identified the last victim yesterday, but said the motive for the murders remained unclear and asked for the public's help in the case.


Hempstead Strives to Change Image
LEAD: RENOVATION, revitalization, renewal.
These three R's, the goals of the Village of Hempstead nearly a decade ago, seem closer to achievement now than they were then.


W. 64th 'Liberty'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviet-Run Stores For Souvenirs
LEAD: ''Not bad at all,'' Oblonsky said, tweaking the quivering oysters out of their pearly shells with a silver fork and gulping them down one after another. ''Not bad at all.''
$ ? - ''ANNA KARENINA''


Poverty Policy
LEAD: To the Editor:


RANGERS' KILGUS IS PERFECT UNTIL 8TH
LEAD: Paul Kilgus pitched seven perfect innings before Gary Gaetti led off the eighth with a double for Minnesota's only hit as the Texas Rangers beat the Twins, 3-0, tonight.
Gaetti hit a hard line drive to left-center field on a 1-0 pitch.
Kilgus (6-3) walked Gene Larkin, the next hitter, but struck out Kent Hrbek and got Tim Laudner to line into a double play.


How to Repair Concrete Steps
LEAD: CONCRETE steps outdoors frequently crack and chip.
Concrete is brittle and requires stable support from beneath as well as reinforcement within to withstand even moderate stress.
Particularly damaging are rapid temperature fluctuations in spring.


Seeking the Elusive Entry-Level Worker
LEAD: ASK any employer about problems in the workplace and chances are the scarcity of entry-level employees will be mentioned immediately.
Even as managerial and white-collar jobs disappear because of layoffs and mergers, the demand for entry-level workers at Westchester companies has never been stronger, said Richard Schaab, director of program operations for the Westchester County


Soviet-Run Stores For Souvenirs
LEAD: THE stock in the shops changes little from year to year.
There are fanciful lacquered boxes, sunny amber jewelry, brightly painted wooden bowls, warm fur hats, vodkas of varying flavors and matryoshkas, the traditional nested wooden dolls.
Even the mostly indifferent and occasionally rude service that characterizes Beriozkas,


A Cocaine Link To Hepatitis
LEAD: AFTER facing its worst siege of hepatitis in at least six years, with 74 recorded cases of the Type A virus in five months, Onondaga County in New York prepared for a return to normalcy.


WHERE THE SUN SHINES, SOLAR ACTIVITY IS STILL BRISK
LEAD: Nearly 10 years have passed since President Carter committed the nation to achieving a 20 percent reliance on solar and other renewable energy sources by the year 2000.
His 1980 budget included $597 million for solar research, and for symbolic measure, Mr.
Carter had solar panels installed in the White


Keeping Tabs on Adjustable-Rate Loans
LEAD: INTEREST rates are edging up, bringing new allure to adjustable-rate mortgages.
In April, 48 percent of new mortgages were adjustable, compared with 22 percent in April 1987, according to the Federal Home Loan Bank Board.
Borrowers are attracted by introductory rates that are often dramatically lower than those of fixed mortgages and by the knowledge that if rates go back down, they won't be locked into a high rate, said Ray Durn, a real estate lawyer in Cleveland with Jones, Day, Reavis &amp;


Public Space Gets a New Cachet in New York
LEAD: There was a strange mix of hype and glory to the announcement earlier this month by Governor Cuomo and Mayor Koch that a 50-acre waterfront park system would be created at Battery Park City in lower Manhattan.
The parks themselves aren't hype; they are among the best public spaces designed for New York City in a generation.


Vintage Connecticut, 1988
LEAD: YOU won't find it on the map, but the Federal Government has designated a large portion of the state as the Western Connecticut Highlands, giving it the official stamp as a wine-making region.


Soft-Shell Crabs, Three Ways
LEAD: NOW that the weather has finally warmed up, soft-shell crabs are coming into the market.
The most common way of cooking them is simple: dust them with flour and fry them in butter.
But soft-shell crabs beget a challenge to chefs, who come up with all sorts of interesting and unusual ways to prepare them.


Peanuts and Pepper
LEAD: ''The Ballplayers have been here for hours,'' writes the poet and essayist Donald Hall, ''for batting practice and pepper and shagging outfield flies. . . .
We arrive and settle with score cards and Crackerjack and peanuts and Schlitz and hot dogs.'' So it is at major league ball parks before every game, a unique atmosphere captured by Scott Mlyn and Louis Rubin in their new book ''Before the Game'' (Taylor Publishing Company, $13.95).


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  The Charge, Sir, Is Faulty Syntax


What's Bad for Glasnost Is Bad for Us
LEAD: To the Editor:


'NO, NO, NANETTE' REVIVAL
LEAD: If the 1925 musical ''No, No, Nanette'' has a message for the 1980's, it is the reminder that today's climate of rampant greed is hardly a new phenomenon in American history.


Laura S. Schwed Weds M. G. Sirico
LEAD: At St.
George's Episcopal Church in New York, Laura Sanxay Schwed, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Schwed of New York, was married yesterday to Michael George Sirico, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George Sirico of the Bronx.
The Rev.
Gerald G. Alexander performed the ceremony.


PERSPECTIVES: Clinton Housing; Shaping Four Acres in Mid-Manhattan
LEAD: ONE by one, in the 1980's, major development sites in ostensibly offbeat locations in Manhattan have gone into construction.
The Zeckendorf Organization, as developer, seems to have made a specialty of them.


A MOMENT OF TERRIFYING PROMISE
LEAD:  RECONSTRUCTION  America's Unfinished Revolution 1863-1877.
By Eric Foner.
Illustrated. 690 pp.
New York:  Harper &amp; Row. $29.95.


Long Island Sound: Profiles by Computer
LEAD: SCIENTISTS are collecting thousands of soil, water and marine-life samples in an effort to develop computer models of Long Island Sound.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: West Midtown Development; 15 Projects Rising as 6-Year Zoning Bonus Ends
LEAD: A SIX-YEAR zoning bonus to allow bigger skyscrapers in west midtown ended this month amid a final push by developers, who are building 15 office and hotel projects in this section of Manhattan that had rarely seen a construction crane in decades.


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Need for Foster Parents Rises as Their Numbers Dwindle
LEAD: THE two-year-old addition on the northern Westchester home was supposed to have been a playroom, but it is hard to play around the four cribs that fill the room.


At Electronic Emporiums, It's the PC Pie
LEAD: IT used to take at least 30 minutes to make a pizza and far longer to deliver it.
So, calling pizza a ''fast food'' was a bit of a misnomer.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-15


PITCHING A PLEASNAT SURPRISE FOR YANKS, INDIANS
LEAD: NO one expected the Yankees to have the best starting pitching in the American League East; the starting pitching, in fact, was generally believed to be the one element that could prevent the Yankees from winning.


Broadway's New Realpolitik
LEAD: When the Soviet Arms negotiator in ''A Walk in the Woods,'' Andrey Botvinnik, decides to leave Geneva, his younger American counterpart, John Honeyman, reacts with the alarm of a rebuffed lover. ''Don't go,'' pleads the otherwise stiff Honeyman. ''I'm still your friend,'' the avuncular Botvinnik replies.


Months of Unrest Led to Leaders' Ousters
LEAD: The dismissal yesterday of the Communist Party leaders in the neighboring Soviet republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan was preceded by repeated outbreaks of unrest in the last three months.
Feb. 13 - School boycotts and street demonstrations by Armenians break out in the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region of the Soviet Republic of Azerbaijan.


In the Days of Detente
LEAD: Only two American Presidents - Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford - have traveled to the Soviet Union for summit conferences since the end of World War II.
Here is a look at their meetings.
May 1972  Moscow - Three months after a historic trip to China, President Nixon met with Leonid I.


Wendy Leigh Romanoff Wed to James R. Packer
LEAD: Wendy Leigh Romanoff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Bernard Romanoff of Boca Raton, Fla., was married in New York yesterday to James Ross Packer, a son of Richard Packer of Norwalk, Conn., and Joan Packer of Vail, Colo.
Dr.
Charles Aigen, a marriage counselor, officiated at the Carlyle Hotel.


For Taiwan, China Looms Ever Larger
LEAD: After 40 years of hostility and separation, China and Taiwan have never felt so close to each other.


Polish Business Group Gives Up Its Efforts to Obtain Legal Status
LEAD: Members of an association of small private businesses have abandoned efforts to legally register the association, citing obstacles put up by the authorities.


Yale Moves to Make Cum Laude Mean More
LEAD: Twenty years ago, graduating with honors from Yale University was a mark of distinction.
Barely a quarter of the graduating seniors qualified for honors.
Fewer than 3 percent were awarded diplomas with the highest approbation, summa cum laude.
This year, however, with grade inflation, making an A is almost as common as getting a C once was.


Susan Hess Marries
LEAD: At St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Bedford, N.Y., Susan Sharp Hess, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Hess of Waccabuc, N.Y., was married yesterday to Matthew Robert Upton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry F. Upton of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
William E. Foley officiated.
The couple graduated from the University of Vermont and completed the exchange, trade, law and language program of the American-Chinese Cultural Exchanges in Shanghai.


Commission Urges All Judges Be Appointed
LEAD: The New York State Commission on Government Integrity, in a new report, has recommended that all judges in the state be appointed, not elected.
But it also conceded that an appointive system does not ''necessarily produce more qualified judges or fewer corrupt ones.''


New Ambassador to Israel
LEAD: President Reagan will nominate William Andreas Brown, the Ambassador to Thailand, to succeed Thomas R. Pickering as Ambassador to Israel, the White House has announced.
Mr.
Pickering has been the Ambassador to Israel since 1985.
The White House announcement, which came Friday, did not disclose Mr.


Risen Star Outruns Filly in Preakness
LEAD: Risen Star, a son of Secretariat, benefited from a rough early duel between Forty Niner and Winning Colors to win the 113th Preakness Stakes today at Pimlico Race Course.


Dr. Amy H. Sherman Weds Anesthesiologist
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
Amy Hope Sherman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julius J. Sherman of Great Neck, L.I., to Dr.
John Gerard McCarthy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeremiah McCarthy of Mitchelstown, County Cork, Ireland, took place yesterday in Amagansett, L.I.
Shepherd Frood, a retired town justice of East Hampton, L.I., performed the ceremony at the Sea Breeze


Memorial for Divine
LEAD: A memorial service for the actor Harris Glenn Milstead, who was known as Divine, is scheduled for 6:30 P.M. to 10 P.M. today at the Tunnel, 12th Avenue and West 27th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Milstead died March 7.
Excerpts from some of his films will be shown.
The memorial is open to the public.
Donations will go to the Northern Lights Alternatives, a nonprofit organization that provides help for children with AIDS.


Miss Longobardo Weds L. D. Langston
LEAD: At the Reformed Church in Bronxville, N.Y., Alicia Anahid Longobardo, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Guy Longobardo of Bronxville and Amagansett, L.I., was married yesterday to Lance David Langston, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul D. Langston of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Margaret Mahaney performed the ceremony.


Do You Like the Stricter Balk Rules
LEAD: This obsessive calling of balks must come to a discernible stop.
GENE SHALIT  Stockbridge, Mass.


Police Still Unraveling Trail Left by Woman in Rampage
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation knew about Laurie Wasserman Dann.
So did prosecutors in three states.
So did her neighbors and her former husband and in-laws.


Jill Wing Is a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Ann Jaquett Wing, the daughter of Mrs.
Rodney G. Aller of Lakeville, Conn., and the late Morgan Wing Jr., to Harold Daniel Heck Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Heck of Easton, Conn., took place yesterday at Grace Episcopal Church in Millbrook, N.Y.
The Rev.
Kenneth Swanson performed the ceremony.


Youth Center Moving to Warehouse
LEAD: The loft building on the western perimeter of SoHo is undistinguished: a warehouse of 1920's vintage, solidly built but fallen mostly into disuse, a lonely repository for voting booths 51 weeks of the year.


CHINA STRAINS FOR OLYMPIC GLORY
LEAD: China may strain for Olympic glory, but so does the United States - with the help of ''instant Americans'' (''China Strains for Olympic Glory,'' by Trip Gabriel, April 24).
Special legislation has been introduced to obtain citizenship for the tennis star Ivan Lendl in time for the 1988 Summer Games.


Hefty, Hefty, Hefty
LEAD: ALL that William (Refrigerator) Perry of the Chicago Bears has to do is lose a pound a day so he can play.
A slip of the lip by Coach Mike Ditka on Friday let out the previously guarded secret of Perry's weight problem.
Ditka said, ''I don't want a 377-pound defensive end'' while discussing switching Perry from defensive tackle to end.


Mark in IC4A Long Jump
LEAD: Ray Humphrey of Georgetown University won the long jump with a last-round jump of 26 feet 10 1/2 inches, a meet record, at the IC4A track and field championships at Yale University today.
Humphrey's jump carried him past Ray Hawkins, who had set a meet record of 26-6 1/2 on the previous jump.


BEST SELLERS: MAY 22, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
ZOYA, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $19.95.) One
woman's story, from St. Petersburg during the
Russian Revolution to Paris in the 1920's to
contemporary New York.


GRACE'S ENVIRONMENT CHIEF: Hugh L. Carey; An Old Pol Tackles a New Post
LEAD: WHEN W. R. Grace &amp; Company hired New York's former Governor, Hugh L. Carey, in December to head its new Office of Environmental Policy, the move caused barely a public ripple.
But speculation has been lively among competitors and shareholders.
Why, they wonder, would Grace, which has endured more than its share of depressed profits and job cuts this decade, fork over $400,000 a year to a 69-year-old lawyer with no recent corporate experience?


Ridgely Trufant Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Ann Ridgely Trufant, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Samuel Adams Trufant 3d of New Orleans, and Theodore Small Brooke, a son of Ann Short of San Francisco and Howard Adams Brooke of Milton, Del., were married yesterday.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Charles S. Temple, assisted by the bride's uncle, the Rev.


THE NATION: Inflation Fears; The Economy Is Looking Brighter, And to Many That's Cause for Concern
LEAD: THE economic news was bright last week.
The Government reported that surging exports cut the United States trade deficit to a three-year low in March.
The dollar firmed.
Factories were busier than at any time in the last eight years.
The nation's purchasing agents, who order goods for their companies, predicted, by a margin of 7 to 1, that the economy would be better in 1988 than in 1987.


Eileen Stafford Kenny Wed To William Araskog on L.I.
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Dominic in Oyster Bay, L.I., Eileen Stafford Kenny, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Kevin Kenny of Locust Valley, L.I., and Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to William Roy Araskog, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rand V. Araskog of New York and Kinnelon, N.J.
The Rev.


Behold! We Have An Industrial Policy
LEAD: One of the Reagan Administration's enduring legacies will be the foundation of a national industrial policy.


Cottage Industry
LEAD: Some have come from homes where ''the parent-child bond has been tattered by years of misunderstanding,'' others from homes that ''make World War I look peaceful by comparison,'' Nan Dale, the executive director of The Children's Village, has written.


Plan to Add 2d Bus Lane For Tunnel Is Pressed
LEAD: THE problem of moving 240,000 eastbound commuters across the Hudson River during rush hours every weekday morning has convinced New Jersey transportation officials to push ahead with a plan to create a second express bus lane leading into the Lincoln Tunnel.


Verbatim: Nicotine Addicts
LEAD: 'The pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine.'  - C. Everett Koop, the Surgeon General, in his annual report on the health consequences of smoking.


SPREADING THE GOSPEL AT HARVARD
LEAD: GOSPEL MUSIC blared from amplifiers, and Chagall paintings with symbols of Christianity and Judaism flashed on the wall above the stage as hundreds of young people crowded into the hall.
It was not an intellectual revival meeting, but Harvey Cox's class on ''Jesus and the Moral Life,'' the hot course at


CRIME
LEAD: An unusually deft first mystery is DEAD RECKONING by Sam Llewellyn (Summit, $15.95).
Mr.
Llewellyn, a British journalist, seems to know everything about yachts and racing them.


THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF ARMS SALES TO THE MIDDLE EAST
LEAD: As Congress considers new proposals for arms sales to the Middle East, debate is again growing over the merits of such deals as a way to win friends, gain influence and preserve peace in the region.
American diplomatic and military experts say that arms sales have become a test of the United States' reliability as a friend and ally and a measure of its commitment to the security of other countries.


When the 'Dead Countries' Come Alive for Collectors
LEAD: DEAD countries, in the parlance of stamp collectors, once existed as stamp-issuing nations but exist no longer.
Dead countries have a way of maintaining their identities, however, rekindling collectors' interest.


Watching And Waiting
LEAD: Game time.
The Cincinnati Reds are trotting onto the artificial turf at Riverfront Stadium in Cincinnati in their white- and red-trimmed uniforms, greeted by a loud ovation.


Ex-Governor, Once in Prison, Runs for Place in Congress
LEAD: Former Gov.
Ray Blanton, who served time in a Federal prison, announced today that he is running for Congress.


Fund-Raisers Give Dukakis A Huge Edge
LEAD: Behind the crusade for money that has helped push Michael S. Dukakis to the brink of the Democratic Presidential nomination are about a dozen wealthy fund-raisers drawn to him by old friendships, Greek-American pride and a desire to participate in politics at the highest level.


Hard Lessons From the Arab Unrest
LEAD: When the Israeli authorities begin reopening Palestinian schools on Monday, they may find that one major strategy for crushing the Palestinian uprising has backfired.


A New Direction For the Retarded
LEAD: WHEN I started working with the retarded in 1974, it was before group homes in the suburbs.
Many of the retarded lived in large institutions.
In those days, big gates and vast grounds kept them at a distance from the outside world.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.97
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.47
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.70
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
8.93
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
13.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
17.75


A Rule Change for Cable
LEAD: Last Wednesday the Federal Communications Commission ruled that reruns of network programs carried by cable companies must be ''blacked out'' if a local station has purchased the exclusive right to broadcast that program in the same area.
How will the ruling affect local broadcasters and cable system operators?


Temple Women Win Championship
LEAD: Penn State and Temple played again today for the women's national championship in lacrosse, and this time the Lady Owls got even.


'I Can Always Find Time to Do This'
LEAD: EVERY Saturday morning, 8-year-old Shaunta Matthews waits eagerly in her Milford apartment for her Big Sister, Michelle Polhemus.
Once Ms.
Polhemus, a 22-year-old volunteer for Big Brothers-Big Sisters of America, arrives from New Haven, the two ''sisters'' hop into the car and do anything from flying a kite, going to the movies or roller skating to simply taking a ride and having a heart-to-heart talk.


WHAT WE FELT, WHAT WE REMEMBER
LEAD:  THE INVENTION OF MEMORY  A New View of the Brain.
By Israel Rosenfield.
Illustrated. 229 pp.
New York:  Basic Books. $18.95.


Wide Variety on the Calendar
LEAD: FROM classical concerts to jazz sessions and, indeed, on to ''the whole world of music,'' the next fortnight will be a busy time around the Westchester Conservatory of Music.


A Born Recycler, in Tune With the Environmental Times
LEAD: I GUESS you could say I'm a born recycler.


'Patty' Launches a Major Star
Just 19 years ago Vanessa Redgrave, perhaps one day to be known as the mother of Natasha Richardson, won the Cannes Film Festival's best-actress award for her bravura performance as Isadora Duncan, the dancer and all-American romantic who had a fatal fondness for long scarves.
The film was Karel Reisz's ''Isadora.''
At this writing, one-third of the way into the 41st Cannes festival, it seems entirely possible that Natasha Richardson might win this year's best actress award for Paul Schrader's ''Patty Hearst,'' a biographical film that is less about an extraodinary character than about an extraordinary event.


U.N. RIGHTS EFFORT: CARROT AND STICK
LEAD: This spring the United Nations is sending the Vice President of Burundi's Supreme Court on a four-week course to study human rights and is also sending a team of French-speaking police officers to help train Togo's police force.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Two years ago we had a plank oak floor installed in our kitchen and dining room over a concrete slab.
In the summer, the last 18 inches of this floor warps, even when we use a dehumidifier.
In the winter the floor returns to normal except for a few spots that are starting to show signs of permanent damage.


POSTINGS: Mixed Use in Bridgeport
LEAD: Officials of The Bank Mart plan to redevelop a 12-acre eyesore of underused and dormant industrial buildings that is visible from their headquarters at 948 Main Street in Bridgeport, Conn.
Cupped around the end of Main Street between Interstate 95, the Metro-North tracks and docks for the Port Jefferson ferry to Long


The Cecil Taylor Enigma Is Intact, Despite New LP's
LEAD: Cecil Taylor has been before the public - some sort of public; he has never commanded anything approaching a mass audience, despite all his critical acclaim - for more than 30 years.
Yet those who admire his music, from critics to musicians to plain fans, still grope for ways to describe it.


A 6,000-Year Trip Into China's Past
LEAD: You start about 6,000 years ago, in the fertile plains of the Yangtze and Yellow Rivers, and as James C. Y. Watt, who presides lovingly over the newly installed ancient Chinese collection at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, can tell you, the characteristics that distinguished the art treasures of China from that of other traditions are already visible.


Bold Textiles Capture the World Of Ancient Peru
LEAD: ''To me as a weaver, Peruvian textiles have always been humbling,'' Jack Lenor Larsen said in a walk through ''The Miracle of Ancient Peru,'' the exhibition he organized at the Edward H. Merrin Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue (at 57th Street).


Reviews/Film; 'World Gone Wild'
LEAD: Mad Max mania is the guiding force behind ''World Gone Wild,'' which opened Friday at the Warner theater and was greeted by only a curious few.
At the very beginning of this standard-issue post-apocalyptic nightmare, a group of machine-gun-toting choirboys arrive at a desert commune full of over-the-hill hippies and proceed to mow down almost everyone in sight.


Rebecca Kelly Company
LEAD: Rebecca Kelly is not afraid of big themes.
Alienation, euthanasia and capital punishment were only a few of the topics with which the Rebecca Kelly Dance Company concerned itself when it performed Thursday night in the 3-D series at the Joyce Theater.
Yet Ms.
Kelly's choreographic earnestness was not always accompanied by an equally high level of imagination, for she often left provocative ideas undeveloped.


Off the Beaten Path In a Changing Nation
LEAD: WHEN a group of Western newspaper correspondents crisscrossed Far Eastern Siberia last year on a tour of gold mines, reindeer farms and hydroelectric dams, they were occasionally startled to discover that officials in the most godforsaken outposts wanted to discuss prospects for tourism.
Tourism?
In a place where the 40-below winter is interrupted only long enough for mosquito season?


STREETSCAPES: Long Island City Power Station; A 1906 Railroad Landmark on the Queens Shoreline
LEAD: THE city's Hunters Point development project - a combination housing-retail-office complex for the Queens shoreline just above Newtown Creek - will begin its preliminary reviews in June.


The Right To Volunteer
LEAD: JOHN C. DONAHUE may be only a volunteer firefighter in Windsor Locks, Conn., but he is willing to fight for the right to volunteer.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  National Offers Free Waivers And Soft Tops


Liverpool Gets Tate Branch
LEAD: TWENTY years ago the Beatles enlivened the world with their exuberant Mersey sound, born and bred in the northern England port of Liverpool.
The city had been declining since World War II but George Harrison, John Lennon, Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr spurred Liverpool's rehabilitation as a cultural center.


Opponents Mass on Video-Terminal Bill
LEAD: EMPLOYERS in Suffolk County, contending that a bill to regulate video-display terminals in the workplace has already driven away prospective new companies, are waging a furious lobbying campaign to defeat the measure.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Basking Ridge  $640,000  25 Stoneridge Lane  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-month-old French provincial; c/a, fireplace in family room, 2-car garage; taxes $8,349.
Butler  $215,000  21 Western Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 63-year-old farmhouse; newly renovated, porch, eat-in kitchen; taxes $2,723.


Headliners; Voice in Evidence
LEAD: Scott Carroll denied that he was ''the South Shore rapist'' who terrorized a wealthy section of Long Island for four years, but compelling evidence against him came from his own mouth.
Mr.
Carroll was convicted last week of 31 counts of rape and burglary, largely on the basis of a ''voice lineup'' in which victims identified his voice as that of the man who attacked them.


Nuclear Power License
LEAD: The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has unanimously approved a license to the Commonwealth Edison Company for the second reactor at its nuclear power plant in Braidwood, Ill., near Chicago, to operate at full power.


Laura R. Hopkins Is Wed in Florida
LEAD: Laura Rowland Hopkins and Stephen Barrington Baxter were married yesterday at Bethesda-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church in Palm Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Ralph R. Warren Jr. performed the ceremony.


Auto Racing Program Helps To 'Keep Good Kids Straight'
LEAD: DAVID ROSENBLUM can remember the day he called his parents for help.
It was New Year's Day of 1983, and they had dropped in on him, bearing bagels ''like good Jewish parents,'' only to find his house, and his life, in disarray.


Mozzarella Comes To Moscow
LEAD: HOW do you say ''half mushroom, half pepperoni, extra cheese on both'' in Russian?


Highly Rewarding Bartok by Kocsis
LEAD: When Bela Bartok received his training in the last decade of the 19th century, the distinction between performers and composers was not as great as it is today.
Gifted students were trained in both disciplines, and Bartok, like Rachmaninoff and Prokofiev, was a piano virtuoso as well as a composer of genius.


3d-District Race Could Be Costly
LEAD: THE RACE to replace the late Representative James J. Howard in New Jersey's Third Congressional District could easily be the most expensive House campaign in history.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Failure on the Plains; FOR SALE: GAS PLANT, NO PROFITS
LEAD: The nation's first commercial synthetic fuels plant, a $2.1 billion complex, looms over the prairie near Beulah, N.D.
Every day, 16,000 tons of lignite coal stripped from nearby mines is fed into a maze of pipes and throbbing machinery, where it is converted into enough gas to supply a city of nearly 250,000 households.


When Moscow Prepares to Receive Visitors
LEAD: To the Editor:


Who's Who in the Conflict
LEAD:  Cambodian Government


The New Guns-and-Butter Battle
LEAD: A HUGE gap has developed between the costs of completing military programs started during the Reagan years and the money likely to be available to pay for them in the next five years.
The issue facing the next President - and Congress and the military - is no longer whether military programs must be reduced, but how much and where.


Christine Wainwright, an Executive, Is Married to Douglas Fernald Stone
LEAD: Christine Wainwright, the daughter of Mrs.
Nicholas Biddle Wainwright of Gwynedd, Pa., and Douglas Fernald Stone, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl H. Stone of Greenwich, Conn., and Paris, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Vincent Liddle performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Messiah in Gwynedd.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 22, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
(Warner, $4.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis
among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
3
THE HAUNTED MESA, by Louis L'Amour.
(Bantam, $4.50.) Unraveling the mystery of
Indian cliff dwellers who vanished centuries ago.


IRAN IS ALIENATING LEBANON'S SHIITES
LEAD: An increasing number of Lebanon's Shiite Moslems, among whom Iran has enjoyed wide popularity, have become hostile toward Teheran, which they blame for relentless factional fighting in the southern suburbs of Beirut.


Hoya in Preview
LEAD: EVEN if Alonzo Mourning is not among the 12 members of the United States Olympic basketball team that will be chosen, the teen-ager is getting a lot of experience at the Olympic trials in Colorado.
He is also getting a good look from the United States Olympic coach, John Thompson, who will become Mourning's coach at


AMERICA'S RED ARMY
LEAD: Jim Robbins's article, ''America's Red Army'' (April 17), provides strong evidence that the Pentagon is finally preparing its soldiers for the next war rather than the last one.
What is not explained is why the National Training Center is located in the Mojave Desert.
In every campaign of every war, topography, terrain and climate have played an important role.


L.I. Sound: Profiles by Computer
LEAD: SCIENTISTS are collecting thousands of soil, water and marine-life samples in an effort to develop computer models of Long Island Sound.


Report Reveals Higher Acidity in Eastern Streams
LEAD: A survey of streams in the Eastern United States by the Environmental Protection Agency shows that the acidification of fresh water is much more widespread than was previously known.


Questions of Feminism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soft-Shell Crabs, Three Ways
LEAD: NOW that the weather has finally warmed up, soft-shell crabs are coming into the market.
The most common way of cooking them is simple: dust them with flour and fry them in butter.
But soft-shell crabs beget a challenge to chefs, who come up with all sorts of interesting and unusual ways to prepare them.


DRUNKEN DRIVING: ZEROING IN ON THE HARD CORE
LEAD: In Judge Edward E. O'Farrell's municipal courtroom in New Philadelphia, Ohio, anyone convicted of drunken driving can count on one thing these days: going to jail.
That is Judge O'Farrell's rule, and it is one measure of how American society's attitude toward drinking and driving is changing, even in smaller communities where people know each other and have preferred not to make an issue of such behavior.


U.S. Articles on Prewar Jews Of Germany Found Wanting
LEAD: The banner headline in The Chicago Tribune on June 14, 1942, announced that the SS had killed 258 Jews in Berlin after accusing them of a ''bomb plot'' against the Third Reich.


IN THE MIDDLE OF L.A.'S GANG WARS
LEAD: THE WARM SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA sun has scarcely set on Good Friday when the shooting begins.
A dark sedan glides through the dusk on West 46th Street, in the heart of the urban war zone that is south-central Los Angeles.


Romancing the Stone
LEAD: BERND MUNSTEINER is a third-generation gem cutter from Germany who devised a technique of cutting stones that bears little relation to the traditional faceting of gems.
He gouges deep vertical, horizontal or asymmetic cuts into the back of a stone so that mysterious planes are revealed when the cuts are viewed through the smooth, unbroken surface.


Gretchen Richter Marries in Jersey
LEAD: Gretchen Van Lear Richter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart A. Richter of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday to Paul J. Massey Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Massey of Bay Village, Ohio.
The Rev.
Polly Kasey performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
She was assisted by Msgr.
Harold Murray, a Roman


Carla Woody Is Wed To David A. Riemer
LEAD: Carla Renee Woody, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George G. Woody Jr. of Roselle, N.J., and David A. Riemer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton Riemer of Marblehead, Mass., were married last evening at Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The Rev.
Erik Kolbell of the United Church of Christ and Cantor Michael


Dr. Dr. Dr. Dr., May I Call You Freddie?
LEAD: THE first time, during my two-year stay in Austria, that I saw a letter addressed to Professor Dr.
Dr.
So-and-So, I thought the secretary's finger had slipped.
But it was I who was in error.
I was in for a lesson in protocol that to this day I have not mastered.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Albertson  $252,500  17 Wood Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old ranch; den, enclosed patio, above-ground pool, 2-car garage; taxes $2,000.
Carle Place  $178,500  312 Rushmore Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; fireplace, den, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.


Bolivar's Treasures Go Home to Venezuela
LEAD: In his lifetime, Simon Bolivar was a known as a military hero, a political dreamer and a legendary lover.
But since his death in 1830, the Venezuelan-born Liberator has gradually assumed the stature of a demigod in the country that he helped to free from Spanish rule.


Acoustic Mystery Under Study
LEAD: Some topics, though by no means negligible, do not warrant lengthy discussion, and have therefore been bundled up into the following medley of short takes:


Louise R. Hoppe Marries John Finnerty in Virginia
LEAD: Louise R. Hoppe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Hoppe of Alexandria, Va., was married yesterday to John D. Finnerty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Finnerty of Caldwell, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas Palke performed the ceremony at the Immanuel Lutheran Church in Alexandria.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Auto Racing  Foyt Qualifies for Indy 500: A. J. Foyt raised his fist in triumph yesterday after qualifying for his 31st consecutive Indianapolis 500.
The four-time Indy winner failed to complete two qualifying attempts May 14, the first of four days of time trials for the race May 29, in a 1988 Lola, then switched to a year-old Lola for his successful effort on the third day of qualifications.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Someone to Watch Over Me  Starring Tom Berenger, Mimi  Rogers, Lorraine Bracco, Jerry  Orbach, John Rubinstein, Andreas  Katsulas, Tony DiBenedetto.
Directed  by Ridley Scott. 1987.
RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video.  105 minutes. $89.95.
Rated R.


Giants' Minicamp Just Fine
LEAD: Buoyed by a combination of fun and dedication that had marked their five days of spring workouts, the Giants ended their minicamp here today.
They were satisfied with the play of the returning veterans, encouraged by the showing of the rookies, and, most of all, relieved that everyone had come through in one piece.


Theater; Hoping for a Cataclysm on a Rainy Day at Shea
LEAD: Considerably dampened by rain, the Survival Research Laboratories presented its post-apocalyptical performance piece ''The Misfortunes of Desire'' Thursday night in the parking lot at Shea Stadium.
This was, first of all, an exercise in audience survival techniques.


J. B. Carroll Weds Tacey B. Phillips
LEAD: Tacey Belden Phillips, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Gorham Phillips of Montclair, N.J., and Vero Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to James Bernard Carroll, a son of Col. and Mrs.
Bernard G. Carroll Jr. of El Cajon, Calif., and Lahaina, Hawaii.
The Rev.
Dr.
J.
Yorke Peeler Jr. performed the ceremony at the Union Congregational Church in Upper Montclair, N


After 4 Months, Yonkers Must Still Pick Low-Income Housing Sites
LEAD: Four months after Yonkers agreed under pressure from a Federal court to build low-income housing as part of a desegregation plan, the city's leaders have yet to settle on construction sites.


Public Authorities, Public Competence
LEAD: New York State Assembly Speaker Mel Miller and his colleagues in the Legislature, circling a politically wounded Mayor Koch, seem intent on blocking his plan for new public authorities to finance and repair public works.
The legislators may have reason to be vexed with a Mayor who bullied legislators over issues like school aid and municipal pensions.


Eliot W. Berry Is Wed To Gloria S. Signorelli
LEAD: Gloria Susanne Signorelli, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John V. Signorelli of Newton, N.J., and Eliot Ward Berry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rynn Berry of New York and Oyster Bay, L.I., were married yesterday by the Rev.
Frederick Hoesli at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  THE ISLAND  By Gary Paulsen.  202 pp.
New York:  Orchard Books/Franklin Watts. $13.95.  (Ages 10 to 14)


Anne Carswell Wed to Benjamin Tang
LEAD: The marriage of Anne Carswell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Carswell of Brooklyn, to Benjamin B. Tang, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Tang of San Francisco, took place last evening at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Justice Richard W. Wallach of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court performed the ceremony.


Poll in Pravda Explores Soviet Attitudes on U.S.
LEAD: The Communist Party newspaper Pravda reported today that most Soviet citizens surveyed in a poll believe that relations with the United States are satisfactory.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  HAMMER, by Armand Hammer with Neil Lyndon. (Perigree/Putnam, $9.95.) Named in part after the Socialist Labor Party's arm-and-hammer symbol, Armand Hammer made a fortune dealing with the Soviet Union and a reputation as a humanitarian and amateur diplomat. ''Dr.
Hammer has managed to turn himself into a sort of living footnote to some of the principal events of his time,'' Ted Morgan said in The Book Review last year.


Where Rural Jews Can Get Together
LEAD: There are no synagogues in this tiny rural community, no kosher butchers or bakeries, and barely enough Jews to make a minyan.
Yet R. D. Eno is working to make his wood-heated log home the center for the Jewish community of rural New England and Quebec.


Long Trail Preceded Woman's Rampage in Illinois
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation knew about Lori Wasserman Dann.
So did prosecutors in three states.
So did her neighbors and her former husband and in-laws.


How Builders Invent Vanity Addresses
LEAD: REAL ESTATE, according to the old saying, is location, location, location, and now some developers are slyly cashing in on a variation of the theme.


RISKY BUSINESS
LEAD: Despite my several points of disagreement, I was moved by Susan Jacoby's piece.


Do You Like the Stricter Balk Rules
LEAD: Given the many children who follow baseball, I think strict enforcement of the balk rule sets a good example.
In a broader context, may I suggest we imprison all people who double park, jaywalk or rip off tags that say ''Do Not Remove.'' JEFF VORCHHEIMER  New York


HARD-LINE CONTRA MAY ATTEND TALKS
LEAD: With the cease-fire between Government and contra forces due to expire in 10 days, leaders of the two armies have announced plans to hold a possibly crucial negotiating session beginning Wednesday.


Linda Eglin Wed To Cole E. Harrop
LEAD: Linda Hilliard Eglin, a daughter of Mrs.
Thomas Wilson Eglin of Lawrenceville, N.J., and the late Mr.
Eglin, was married yesterday to Cole Edmund Harrop, a son of David C. Harrop of New York and Yolanda W. McPhee of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Carl D. Reimers performed the Presbyterian service in the Edith Memorial Chapel at the Lawrenceville


Officer Charges Remarks Led to Demotion
LEAD: A police lieutenant who faces demotion and a pay cut after criticizing what he said were racist attitudes here is suing town officials.


'Slaughterhouse Rock'
LEAD: ''Slaughterhouse Rock'' brings together the usual suspects of teen-age horror films: murder, rock music, sex, low budgets.
Alex, a college student, is possessed by the spirit of a cannibal-ghost buried beneath Alcatraz, released from his grave by a dead rock star.
In order to exorcise the spirit from his dreams, Alex and a half-dozen of his most foolhardy friends head for Alcatraz in the middle of the night, where they stumble over skeletons, corpses and many live rats.


Inflation Worries Keep on Mounting
LEAD: This week's numbers did little to ease the nerves of anyone worried about inflation.
The most-cited measure of inflation, the Consumer Price Index, showed a gain of four-tenths of 1 percent in April, in line with expectations.
That works out to an annual rate of 5.3 percent, up from last year, but not too alarming.


With Race Largely Over, Jackson Lets Up Only a Bit
LEAD: The race for the 1988 Democratic Presidential nomination is effectively over, but the Rev.
Jesse Jackson carries on, motivated by practical politics, broad philosophy and personal drive.


POSTINGS: Town Houses; 86 Units In North Hills
LEAD: Construction is scheduled to begin in the fall on Forestwood, an 86-unit town house complex in North Hills, L.I., which has had two development teams.


Land-Use Decisions Via the Ballot Box
LEAD: FOR more than a decade, Cardinal Industries of Columbus, Ohio, has kept on its sales map a big X scrawled across the city of Parma.


Headliners; Voice in Verse
LEAD: Call it a case of poetic justice.
In a verse written 30 years ago, Howard Nemerov poked fun at the job of poet laureate, with its long hours and low pay; last week, he was appointed poet laureate of the United States, a post created in 1985.
Mr.
Nemerov's poem, ''From the Desk of the Laureate: For Immediate Release,'' referred to the British laureate, who is appointed for life and is expected to chronicle important events in verse.


John R. Cavanagh Is Wed To Deborah Anne Nichols
LEAD: Deborah Anne Nichols, a daughter of Mrs.
Clement Nichols of Westfield, N.J., and the late Mr.
Nichols, was married yesterday to John Raymond Cavanagh, the son of John J. Cavanagh of Upper Greenwood Lake, N.J., and Placida, Fla., and the late Anne Cavanagh.
The Rev.
Barry Andrews, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central


Lilco Deal Disappoints Hard-Line Opponents
LEAD: AS elements of a negotiated settlement between the state and the Long Island Lighting Company fall into place, it appears likely that Long Island's public power advocates will be forced to settle for a partial victory in their battle to take control of the beleaguered utility.


On Your Own, At Least a Bit, in Moscow
LEAD: EVERY TIME I see a red and white tourist bus cruising across Moscow, passengers staring vacantly out the window as a guide recites a numbing litany of useless facts about the city, I want to throw a roadblock in its path, jump aboard and tell the visitors they're missing one of the great dramas of their time.


Q and A
LEAD:  Emptying an Apartment


Once More Into the Videotex Breach
LEAD: IT takes special courage to enter the videotex market, a graveyard for many bold projects of brave and strong companies.
Yet the idea of videotex - a service that harnesses the power of the personal computer to bring electronic shopping, information and entertainment into the home - remains so compelling that the International Business Machines Corporation, the nation's largest computer maker, and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, the largest retailer, have formed an alliance to try to resurrect the market once again.


Celtics' Tradition Looming Larger
LEAD: ''Our Birds are Better than Yours.''


CORRECTION
LEAD: A correction in this space last Sunday incorrectly identified the holder of the men's world record for the 400-meter run and gave an incorrect time.
The record is 43.86 seconds and it was set by Lee Evans of the United States in the 1968 Olympic Games in Mexico City.


Entry Runs 1-2 in Acorn
LEAD: Centennial Farms' entry of Aptostar and Topicount swept the first two places in the Grade I, $183,300 Acorn Stakes for 3-year-old fillies at Belmont Park yesterday.
Aptostar was the winner by three lengths.
In taking the Acorn, Aptostar, trained by H. Allen Jerkens, took the first leg of the New York Racing Association's Triple Tiara series.


Gray Goods
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEW JERSEY OPINIONThe Future Is in Good Hands
LEAD: AS A former press aide to Assemblyman Chuck Hardwick, I was asked to speak to a ninth-grade class on the ''how-to's'' of political campaigning.


Having a Stuffed Koala as a Grown Woman Is Not the Same
LEAD: YOU see it everywhere these days. The koala bear. First, the Qantas


Jets Trade Carter
LEAD: THE Jets closed down their minicamp Friday and yesterday they traded Russell Carter, a first-round draft choice out of Southern Methodist in 1984, to the Los Angeles Raiders for a conditional sixth-round draft choice in 1989.
The condition is that Carter must make the Raiders.
Carter the 10th player chosen over all in the 1984 draft, has been plagued by a series of injuries mainly to his legs, hamstring and calf muscles.


Brooke Lilley Marries Geoffrey Cutler
LEAD: Brooke Carol Lilley, a daughter of William Lilley 3d and Beverly Knight Sullivan, both of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Geoffrey Ilsley Cutler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald F. Cutler Jr. of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
The Rev.
Edwin M. Ward, headmaster of St.
Stephen's School in Alexandria, Va., performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Washington


TRUCK RAMS A RESTAURANT
LEAD: A truck lost its brakes and rammed a restaurant today, injuring five people.
The truck was traveling down an incline in heavy rain at 6 A.M. when the brakes failed.
It crashed into Frenchy's Restaurant, caving in the front and injuring Patrolman Kenneth Racine.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Two years ago we had a plank oak floor installed in our kitchen and dining room over a concrete slab.
In the summer, the last 18 inches of this floor warps, even when we use a dehumidifier.
In the winter the floor returns to normal except for a few spots that are starting to show signs of permanent damage.


David Chapin Married To Diana Helene Wolff
LEAD: Diana Helene Wolff and David Emerson Chapin were married yesterday at their home in Clifton, N.J., by Judge Philip Freedman of State Superior Court in Newark.


A Gallery of Sternhagen Roles
LEAD: IN Frances Sternhagen's 33 years as a stage and, sometimes, screen actress, her performances have progressed, accordise to perfection.
She paid her dues by proving versatility, reliability and competence, qualities that her reviewers may have taken for granted.
As her work continues to deepen, revelatory may become the operative adjective in describing her performances.


Shell Bacteria Kill East Coast Lobsters Near Ocean Dump
LEAD: A disease that burns holes in the shells of lobsters and crabs has cropped up in undersea canyons north of New York City's newest and only ocean dump site for sewage sludge, prompting a Federal study of whether the dumping is harming marine life.


White Horses
LEAD: To the Editor: I enjoyed Susan Spano Wells's article, ''Tracking Wiltshire's White Horses'' (Travel, April 10).
A number of years ago, while motoring through the Berkshire Downs, I was startled by the appearance of a giant white equine on a distant escarpment.
It turned out to be the Marlborough Horse, one of the hill figures mentioned.


THE MAN BEHIND THE FEMINIST BIBLE
LEAD: The spring of 1953 was an exhilarating time for the publisher Alfred A. Knopf.
His freshly printed American edition of ''The Second Sex'' by Simone de Beauvoir made the New York Times best-seller list and appeared on the way to being considered the most ambitious and brilliant study of woman ever written.


Same Standards For the Umpires
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


POSTINGS: Wetlands on the Cliffs; Office Delay
LEAD: The Lucky-Goldstar Group of Seoul, South Korea, whose 29 companies are involved in everything from oil exploration to video cassette recorders, is trying its hand at building in Bergen County and finding it heavy going.


Companies Find Profits In China
LEAD: THE president of the Farmstead Telephone Group might be based in Glastonbury, but he is doing a lot of business in Beijing.


In a Word, The Festival Was a Workshop
LEAD: The New York City Ballet's American Music Festival presented 22 world premieres, 14 earlier ballets set to music by American composers, one company premiere and the first performance at the New York State Theater of a work (danced again by students) created originally for the School of American Ballet.


Correction
LEAD: A listing of summer music festivals in last week's Arts and Leisure section incorrectly described the schedule of the Dobbs Ferry Chamber Music Festival series.
The concerts take place on Sunday.
The dates indicated - June 5, 12, 19 and 26 - are correct.


TV Docudramas Go One Step Beyond Reality
LEAD: Perceiving that TV docudramas exploit is much like realizing that water is wet.
So what else is new?
Desperate for material to fill its prime-time needs, television long ago discovered that there were fortunes to be had in ''based on fact'' dramas.
Usually, these are adaptations of nonfiction books.


Julia Just and Michael Azerrad Marry
LEAD: Julia Barnett Just and Michael Milsner Azerrad were married yesterday at the Washington home of the bride's stepfather and mother, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Turrell Bower.
Judge Joyce Hens Green of the Federal District Court in Washington officiated.


Anne Axline Marries
LEAD: Lieut.
Anne Elizabeth Axline of the Navy Nurse Corps, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John W. Axline of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Lieut.
Comdr.
William Lawrence Howe 2d of the Navy Medical Corps, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
William L. Howe of Clearfield, Pa.
The Rev.
George Coxe Bland Jr. performed the ceremony at the Greenfield Hill Congregational Church in Fairfield.


A Perfect Mismatch: Separates With Snap
LEAD: STYLE and function have been pairing up nicely of late in the form of suits that come in contrasting colors and fabric patterns.
The ensembles are at once more relaxed and more eye-catching than the traditional matching suit.


County acts to Stem Crimes of Bias
LEAD: FOUR months ago, after a spate of anti-Semitic vandalism in and around Westchester County, government officials met with Jewish and other religious leaders to coordinate a response to the racial and religious crimes.


Ornaments Bloom, But Nature Is Better
LEAD: THIS is the time of year for neighborhood walks and back-street wanderings in the car.
Every week brings new plants and trees into bloom.
Homeowners meet nature's challenge with garden and house improvements.


Canoeist Crosses Massachusetts in Pursuit of Idea
LEAD: Denny Alsop says he made a 33-day trip across the state by canoe to implore all who would listen to clean up and preserve the water.


How to Repair Concrete Steps
LEAD: CONCRETE steps outdoors frequently crack and chip.
Concrete is brittle and requires stable support from beneath as well as reinforcement within to withstand even moderate stress.
Particularly damaging are rapid temperature fluctuations in spring.


Minnesota Lawmaker Denies Misusing Aides
LEAD: Former aides to Representative Gerry Sikorski, Democrat of Minnesota, have accused him of requiring them to perform personal services and to campaign for him while on the Government payroll, according to two published reports today.


Foreign Policies
LEAD: To the Editor:


A CONSERVATIVE WITHOUT COMPROMISE
LEAD:  RIGHT FROM THE BEGINNING  By Patrick J. Buchanan.
Illustrated. 392 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $18.95.


AN OUTSIDER JOINS THE TEAM
LEAD: AT A RURAL COLLEGE in Michigan, Dr.
Harry Edwards, the controversial sports sociologist, is delivering his first speech of a three-day, $8,000 lecture stop.


INTELLECTUAL ORGIES WERE NOT FOR HIM
LEAD:  DIARY  Volume One.
By Witold Gombrowicz.
Edited by Jan Kott.
Translated by Lillian Vallee.  232 pp.
Evanston, Ill.:  Northwestern University Press.
Cloth, $29.95.
Paper, $12.95.


Juliana Van Norden Weds Craig Wynne
LEAD: Juliana Van Norden, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Montagnie Van Norden of New York, and Craig Donald Wynne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald T. Wynne of Chagrin Falls, Ohio, and Vero Beach, Fla., were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the ceremony.


Planning, for Vermont: A Tough Balancing Act
LEAD: Elaine Park of the town manager's office says about half of Williston's 4,291 people want a 400,000 square foot shopping mall in their town and the other half fear such a mall will change Williston's character.


Landmark Politics
LEAD: Secretary of the Interior Donald Hodel has taken it into his own hands to declare Whittaker Chambers's Maryland farm a National Historic Landmark.
His pitch to the conservative right is a low-water mark in landmarking.


Social Events; Harlem Celebrations
LEAD:  Harlem at the Plaza . . .
May 23 - The Studio Museum in Harlem, which is devoted to the preservation and exhibition of the art of black Americans, will celebrate its 20th anniversary at a benefit at the Plaza.
Bill Cosby with be the master of ceremonies, and Representative Charles B. Rangel and others will receive awards.


For Those Who Like It Hot
LEAD: THAI cuisine was a natural to succeed Cajun as the hot trend.
As American appetites have been energized for spicy foods, the need was met by Mexican, then Sichuan and Hunan, followed by Cajun and now comes the incendiary cooking of Thailand.


Women at War in Comedy of Menace
LEAD: Joan Schenkar often says she writes plays out of her dreams, and some seem born of nightmares. ''The Lodger,'' at the Theater for the New City, is a light reverie.
But this nifty little number, which Ms.
Schenkar wryly calls ''a comedy of menace,'' may not make everyone who wakes from it long to dream again.


Rude Fans Ruin Baseball
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Beware of Greeks Wearing Lifts
LEAD: AT A CLANDESTINE meeting of the Attention-Getting Headline Writers Society, the subject of Michael Dukakis was discussed in detail (''Punchy Headscribe Gang Secret Confab Targets Duke,'' as one of them reported to me in his characteristic patois).


County's Libraries Reach a New Milestone
LEAD: ''WESTLYNX'' has arrived.
This is the Westchester Library System's new centralized, automated circulation-control network that will eventually give librarians immediate access to an on-line data base of updated information about every title held by 37 out of 38 public libraries in the county.
The White Plains Public


Pro Football; Marshall Sparks a Dormant Fire
LEAD: HE plopped onto the concrete steps in front of the Washington Redskins offices, gaining a brief respite from a long, sweaty morning of minicamp practice.
The sun's rays dazzled as he squinted his right eye and then his left one.
A Concorde jet blazed overhead, leaving a trail of booming clatter.
Quickly, his thoughts shifted.


Federal Judge Slain by a Gunman in Westchester
LEAD: A 56-year-old Federal judge was shot and killed yesterday afternoon at his Westchester County home by an assailant who pursued him from garden to house with a blazing gun and then shot himself to death, the police reported.


Ens. R. S. Bruner Weds Dr. Alexandra Vorhaus
LEAD: Dr.
Alexandra Nicole Vorhaus, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis J. Vorhaus 2d of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Ens.
Russell S. Bruner, U.S.N., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Van Nixon Bruner of Hattiesburg, Miss.
The Rev.
David Cockroft of the Riverdale Presbyterian Church officiated at the Riverdale Yacht


In Afghanistan, Communists Stand Alone and Divided
LEAD: ADDRESSING the first brigade of Soviet troops to withdraw from his country last week, President Najibullah of Afghanistan offered expressions of confidence about his Government's ability to survive.
But he also appealed to Afghan Communists to ''consolidate the unity of our party.''


Peers Strive to Prevent Addiction
LEAD: ''I had a friend who started smoking cigarettes, then pot, and then he started doing coke,' Steven Scarola told the class of restless seventh graders.


Cello and Piano Duo
LEAD: Karen Buranskas and Masako Hayashi make up an exceedingly fine cello and piano duo.
They have an understanding of the duo form (and of each other) unusual for its subtlety, and at Weill Recital Hall last week they gauged the acoustics of this presumably unfamiliar space with professional ears.


A QUESTION OF COSTS: OREGON PREFERS TO CARE FOR THE AGED AT HOME
LEAD: Oregonians have always prided themselves on their maverick streak.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Basel
LEAD: In the heart of Switzerland's second city, the Rhine turns resolutely from a westerly course toward the north.
Local people call the bend in the big river its knee - a dramatic curve that marks the waterway's transition from an Alpine river into the throbbing artery of one of the continent's most heavily industrialized regions.


SHOULD NEW YORK TAKE JUDGES OFF THE BALLOT?
LEAD: New York is one of only 14 states in which voters still choose some or most of their judges in partisan elections.
Bar associations and other groups are urging the Legislature to switch to a system of appointment known as merit selection.
Their campaign gained the support last week of the New York State Commission on Government Integrity, created by Governor


How to Repair Concrete Steps
LEAD: CONCRETE steps outdoors frequently crack and chip.
Concrete is brittle and requires stable support from beneath as well as reinforcement within to withstand even moderate stress.
Particularly damaging are rapid temperature fluctuations in spring.


No Letup By Gooden As Streak Reaches 8
LEAD: The Mets, still streaking in all directions, won their sixth straight game tonight by beating the Los Angeles Dodgers, 4-0, as Dwight Gooden won his eighth straight by pitching a four-hitter with the oldtime mastery.


Soft-Shell Crabs, Three Ways
LEAD: NOW that the weather has finally warmed up, soft-shell crabs are coming into the market.
The most common way of cooking them is simple: dust them with flour and fry them in butter.
But soft-shell crabs beget a challenge to chefs, who come up with all sorts of interesting and unusual ways to prepare them.


Kings Tenements
LEAD: To the Editor:


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''If the deficit doesn't improve that's bad, but if it does, we have another problem.
We're statistical hypochondriacs.'' - Norman Robertson, chief economist at Mellon Bank on the trade deficit.


POSTINGS: N.J. Condominiums; Converting a Mill
LEAD: In the last decade, the developer Gordon Ash has churned out mill conversions steadily.
First was Roger's Mill, a locomotive erecting shop he converted into offices and a museum.
Then came Ivanhoe Mill, a flax factory turned into stores, and Union Works and Argus Mill, yarn and textile factories that are now schools.


Bruins Can't Believe Their Effort Hasn't Paid Off
LEAD: After the Boston Bruins dropped the first two games to the Edmonton Oilers in the series to decide a Stanley Cup champion, Rick Middleton stood in a jammed locker room hallway with a faraway look.


A Winning Combination Named Beverly Sills
LEAD: Beverly Sills has never been the retiring type, so let's avoid the word and say that she is stepping aside.
Her scheduled departure at the end of this year as general director of the New York City Opera will not take her out of the company's picture - she becomes president of the board, after all.


James S. R. Rose And Amy Harless Wed in Greenwich
LEAD: Amy Elisabeth Harless, a daughter of Mrs.
Ricardo Deambrosio of Lyme, Conn., and Montevideo, Uruguay, and Theodore James Harless of Port Chester, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Stillman Rockefeller Rose, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Harden Rose of New York and Bridgehampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Alastair Votaw performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich,


Military Academies Are Becoming Even Tougher on Body and Mind
LEAD: Almost 3,000 graduates of the Military, Naval and Air Force Academies will toss their hats into the air in the next couple of weeks at West Point, Annapolis and Colorado Springs, after having finished educations that are among the most rigorous in the United States.


Andrew Hildick-Smith Married to Dr. Jacobus
LEAD: At the Miller Chapel of the Princeton Theological Seminary in Princeton, N.J., Dr.
Claire Hughes Jacobus was married yesterday to Andrew Hewes Hildick-Smith by the Rev.
John Crocker Jr., an Episcopal priest.
The bride, who will keep her name, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David P. Jacobus of Princeton.


Tracking the Creative Process
LEAD: THERE are sculptures, prints and photographs by nine artists in the Gallery at Hastings-on-Hudson's ''Progressions.'' But the objects are less the subject of the show than the ways in which they are made.
Most of the items are backed up by drawings, molds, early impressions, written notes - whatever it takes to demonstrate the stages in a given technique.


METS' BULLPEN IS BACK ON EVEN KEEL
LEAD: Dave Johnson is the first to admit it: The Mets' bullpen, which he called ''my main concern'' in spring training, is no longer his concern.
It is his strength.


ABOUT BOOKS
LEAD: AMONG the books topping the list for good summer reading is ''The Politics of Inclusion'' by Thomas H. Kean (Free Press, New York, $17.95), a thoughtful and often provocative work by the Governor about himself and his political career.


THE WINGS OF ADVENTURE
LEAD: Daniel Menaker's article, ''Hell on Wheels'' (May 1), brought back memories of similar six-hour weekly drives to and from our farm in Vermont.
After five years, however, I realized Mr.
Menaker's dream of sprouting wings: I learned to fly and purchased a well-used four-passenger Piper airplane to speed the trip for my wife, two children and overweight dog.


Jackson Beats Dukakis In Vermont Convention
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson edged out Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis in the state Democratic convention's preferential vote today, earning seven delegates to Mr.
Dukakis's six.
One uncommitted delegate to the national convention was also elected.


With Visions of Tree Houses, A Sign-Up for Fresh Air Fund
LEAD: For 8-year-old Carlos Toro and his friends, the good times growing up in Jamaica, Queens, are usually overshadowed by fear of the neighborhood's rampant drug trade and flashes of violence.


Honoring Golf's Best
LEAD: TWO pros who are still competing are on the list of three players who will be voted into the PGA-World Golf Hall of Fame Nov. 3.
Tom Watson and Peter Thomson will be enshrined, along with the late Robert Harlow.


Yes, A Faster Network, but Which One?
LEAD: Most experts agree that an Integrated Services Digital Network is needed to handle the huge volume of data that will be transmitted over the nation's telecommunications networks in the future.
But according to Kenneth L. Phillips, chairman of the Committee of Corporate Telecommunications Users, the I.S.D.N.


Do You Like the Stricter Balk Rules
LEAD: The balk rule is serving only in slowing the game without really tackling the reason for its institution.
More balks appear to be called when the pitcher pitches to the batter than when he throws to first base to eradicate a troublesome man on base.
The rhythm of the pitcher is unnecessarily interfered with, and the resultant confusion serves only to make the game less enjoyable.


Haiti Is Called Growing Hub for Drug Smuggling
LEAD: Haiti has joined Panama as a growing drug-smuggling center, and members of its secret police are forcing their way into the distribution of crack in Florida, witnesses told a special Senate hearing today.


Ms. Whittingham, Editor, Is Married
LEAD: Mary Elizabeth Whittingham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Whittingham of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married there yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
John and St.
Mary to Charles Frederick Goehring, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford Goehring of Falmouth, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Paul Mohan performed the ceremony.


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed distribution of The New York Times in some areas.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


White Horses
LEAD: To the Editor: The article about Wiltshire and other chalk horses brings back memories of using the Uffington Horse as a navigational landmark when flying over England in World War II.
Several of these figures were marked on our British air navigation charts.


LOVING JONROBERT
LEAD:  IN THE SHADOW OF THE PEACOCK  By Grace Edwards-Yearwood.  279 pp.
New York:  McGraw-Hill Book Company.


Kathryn Cordes Wed To Gianfranco Chicco
LEAD: The marriage of Kathryn Cordes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Woglom of Norwalk, Conn., to Gianfranco Chicco, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Giuseppe Chicco of Kalamazoo, Mich., and Lodi, Italy, took place yesterday at the hotel Maxim's de Paris in New York.
The Rev.
Michael B. Easterling, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony.


WESTCHESTER OPINON
LEAD: I REMEMBER the study where the Beaver went to receive the wisdom of the ages given to him by Ward Cleaver, his father.
I do not remember any of the pearls that this sage cast before the boy but I do remember the study and the magical maleness that emanated from that room and its surroundings.
I have always wanted a room like that for my own.


Mary Olmsted a Bride
LEAD: Mary Graves Olmsted, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Olmsted of Wayland, Mass., was married there yesterday to Kenneth Leroy Wyatt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leroy Wyatt of White Plains.
The Rev.
Cassius Webb performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Spirit.
A graduate of Williams College, the bride is studying for an M.B.A.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Two years ago we had a plank oak floor installed in our kitchen and dining room over a concrete slab.
In the summer, the last 18 inches of this floor warps, even when we use a dehumidifier.
In the winter the floor returns to normal except for a few spots that are starting to show signs of permanent damage.


Brakeman Killed, Engine Derailed As Conrail Trains Crash in Jersey
LEAD: A railroad brakeman was killed and the engine of a freight train derailed early yesterday in a head-on collision between two Conrail trains in Fair Lawn, N.J., railroad officials said.


New Industry Is Growing From Neglected Seeds
LEAD: Jan Blum grasps tiny green leaves in her fingers the way a jeweler might handle an emerald.


THE NATION: The People's Concern; ILLEGAL DRUGS ARE AN ISSUE NO POLITICIAN CAN RESIST
LEAD: When Vice President Bush split with the White House last week over a plan to drop narcotics charges against Panama's Gen.


DATA BANK: May 22, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
I Q'88
IV Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,902.6
$3,880.8
$3,735.2
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.3
4.8
4.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
IV Q'87
III Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$144.2
$141.9
$144.2


COMMENCEMENTS
LEAD:  Marist College


A Woman and a Walnut Tree: Part II
LEAD: IN MAY 1982, my essay, ''Twins Through Time: A Woman and a Walnut Tree,'' appeared in this section.


Hungary May Name New Leader Today
LEAD: A senior Communist Party official strongly hinted today that Prime Minister Karoly Grosz would be chosen Sunday to replace Janos Kadar as party leader.
He said the Soviet Union did not have a say in the choice.


Dreams And History Devastated In a Blaze
LEAD: You can smell the devastation here before you see it.


Reporter's Notebook; Dukakis Seems to Be Savoring the Home Stretch, From Coast to Coast
LEAD: This is the bicoastal season in Presidential politics, the days of Camden in the morning, Los Angeles at night and the rest of America from 30,000 feet.
It is the final stretch of the long Democratic nominating process before the New Jersey and California primaries bring it mercifully to a close on


Car-Train Crash Kills 3
LEAD: A car carrying six people ran into a freight train Saturday, killing three people in the car, the police said.
Officials said the car struck an engine of a Burlington-Northern freight train at a crossing just east of here.
The victims were identified as Robert Dean Cooper, 38, of De Soto, and Paula R.


Japan Group To Offer Arts Prizes
LEAD: A Japanese art society long associated with the imperial family has announced the creation of international prizes for artists that are likely to become among the most lucrative awards of their kind in the world.


Texaco-Icahn Accord Seen
LEAD: An agreement to end Carl C. Icahn's promised proxy fight against the management of Texaco Inc., and to drop the company's suit against Mr.
Icahn, may be announced today.


Regrouped Lakers Breathing Easier
LEAD: There was a sense of renewal amid the jubilation this afternoon as the Lakers arrived for practice at Loyola Marymount University.
On Saturday, the defending world champions had taken a major step toward getting back to the championshiop round with a 109-98 pasting of the Utah Jazz in the seventh game of the Western Conference semifinals.


Gandalf Technologies reports earnings for 13wks to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gandalf Technologies (OTC)
13wks to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
44,215,000
33,019,000
Net inc
2,288,000
1,676,000
Share earns
.19
.16
Shares outst
12,140,017
10,054,087
9mo rev
120,643,000
95,575,000
Net inc
6,225,000
4,533,000
Share earns
.52
.45
Shares outst
12,084,817
10,012,383


GORBACHEV'S TONE UPBEAT ON SUMMIT
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev set a positive tone for the coming Moscow summit meeting in an interview published in today's issue of The Washington Post.
But the Soviet leader provided no hint of flexibility on some of the key arms control issues that stand in the way of a new treaty reducing long-range nuclear arms.


First Liberty Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Liberty Financial
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,401,000
2,291,000
Share earns
.71
1.17
6mo net inc
3,160,000
4,501,000
Share earns
1.59
2.31


Taxing Lesson at Yonkers Market
LEAD: Armed with guns and pages from the New York State Tax Law, a team of undercover agents swept through the Yonkers Raceway Flea Market today to demonstrate that tax evasion does not pay.


Cuomo Says Budget Gap May Exceed $300 Million
LEAD: As bickering flared anew today among Republicans and Democrats over the state budget shortfall, Governor Cuomo indicated that the shortfall would be larger than the $300 million figure that his administration had predicted earlier this month.


Control Laser International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Control Laser International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,374,000
2,530,000
Net inc
54,000
25,000
Share earns
.02
.01


Tax Watch; Nonprofit Groups May Face a Tax
LEAD: COMPUTER dealers are upset that university bookstores are selling personal computers under their tax-exempt umbrella.
Travel agents complain that they are being unfairly undercut by a growing number of tax-exempt groups offering discount tour packages.
Drugstores are protesting unfair competition from tax-exempt pharmacies at nonprofit hospitals.


Rowers Transcend Difficulties to Enjoy Exercise Sublime
LEAD: ALTHOUGH recreational rowing, meaning sculling in a single-seat vessel, is being heralded as the exercise sublime, the sport has yet to take off in a way comparable to jogging, cycling or even windsurfing.


Lab in Japan For Upjohn
LEAD: The Upjohn Company will soon open its laboratory in Japan, the drug maker said today.


2 Powerful Chairmen at Odds As Vote Nears on Home Care
LEAD: A bill to provide Federal funds for long-term home health care is nearing a vote in the House of Representatives, provoking a dispute between two powerful committee chairmen.


Jeanne Nyland Is Married To Lloyd Anthony Doran
LEAD: Jeanne Nyland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Donald Nyland of Yonkers, was married yesterday to Lloyd Anthony Doran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Doran of Annandale, Va.
The Rev.
Daniel Davidson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Holy Name Chapel of the College of New Rochelle.


Setbacks Can't Stall Guerrero's Ambition
LEAD: THE Golden Age of auto racing continues Sunday with the Indianapolis 500, the annual event that defines a certain part of Americana.


Those Who Think Young
LEAD: Life begins at 55 at the sixth annual New York State Senior Games scheduled for June 16-19 on the SUNY campus in Cortland.
More than 2,000 men and women are expected to compete in 21 sports, from archery to track and field, bait-casting to swimming, darts to shuffleboard.


Alamco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alamco Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,696,000
3,961,000
Net loss
514,000
923,000


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; From Parking Lot To Room With View
LEAD: Fresh off the Concorde after three days of parties and screenings at the Cannes Film Festival, Stephen C. Swid strolled last week through his estate-size office at the top of a skyscraper on the Avenue of the Americas and settled onto an expensive sofa.
He had just become a movie potentate by buying into the Cinecom Entertainment Group, a small but growing film production and distribution company.


West Germans Debate Disposition of Nazi Art
LEAD: Are paintings that once decorated the offices of Nazi officials (a) works of art, (b) historical documents or (c) symbols of darkness?


Technical Communications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technical Communications Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,226,516
1,874,901
Net inc
126,727
b15,278
Share earns
.10
-
6mo sales
1,226,516
1,874,901
Net loss
234,193
c63,653
Share earns
-
.05


The Age of Security
LEAD: Assassination was a quaint idea when ''The Manchurian Candidate'' was first released in 1962, evoking places like Sarajevo and names like Czolgosz.
Last week's chilling news of a plot against the life of Jesse Jackson showed again how common public violence has become over the intervening 26 years.


North Castle Selected By Goodmark Foods
LEAD: Goodmark Foods of Raleigh, N.C., has gone north for its new ad agency, choosing North Castle Partners Advertising, Greenwich, Conn., whose forte is snack and specialty foods.
The budget is $3 million.
The agency has begun working on a campaign for Slim Jims, a beef snack.
Goodmark, which recently acquired Fleetwood Snacks, a Pennsylvania maker of cookies and crackers, also produces Pemmican and Penros meat snacks and Andy


Angeles Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Angeles Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,866,000
10,488,000
Net loss
2,013,000
b28,000
9mo rev
24,978,000
31,343,000
Net loss
1,729,000
b639,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income and includes gains from tax benefits of $14,000 and $310,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Violence Flares in West Bank
LEAD: Violence erupted in the occupied West Bank today as the Israeli authorities opened schools that were closed for four months in East Jerusalem.
The schools were reopened in an attempt to restore normal life to the city.


Consultants Criticized by Agency Side
LEAD: ALVIN A. ACHENBAUM, a former ad agency executive turned consultant, came under heavy attack from a high advertising industry executive last Friday for what he purportedly has been doing to reduce agency compensation.


Dallas Papers Settle Suits
LEAD: The Dallas Morning News and The Dallas Times Herald have settled their lawsuits accusing each other of fraudulent circulation practices.


Cindy Bernhard Married
LEAD: Cindy P. Bernhard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Bernhard of Putnam Valley, N.Y., was married yesterday to Joseph V. Taibi, a son of Rita Taibi and Joseph S. Taibi, both of Ozone Park, Queens.
Arthur Burstein, a town justice in Putnam Valley, performed the ceremony at the Garrison (N.Y.) Golf and Country Club.


Teacher Says She Acted on Instinct To Save Children in Shooting Spree
LEAD: A substitute teacher recounted today how she grabbed a deranged woman to stop her from shooting a classroom of second-grade youngsters on Friday.


When a Woman Is Driven to Kill Her Baby; A Satire of Liberalism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Judge Rules on Koppers Bid
LEAD: A Federal judge ruled on Friday that Beazer P.L.C.'s $1.69 billion bid for the Koppers Company could be completed if its financing were guaranteed, thereby meeting Federal stock-margin rules.


Bridge
LEAD: In major championships, players in pair contests have one small advantage over those in team events: all play the same deals and have an opportunity to compare notes later.


Shauna M. Lehv Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Shauna Marie Lehv, the daughter of Mrs.
John Grantham Ballard of Mercer Island, Wash., and Honolulu, and Bernard M. Lehv of Herbeys, France, was married yesterday to Frank G. Binswanger 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Binswanger Jr. of Philadelphia.
Judge Lynne M. Abraham of the Common Pleas Court in Philadelphia performed the ceremony at Andalusia, an estate near


7-Up Official Quits His Job
LEAD: Following his conviction last week on charges of price-fixing while working for another company, James J. Harford, who is the president of the Seven-Up Holding Company, resigned yesterday.


Visualization: Does It Provide an Edge?
LEAD: INCREASING numbers of athletes are turning to a sports psychology training technique known as visualization to sharpen their competitive edge.
The technique involves mentally rehearsing for a competition, playing ''movies'' in the mind over and over of a superb past performance or the ideal performance.


Commodore Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commodore Environmental Services
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,837,000
16,259,000
Net loss
1,854,000
b3,444,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income  The company said the reversal was due to job-related costs experienced in the latter part of 1987.


Horse Racing; Hot Debate Follows a Spirited Race
LEAD: The Preakness is over, but the controversy lingers.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Presidential Greetings
LEAD: The process of choosing United States ambassadors is tedious, involving months of security checks by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, elaborate medical tests, obtaining agreement to the proposed appointment from the host government and, finally, securing confirmation by the Senate.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the second day of Shabuoth, the Jewish Feast of Weeks, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Japan's 1% Fiction
LEAD: To the Editor:


Classic Auto Accessories of North America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Classic Auto Accessories of North America
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
162,416
272,178
Net loss
289,879
180,304
9mo sales
1,260,020
561,989
Net loss
272,372
301,143


John Hancock Investors Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* John Hancock Investors Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,413,980
3,439,458
Share earns
.50
.50
Net income represents net investment income.
The net asset value at March 31 was $144,529,506 for the latest period, compared with $154,133,153 for year-ago period.


Beres Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beres Industries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,903,200
1,527,800
Net loss
b21,400
91,200
b-Includes a writeoff of about $44,000 of direct moving expenses and a gain of $44,500 from the sale of assets.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Have two or more members of the same team ever scored 40 or more points in a regulation game in the National Basketball Association?


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Air Express International Corp., Darien, Conn., an international air freight forwarder, appointed R. Peter Zimmermann senior vice president and chief finacial officer.
He assumes the duties of Alfred N. Tolan, executive vice president and chief financial officer, who will continue as a consultant.


India's Advertising Industry Surges
LEAD: A once-flagging advertising industry is booming in India.
It has become fiercely competitive and one of the country's fastest-growing economic sectors.


Labonte Sprints to a Victory
LEAD: Terry Labonte took the lead early in the final 10-lap sprint in the Winston today and became the fourth different winner in the four-year history of Nascar's $600,000 winners-only, three-segment auto race.


Citizen Anti-Crack Drive: Vigilance or Vigilantism?
LEAD: When the crack business struck East 13th Street in Manhattan last year, neighbors stepped in where government had failed: they began citizen patrols, staged undercover drug buys and made citizen arrests without the help of the police.


Volume Cut Worrying Wall Street
LEAD: The reduction in stock trading volume in recent weeks is giving Wall Street a new worry.
With so many investors on the sidelines, traders and money managers fear that the market could become even more volatile.


Utopia Journal; Paradise Found? Close but Not Quite
LEAD: All the children in Garrison Keillor's fictitious Lake Wobegon may be above average, but that would hardly suffice here in Utopia.


We Can't Isolate Vietnam Forever
LEAD: Following a visit to Vietnam last month, I concluded that more than 13 years after the last American helicopters left Saigon, the United States should consider ending its isolation of Vietnam.
For the first time, Congress seems ready to review American policy there.


Zero Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zero Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
36,908,000
31,173,000
Net inc
4,012,000
2,985,000
Share earns
.32
.24
Yr rev
139,073,000
125,699,000
Net inc
13,290,000
11,602,000
Share earns
1.06
.93


Conspirators, Trillions, Limos in the Night
LEAD: This appears to be the season for disclosing Washington secrets, and I don't see why only Republicans should be able to play.
I've got a pretty good one.
Secret messages concealed on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times.
Whispered conversations on the Senate floor.
White House limos hurtling through the wintry night to a house in northwest Washington.


SUNY Law School at Buffalo Hears Kunstler
LEAD: When the graduating class at the Law School at the University of New York at Buffalo was trying to select a commencement speaker, the choices were Harry Hamlin or William M. Kunstler.


American League; Orioles Win 2d In a Row
LEAD: The lowly Baltimore Orioles achieved a two-game winning streak for the first time this season, defeating the Seattle Mariners, 7-2, today as Jose Bautista and Mike Morgan combined on a five-hitter and Larry Sheets and Cal Ripken hit home runs.


With President of Union Ailing, Teamsters Face a Power Struggle
LEAD: A divisive struggle is unfolding in the International Brotherhood of Teamsters over who will succeed Jackie Presser as head of the nation's largest union.


Oilers Close In On Title
LEAD: The Edmonton Oilers were right where they wanted to be throughout the game, and their discipline put them in position to attain their fourth Stanley Cup by a novel method, a sweep of the opposition.


Amy Irving's Choices and the Lure of the Stage
LEAD: She could be heading off to Spain to accompany her husband, one of the most successful movie makers in history, on location with his next blockbuster.


Slain Judge Ruled Against His Killer's Daughter
LEAD: The man who shot and killed a Federal judge in Westchester County Saturday was a retired New York City police officer apparently seeking revenge for the judge's dismissal last week of a $2.5 million lawsuit filed by his daughter, investigators said yesterday.


Chairman of Payless Scorning Edelman Bid
LEAD: David Stanley, chairman and chief executive of Payless Cashways Inc., thinks little of the announcement by an investor group led by Asher B. Edelman that it may seek control of the big building materials company that is based in Kansas City, Mo.


5 Finalists Are Vying For Fuji Photo Business
LEAD: Fuji Photo Film USA, Elmsford, N.Y., whose parent is the Fuji Photo Film Company of Tokyo, announced that five finalists were vying to handle its photographic and magnetic products divisions.
The selection process, which began May 3, initially included eight agencies.


Mary Gibbons Marries John Feinstein, Writer
LEAD: At Christ the King Roman Catholic Church in New Vernon, N.J., Mary Clare Gibbons, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James T. Gibbons of Morristown, N.J., was married yesterday to John Feinstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Feinstein of McLean, Va.
Msgr.
John Corr performed the ceremony, assisted by Rabbi Raymond


Yanks Activate Guidry
LEAD: Ron Guidry, who has spent the last six months recovering from surgery on his left shoulder, was activated yesterday from the disabled list by the Yankees.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Veto Battle Looms
LEAD: The long-expected veto of the omnibus trade bill is likely to come Tuesday even though the House will be in session and is likely to vote to override that same day, White House and Congressional officials predict.


Ayer Settles Army Dispute
LEAD: N. W. Ayer, the advertising agency that created the ''Be All That You Can Be'' recruiting campaign for the Army, on Friday agreed to pay $750,000 to the Department of Justice to settle charges of billing and bidding improprieties, a spokesman for Ayer said.


Black Churches, Endangered Children
LEAD: ''The black family has been an issue in search of leadership,'' Eleanor Holmes Norton observed in an article three years ago in The New York Times Magazine.
Even as she wrote, however, that leadership was starting to materialize in a familiar place: the black church.


D'Arcy Masius Wins Hampton Inns Account
LEAD: D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis, has been called on to handle the Hampton Inns account after a six-way competition that lasted three months.
The budget is $2 million.


American Locker Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Locker Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,341,004
5,893,855
Net inc
b317,818
c425,471
Share earns
.24
.32
b-After a $6,239 loss from discontinued operations.
c-Includes a $56,927 gain from discontinued operations.


Olympic Trials Are in Sight
LEAD: Contenders for the United States Olympic sailing team are competing in every American regatta possible to prepare for one that counts, the Olympic yachting trials this summer.


Measuring Speed on Small Craft
LEAD: Surfers and board sailors take their water speed seriously.
Whether it is wind or wave that drives their small craft, most like to go fast.
But until recently, they had to guess their speed.
Now they can measure it as they go.


ABM Gold Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ABM Gold Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,859,000
545,000
Net inc
4,000
803,000
Share earns
-
.13
The year-ago quarter includes a gain of $1,175,000 on the sale of securities by affiliates.


Rise Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rise Technology
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
205,000
822,000
Net loss
576,000
320,000


Northeastern Wins Heavyweight Title
LEAD: In beating Penn today to win the Joseph Burk Cup for the first time since 1983, Northeastern's heavyweight crew put together the race it lacked May 15 when it finished third in the Eastern Sprints Championship.


Reporter's Notebook; At Sikh Temple, an Uncertain Song Returns
LEAD: The sound of Sikh hymns rang across the Golden Temple this morning for the first time in two weeks and echoed off the empty chambers and corridors of the nearly deserted shrine.


Miss Greenfield Weds Thornton David Lewis
LEAD: Ellen Greenfield and Thornton David Lewis were married yesterday at the Explorers Club in New York by Rabbi Burton Aaron Siegel.


Astros Top Cards With Run in Ninth
LEAD: Chuck Jackson doubled home the winning run in the ninth inning today as the Houston Astros beat the St.
Louis Cardinals, 2-1.


Stalin Protest Is Broken Up In Lithuanian Capital Square
LEAD: Authorities broke up a gathering of about 300 people at a main square in the Lithuanian capital of Vilnius today, the Soviet press agency Tass said.


Continuum Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continuum Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,118,000
15,596,000
Net loss
957,000
b1,023,000
Share earns
-
.24
Yr rev
60,381,000
58,201,000
Net inc
2,493,000
3,227,000
Share earns
.57
.75


Cajuns Ask Minority Status
LEAD: A measure granting minority status to Cajuns has been approved by the Louisiana House of Representatives over the objections of black lawmakers who say the measure threatens black economic development, Cajuns are descendants of French settlers expelled from Canada who settled in the steamy bayou country of south Louisiana in the 1750's.


In Kabul, Rising Fear and Cynicism
LEAD: Near a row of carts piled high with onions, rhubarb and peppers from the surrounding countryside, two friends were talking in a crowded downtown bazaar the other day about the uncertain future of Afghanistan when all Soviet soldiers finally leave.


Fountain Powerboat Indusries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fountain Powerboat Indusries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,740,293
2,160,159
Net inc
181,964
96,848
Share earns
.04
.02
6mo sales
8,115,186
3,346,157
Net inc
250,891
101,757
Share earns
.06
.02


For Leonard Bernstein, 3 Birthday Premieres
LEAD: The Brooklyn Philharmonic is to give a concert in celebration of Leonard Bernstein's 70th birthday, Tuesday at 8 P.M. at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, as part of its Meet the Moderns series.
The Occasional Singers, under the direction of Gil Robbins, are to perform, with Lukas Foss, Tania Leon and Steven Mercurio sharing the conducting.


Hawks Cannot Contain Celtics' High-Flying Bird
LEAD: Kevin McHale repeated today what has been said many times before, ''Larry Bird just won't let you lose.''


At Accused Pastor's Church, Schism
LEAD: More than 250 worshipers came to the nearly windowless auditorium of the True Church of God in East Harlem yesterday, as they have every Sunday, to seek the light from their minister.
But this Sunday was different, because the minister, the Rev.
Thomas Streitferdt, is charged with raping two teen-age members of his church.


A New Career, in Sales, For Old Cartoon Stars
LEAD: YOU need a celebrity to sell a product.
How about one of America's most famous businessmen?
Granted, he is no Iacocca, but he is loved by the public, will not charge much, has been married to the same woman for 55 years, has a fun-loving 54-year-old son and a 47-year-old daughter, and certainly will not embarrass your company.


Tanner Dismissed By the Braves
LEAD: The Atlanta Braves dismissed Manager Chuck Tanner tonight and named Russ Nixon, a manager in their minor league system, to replace him.


Two-Hit Victory For Candelaria
LEAD: John Candelaria, who has survived 14 years in the major leagues and already endured a lifetime worth of heartache, still possesses remnants of a boyish innocence.


18 Drown in Bay of Bengal
LEAD: At least 18 fishermen drowned Saturday after their boats capsized in the Bay of Bengal off the port of Chittagong, The Bangladesh Observer reported today.


Pressure For Tougher Fed Actions
LEAD: In order to calm the nation's inflation fears, the Federal Reserve Board should alter its current approach of raising interest rates slowly, a number of credit market participants contend.


Iran Seeking Oil Cutbacks
LEAD: The oil minister of Iran, Gholam Reza Aghazadeh, arrived here today, apparently seeking support for a reduction in oil output in advance of the June meeting of the ministerial council of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.


'Then and Now' Spans 5 Decades of Dance
LEAD: Jane Dudley is to present ''Then and Now,'' a program of dances spanning 50 years, Wednesday through Friday at the Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street.
Miss Dudley was a soloist with the Martha Graham Dance Company from 1936 to 1946 and toured the United States as a member of the noted Dudley Maslow Bales


Ransom Wilson, Flutist, Receives Alabama Prize
LEAD: The flutist Ransom Wilson is the recipient of the first Alabama Prize for outstanding work in the arts awarded by three Alabama newspapers owned by The New York Times Company.
The prize, consisting of a $10,000 cash stipend and a Tiffany etched glass bowl, was presented to Mr.
Wilson at a ceremony Friday night in Gadsden, Ala.


Uniquack III Rides to the Voters' Rescue
LEAD: This year's college graduates were freshmen in high school when Ronald Reagan became the 40th President, and they will be in their middle 30's, or thereabouts, at the turn of the century.


2 Blacks Die in Soweto Attack
LEAD: Two blacks were killed and 30 were wounded, some seriously, in the township of Soweto today when explosives were hurled at the meeting of a conservative black political party, the police said.


Cuomo Addresses Commencement in Buffalo
LEAD: Governor Cuomo greeting graduates yesterday in Amherst, N.Y., at the commencement ceremony at the State University at Buffalo.
In his commencement address, Mr.
Cuomo urged the graduates to shape ''a world larger than the one that ends in your own back yard.'' (NYT/Joe Traver)


Using Arts To Help Heal The Mind
LEAD: ''Sometimes, when I'm playing music, I can see another healthy person being formed - there's a light ahead,'' said Richie, a stocky, gentle man of 48 years.
At an unusual and struggling Manhattan clinic, Richie has found a kind of peace from his chronic depression through art therapy.


Isoetec Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Isoetec Communications
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
25,621,000
24,199,000
Net inc
330,000
1,139,000
Share earns
.05
.21
Shares outst
6,270,000
5,326,000
The latest quarter included $876,000 of equity in losses from Executone Inc.


Unique Plan to Merge Papers Inspires Debate
LEAD: A California farming town with two tiny newspapers that want to merge their non-editorial operations is becoming the center of a debate with national ramifications.


Armenians Urge Discussion of Soviet Unrest
LEAD: Some of a crowd of about 300 Armenians who gathered yesterday at the Moscow Armenian Cemetery to urge the Soviet press to end its silence about recent unrest in Azerbaijan.
Rioting between Azerbaijanis and Armenians took place there earlier this year, and was repeated last week. (Agence France-Presse)


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-13  Karoly Grosz replaced Janos Kadar as head of Hungary's Communist Party.
Mr.
Kadar, whom the Soviet Union installed as party leader in 1956, was elected to a new post that is meant to be ceremonial.
Page A1  Man in the news: Karoly Grosz, the new head of the Hungarian Communist Party, has shown political skill and adaptability, overcoming a reputation of stolid conservatism.


W. S. Joyce, 75, Dies; Headed Boston College
LEAD: The Rev.
W.
Seavey Joyce, a Jesuit priest and president of Boston College from 1968 to 1972, died of cancer of the pancreas on Thursday at the Campion Center Jesuit Residence in Weston, Mass., where he lived.
He was 75 years old.


Solid Waste: The Beverage Sector Shouldn't Foot the Entire Bill
LEAD: To the Editor:


Associated Communications Corp reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Associated Communications Corp
(
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,528,161
1,996,355
Net loss
2,333,764
b954,424
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $763,335 from sales of properties.


Hong Kong Bank Denial
LEAD: The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation and Midland Bank P.L.C. are not discussing setting up joint headquarters in London and Hong Kong, George Cardona, manager of corporate public affairs at Hongkong and Shanghai, said Saturday.
He was commenting on a report by the Reuters news service on May 20 in which bankers and analysts were quoted as saying that such a plan would give the Hong Kong bank a safety net after the transfer of Hong Kong's sovereignty to China in 1997.


Books of The Times; A Winged Terror and Childhood Crises
LEAD:  The Pigeon  By Patrick Suskind  Translated by John E. Woods. 115 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $14.95.
Only Children  By Rafael Yglesias  523 pages.
William Morrow. $19.95.


Market Place; Utilities Favored For High Returns
LEAD: COMMON stockholders have generally received higher returns from electric and telephone utilities over the last 16 years than from unregulated industrial corporations, a study by the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners has found.


South Africa Delays Insider Trading Action, Official Says
LEAD: The South African Government has failed to act on new laws needed to curb rampant insider trading in the stock market, Pretoria's top legal adviser on the issue complained today.


When a Woman Is Driven to Kill Her Baby; Mothers Need Nurture
LEAD: To the Editor:


Commercial International Corp reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial International Corp
(
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
15,504,722
13,737,524
Net loss
831,653
148,286
9mo rev
49,602,372
42,292,031
Net loss
b899,277
107,990
b-After a gain of $148,000 from cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Jordana Pomeroy, Student, Marries
LEAD: Jordana Pomeroy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Harris Pomeroy of New York and Garrison, N.Y., and Tyler Gregory Anbinder, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen E. Anbinder of Washington, Conn., and New York, were married yesterday by Rabbi Bruce Goldman at the Terrace Restaurant atop Butler Hall at Columbia


Metro Matters; Computer Burps, Leaving Mothers To Go Hungry
LEAD: ''I don't know how I could express hunger,'' Patricia Bennett said. ''It was not to the point where I passed out.
The children always ate.
Maybe I didn't.
Maybe not for two or three nights.
Maybe some juice during the day, but that's not eating.''


Turner Scores First Victory
LEAD: Sherri Turner birdied the last two holes today to win the Mazda L.P.G.A.
Championship by a shot over Amy Alcott and gain the first victory of her professional career in a women's major event.


Computrac Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computrac Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,430,765
1,950,002
Net inc
343,813
154,402
Share earns
.06
.03


Penn State Takes IC4A Title Again
LEAD: Penn State won its third consecutive IC4A team championship today, but Harry Grove's Nittany Lions had to sweat out the final event - the 1,600-meter relay - before they could enjoy the victory.


Staying Dry
LEAD: There was enough rain in the Northeast this week to draw comparisons with the Flood.
At the Big East baseball tournament in Bristol, Conn., the man who played Noah was a groundskeeper, 59-year-old Anthony Guerriero, who will retire this year as Parks Department Group Leader at Muzzy Field.
Guerriero's devotion to service may or may not have had something to do with divine instruction, but he managed to turn a swamp into the baseball equivalent of Mount Ararat.


Thompson Makes Cuts
LEAD: John Thompson, coach of the 1988 men's Olympic basketball team, today invited 48 players to a public scrimmage in Denver.


The Trade Effect
LEAD: Do baseball players traded during a season hit better before or after the trade?


Utility Bidders Named
LEAD: Samuel Belzberg, the Vancouver investor, is among the bidders for part of the British Columbia Hydro and Power Corporation, the provincial government said Saturday.
The company is a government-owned utility with annual revenues of about $2 billion (Canadian).
The government said Pacific Rim Gas Inc., a unit of the Hong Kong and China Gas Company Ltd., is one bidder for Hydro's mainland gas division, which distributes natural gas in the Vancouver area.


Review/Ballet; A Revival of Antony Tudor's 'Gala Performance'
LEAD: One of the funny things about funny ballets is that not all were originally meant to be funny.
Antony Tudor's ''Gala Performance,'' which American Ballet Theater revived Saturday at the Metropolitan Opera House, is a curious case in point.


Dodd, Mead Appointment
LEAD: Jonathan Dodd has been appointed president of Dodd, Mead &amp; Company, the publishing house has announced.
A fifth-generation member of the family that has owned the concern for more than 140 years, Mr.
Dodd joined it in 1958 after graduating from Yale and has served as vice president, publishing director and director of subsidiary rights.


New Air Terminal, but Old Problems
LEAD: Continental Airlines, seeking to regain consumer confidence, today opened its new terminal at Newark International Airport, calling it the most technologically advanced airline terminal in the world.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Wadkins Surges to Victory: Lanny Wadkins came from five shots back with a 65 to take a one-stroke victory yesterday in the Colonial National Invitation tournament in Fort Worth.
Wadkins finished at 270, 10 under par.
The 18th victory of his 18-year PGA Tour career was worth $135,000 from the total purse of $750,000 and pushed his earnings to $447,465 for the year.


Accord Ends Firestone Strike
LEAD: The United Rubber Workers today reached a tentative contract agreement, ending a weeklong strike against the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company.
Hours earlier, union members at the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company approved a new contract.


In Pelham, Grief and Warm Memories
LEAD: This village of 6,800 people in Westchester County is less than three miles from the Bronx.
But the quiet in the streets, the broad lawns and the fact that most everyone seems to know most everyone else typify life ''like it is in upstate little towns,'' said Anthony Giacovelli as he left Mass this morning at the Church of St.


Hong Kong Rates
LEAD: The Hong Kong Association of Banks said on Saturday that it had decided to leave interest rates unchanged at its regular weekly meeting.
The banks' prime lending rate is currently 7 1/2 percent.


Zaire, the Manager's Nightmare: So Much Potential, So Poorly Harnessed
LEAD: A drop of sweat slipped onto his brow, perhaps from the heat, perhaps from nervousness, as Nakambo explained how lucky he was to find a job as a private school teacher that pays $10 a week.


An End to Seasons in Book Publishing
LEAD: As long as anyone can remember, autumn has been the big season in book publishing, the season to unveil the blockbuster novel and the talked-about nonfiction book.


Charles Sweeps Seniors Event
LEAD: Bob Charles of New Zealand registered another virtually errorless round and captured the Nynex/Golf Digest Commemorative tournament today.


Review/Rock; A Raucous Beat From a Hendrix Fan
LEAD: The beat was the biggest thing on stage at the Ritz Thursday night for Jesse Johnson's show.
Large as a passing ocean liner, and a lot more maneuverable, it filled the club and overwhelmed Mr.
Johnson's guitar playing and singing.
If any one thing was the point of the music, it was.


Belling The Cat
LEAD: Drug-itics - the demogogic posturing of candidates to appear tough on the subject of drugs -has become a new national narcotic.


Hitech Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hitech Engineering
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
850,000
161,726
Net inc
375,516
b133,930
Share earns
.18
-
b-Net loss


Fear of Chernobyl Radiation Lingers for the People of Kiev
LEAD: Judging by Kiev's bustle and the vigorous chestnut flowers that spiral upward from its trademark trees, the city is flourishing two years after the disaster at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant drove away its children and its peace of mind.


Boardroom Business Prodcts reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boardroom Business Prodcts
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,003,440
1,292,618
Net loss
1,995,220
392,251


Infringements on the Right Not to Smoke
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Zaire: Potential Unfulfilled  Zaire has immense potential and natural resources - as well as a reputation for being one of the world's most egregious examples of economic mismanagement.
Page A8.
New Wall Street Worry  The low trading volume of recent weeks has resulted in a stock market that lacks liquidity, which could make stocks even more volatile.


Black Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Black Industries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,509,435
2,775,778
Net inc
1,387
18,249
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
5,474,697
5,457,746
Net inc
165,877
112,928
Share earns
.20
.13


New World Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New World Entertainment
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
115,637,000
82,229,000
Net inc
b4,616,000
c11,301,000
Share earns
.35
.77
Shares outst
12,177,000
14,647,000
b-Includes extraordinary items totaling $12,557,000 that are from a gain on early extinguishment of debt and tax credits.


Peter V. Busatti, Tournament Director, 57
LEAD: Peter V. Busatti, director of the Ladies Professional Golf Association's Chrysler-Plymouth Classic tournament, died of cancer yesterday at the Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 57 years old and lived in Amawalk, N.Y.


O'Brien Energy Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* O'Brien Energy Systems (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,370,672
1,097,965
Net loss
448,267
159,498
9mo rev
3,734,447
2,153,383
Net loss
832,517
355,823


Topics of The Times; Campaign Reform, Unstalled
LEAD: New York's Governor Cuomo proposes two ways to break Albany's deadlock over campaign finance reform.
In March, the Democratic Assembly approved a bill, backed by the Governor, to reduce the influence of big money in campaigns by creating a system of public financing of statewide elections - for governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general and comptroller - and for the Legislature.


Washington Talk: Press Secretaries; Mouthpieces to the Powerful Have Principles, Too
LEAD: Press secretaries for top Government officials often must perform a high-wire act.
In their attempt to tell the truth while protecting their superiors, theyrisk a fall, as demonstrated when Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d dimissed his spokesman, Terry Eastland.


African Debt Relief Urged
LEAD: President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia said today that Africa would need a 20-year grace period to build its economy in order to repay its $200 billion debt.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Minnelli's Triple


Victoria Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Victoria Financial
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,392,000
2,070,000
Net inc
4,000
35,000
Share earns
-
.02


Honduras Hurt by Border Violence
LEAD: A blocky building of raw gray concrete rises alongside a four-lane highway on the outskirts of this nation's capital.
On some floors huge panels of glass glint in the late afternoon sun.
On others there are gaping dark holes.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Waiting for Liberty
LEAD: James S. Brady, the White House press secretary who was felled by gunshots directed at President Reagan outside a Washington hotel seven years ago was back in the Oval office the other day with David Puttnam, the film producer, Robert Bolt, the writer, and Mollie Dickenson, author of ''Thumbs Up,'' the story of Mr.


Gasoline Prices Stable
LEAD: Retail gasoline prices were steady in the past two weeks, according to a survey of about 12,000 service stations throughout the United States.
The average national price for a gallon of gasoline on May 20 was 100.26 cents, just three-hundredths of a penny less than the average for May 6, said Trilby Lundberg, who oversees the twice-monthly Lundberg Survey of gas prices.


The Ways Writers Are Weathering The Strike
LEAD: It is that time in May when, ordinarily, television writers are expectantly awaiting the news about scripts they have turned in for the networks' fall television shows.
Instead, the 9,000 striking members of the Writers Guild of America on both coasts will be expectantly awaiting the news today from a 2 o'clock meeting in Sherman Oaks,


Karen Waddell Is Wed To Ida Bagus Suarsana
LEAD: Karen Waddell, a daughter of Roberta W. Waddell of New York and the late Richard H. Waddell, was married yesterday to Ida Bagus Suarsana, a son of Jero Nyoman Suratimi and Ida Bagus Anom Buana, both of Denpasar, Bali.
The Rev.
William K. Fuller, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Riverdale Yacht Club in Riverdale, the Bronx.


Ad Campaign to Tell What US Magazine Is
LEAD: US magazine is beginning a lighthearted year-long trade campaign today, aimed at dispelling notions people may have of the magazine.


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Spain, which ruled the Philippines for 300 years, has offered a $70 million loan to its former colony, according to the Spanish Prime Minister, Felipe Gonzalez.
Spanish colonial rule in the Philippines started in the 16th century and lasted until the Spanish-American war in 1898.
Mr.
Gonzalez said Spain would cooperate with other members in the European Community to help the Philippine economy.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''So you ask yourself: Which situation are we better off in, to have Noriega more or less in charge in Panama, and us with an indictment that we cannot do much about, but nevertheless holding onto it?
Or having Noriega giving up power in Panama and leaving Panama, but also, having paid that penalty, not having the indictment hang over his head?


In the Lion's Den
LEAD: George Chen, 4 years old, taking a look at a lion's head used by Chinese lion dancers yesterday to entertain participants in a charity walkathon.
The ''Walk for a Million,'' a 6.2-mile walk for various charities, began at Columbus Park at Bayard and Mulberry Streets in Chinatown. (NYT/Bob Glass)


Canada Banks' Loss Reserves
LEAD: Canada's federal banking regulator said Friday that Canadian banks had been ordered to raise their third world loan-loss reserves to 35 to 45 percent of total loans to the developing world, from the current 30 to 40 percent.


African Railroad Running a Deficit
LEAD: For most of the 1980's, the $3 billion, 403-mile Trans-Gabon Railroad was the largest construction project in sub-Saharan Africa.


Marie Stoess Is Wed To Mark J. Schwartz
LEAD: The marriage of Marie Louise Stoess, the director of business travel marketing at American Express, to Mark Jonathan Schwartz, an associate in corporate finance at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, took place yesterday.
Rabbi Charles Lippman officiated at the chapel of the Church Center for the United Nations in New


Scientific Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scientific Technologies
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,648,732
1,397,081
Net inc
283,542
b231,473
Share earns
.01
.01
b-Includes a gain of $50,000 from an accounting change.


Man in the News; Hungarian Up From Bureaucracy; Karoly Grosz
LEAD: Karoly Grosz has become the chief of the Hungarian Communist Party largely because the country's stagnating economy is believed to require radical changes.
And that fact is a measure of his political skill and consummate adaptability.


Koch Proposes Plan To Catch Scofflaws From Outside State
LEAD: With scofflaws from outside New York State accounting for $265 million of the $1.4 billion in unpaid parking fines in New York City, the Koch administration is proposing a program that would target their cars for towing by city marshals.


Altman Agency Tapped For Sara Lee Projects
LEAD: The Sara Lee Corporation of Chicago has selected William Altman Advertising, a $5 million shop specializing in the arts, to handle advertising for its corporate affairs division.
The agency, which also has the Metropolitan Museum account, will promote arts and philanthropic events sponsored by Sara


Czyz Loses Fight, Title Shot
LEAD: In a battle of former light heavyweight champions, Dennis Andries finished strongly to win a 10-round majority decision today over Bobby Czyz at Bally's Park Place Casino Hotel here.


Physicians' Pharmaceutical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Physicians' Pharmaceutical
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,999,051
1,678,666
Net inc
18,630
4,998
9mo rev
5,584,678
3,583,182
Net inc
21,424
b267,576
b-Net loss


Tennis; French Open Starts With Strong Field
LEAD: Virtually all of the world's best tennis players have gathered here for the French Open, the second leg of the Grand Slam and the year's most important clay-court event.


Review/Ballet; A Passionate Makarova In 'Swan Lake' Excerpt
LEAD: Saturday afternoon was a time for swooning at the Metropolitan Opera House, for American Ballet Theater offered two unabashedly passionate works.


EFI Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EFI Electronics
Qtr to April 1
1988
1987
Revenue
1,866,194
1,336,536
Net inc
342,076
b204,239
Share earns
.03
.01
Yr rev
6,307,753
4,913,558
Net inc
996,887
b726,025
Share earns
.10
.08
b-Includes a gain of $43,603 from a tax benefit for the quarter and an extraordinary gain of $155,000 for the year.


Decorator Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Decorator Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,652,435
6,380,681
Net loss
110,205
b160,351
Share earns
-
.16
b-Net income and includes an accounting gain of $60,000.


Students Battle Police in South Korea
LEAD: University students hurling stones and gasoline bombs at police as thousands staged violent demonstrations yesterday in the southwestern city of Kwangju.
Police dispersed the rioters with tear gas.
Scores of protesters were arrested but there were no immediate reports of injuries.
The demonstrations were held to call for a full-scale inquiry into he army's crushing of an uprising in the city in 1980.


Rift on Noriega Deepens as Bush And Treasury Chief Oppose Deal
LEAD: American officials said today that there is a deepening rift within the Reagan Administration over how to remove Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega from power in Panama.


Million-Dollar Team Keeping Bush Campaign in the Money
LEAD: As a senior at an exclusive New England preparatory school, George Bush saved a younger classmate from being beaten by a bully.
Forty-seven years later, the events that day at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., are bringing enormous financial rewards to Mr.
Bush's Presidential campaign.


Federal Express vs. Japan (Cont.)
LEAD: It is a familiar tale.
An American company tries for years to break into the Japanese marketplace.
Finally, just as it thinks it is through the last barrier, it hears of other regulations that prevent it from operating in Japan.


Review/Opera; Children Sing 'Noye's Fludde' By Britten
LEAD: It is nice to come across a children's opera intended for children.
Most serve adult needs, either as fantasies of what grown-ups think childishness should be or else as condescending exploitations of the cuteness they perceive in young innocence.
Benjamin Britten works hard to establish and defend the rights of children in his brief opera ''Noye's Fludde.


2-Year and 5-Year Notes to Be Auctioned
LEAD: Treasury financings this week begin with today's regular auction of three-month and six-month bills, followed on Wednesday by an auction of two-year notes and an auction of five-year notes on Thursday.


Militia War Abates in Beirut As Negotiations Go Forward
LEAD: Fighting between Shiite Moslem militias slowed today as negotiators worked on the terms for the deployment of Syrian forces in the capital's battle-torn southern suburbs.


HUNGARIAN PARTY REPLACES KADAR WITH HIS PREMIER
LEAD: Prime Minister Karoly Grosz became the new General Secretary of Hungary's Communist Party today, replacing Janos Kadar, whom the Soviet Union installed as party leader during the failed uprising in 1956.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of May 22, 1988:
MONDAY
Amer Express
Detroit Edison
BRE Properties Inc
San Diego G&amp;E
Continental Illinois
United Illuminating
Crane Co
Watkins-Johnson
TUESDAY
Brush Wellman
Home Depot Inc
Connecticut Nat Gas
Merck &amp; Co
Duquesne Light
Philip Morris Cos
Gap Inc
Zemex Corp
WEDNESDAY
Cigna Corp
Kay Jewelers
Crystal Brands
New Jersey Resources
Deere &amp; Co
Pennsylvania Pwr &amp; Lt
Hannaford Bros
Rose's Stores
Kansas Gas &amp; Elec
THURSDAY
Angelica Corp
Ethyl Corp
Arvin


Reviews/Television; Espionage in 'CAT Squad' Sequel
LEAD: The current silly season for television movies keeps clip-clopping along this evening at 9 with NBC's ''CAT Squad: Python Wolf,'' an action-adventure exercise distinguished by one of the year's more incomprehensible plots.
The film does carry an eye-catching credit.
It was directed by William Friedkin, who won an Academy Award for ''The French Connection.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A One-Night Stand
LEAD: Paul H. Nitze, the arms control negotiator for the United States, is scheduled to view Paul H. Nitze as portrayed by an actor in a one-night stand this evening of ''A Walk in the Woods'' at the Library of Congress.


Retail Layoffs Start to Rise As Merger Wave Subsides
LEAD: With the wave of retailing mergers beginning to subside, their effect is now being felt hard by those who work in this people-intensive industry.
The number of people displaced from jobs is expected to be the largest in a long time because of the concurrent mergers, divestitures and internal restructurings at some of the nation's largest retailing companies.


Northland Cranberries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northland Cranberries
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,000
-
Net loss
476,000
-
Year-ago figures are not available because the company went public in August 1987.


When a Woman Is Driven to Kill Her Baby
LEAD: To the Editor:


Again, States Turning to Alternatives To Costly and Overcrowded Prisons.
LEAD: Almost desperate to come to terms with overcrowded prisons and the high cost of incarceration, many states have turned to alternative penalty programs that are similar to ideas that were tried and largely discarded a decade ago.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Durable Goods April  Wednesday  Merchandise Trade First Quarter  Thursday  G.N.P.
First Quarter  Corporate Profits


Moyers and a Sage Seek Meanings
LEAD: Talk about old fashioned! ''Moyers: Joseph Campbell and the Power of Myth'' is Stone Age television: six hours in which Bill Moyers and Mr.
Campbell talk to each other and hardly ever get out of their chairs.
Is this boring?
Sometimes it is; most of the time it is not.
Pay attention and you'll be engaged.


Biotechnology Development reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biotechnology Development
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
631,878
300,233
Net loss
115,943
b14,667
b-Net income and after a one-time gain from the sale of Integrated Separation Systems of $73,230.


Mr Gasket Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mr Gasket Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
27,563,000
29,295,000
Net inc
108,000
b923,000
Share earns
.01
.09
b-Includes an $838,000 gain from an acounting change.


USG Details Proxy Victory
LEAD: The USG Corporation announced yesterday that a preliminary count showed that it had won a proxy fight waged by Desert Partners L.P. to place six directors on the company's 15-member board.


Outdoors: Trout in Ponds
LEAD: ALTHOUGH most fly fishermen would rather pursue their pleasure on streams and rivers, ignoring stillwater trout is a form of self-deprivation.


Castle Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Castle Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,216,038
887,915
Net inc
301,337
193,258
Share earns
.10
.07
6mo rev
2,863,618
1,821,845
Net inc
723,594
b330,858
Share earns
.24
.12
b-After an extraordinary charge of $1,980,474.


Warship Weapons Secrecy Is Rooted in Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Judge Blocks Drug Tests
LEAD: A Federal district judge has temporarily blocked a Reagan Administration plan to test employees of the Federal prison system at random for drug use.
The testing, which was scheduled to begin Monday, would have affected 35,000 workers around the nation.


Review/Theater; Prison, the Heartland And Other Subjects
LEAD: In an evening of one-acts presented by the Working Theater at Intar Stage II, four playwrights have an opportunity to work out their dramatic problems.
None of the plays can yet be considered a forward step for the author.


Teachers In Day Care Questioned
LEAD: With salaries unappealingly low and turnover rates alarmingly high, almost half of New York City's day-care and Head Start classrooms are run by teachers who lack full qualifications, a study by the Bank Street College of Education has found.


Herbalife International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Herbalife International Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
35,900,000
37,300,000
Net inc
189,000
404,000
Share earns
.01
.02


Gulf Applied Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gulf Applied Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,158,000
1,542,000
Net loss
b378,000
c2,310,000
Share earns
-
.71
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $464,000.
c-Net income and includes a gain from discontinued operations of $1,694,000.


Greek Quake Sets Off Slide
LEAD: A strong earthquake rocked the western Greek island of Cephalonia today and set off a landslide near the main town of Argostoli, the police reported.
There were no reports of casualties or building damage.
However, the quake, which was centered almost 200 miles west of Athens and registered 5.5 on the Richter scale, ''shook everybody awake this morning'' a police officer on the island said.


Kitty Dukakis Lends Emotion To Politics but Keeps Identity
LEAD: Kitty Dukakis does not slip easily into the fixed and adoring stare perfected by generations of political wives.
She is a toucher, a talker, a woman who laughs easily and gives orders with equal gusto.


Valenzuela Crushed by Mets
LEAD: The Mets completed their week's sweep through southern California today with a seven-game winning streak, a five-and-a-half-game lead and a two-round knockout over Fernando Valenzuela.
And they even escaped the rage of Pedro Guerrero, who hurled his bat past the mound after David Cone bounced a curveball off his helmet.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  Wall Street is worried that volatility will increase as a result of the low trading volume of recent weeks.
The market's liquidity -which allows stocks to be traded without distorting prices - is at its lowest level in two years, one investment firm says.
A trader described the situation as ''very dangerous,'' and others pointed out that a marketplace with low liquidity was vulnerable to shocks.


Consensus Emerges in Panama: Noriega Has Won
LEAD: Having weathered months of political crisis, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega now appears able to hold on to power indefinitely if he chooses, according to several diplomats and Panamanian politicians.


Account
LEAD: *
Sport &amp; Health athletic facilities, Washington, to Shapiro, Hyman &amp; Freeman, Baltimore.


Capt. John Stanley Marries Jane Kheel
LEAD: The marriage of Jane Meredith Kheel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore W. Kheel of Riverdale, the Bronx, to Capt.
John Richard Garrett Stanley, U.S.A.F., the son of Valerie A. Stanley of Pinckney, Mich., and Everett E. Stanley of Westminster, Md., took place yesterday at the Thomas Law House in Washington.


China Oilfield Sees Big Loss
LEAD: This year may be the first in which China's biggest oilfield reports an operating loss, the official New China News Agency said today.


SEVERAL GARRISONS ARE SAID TO FALL TO AFGHAN REBELS
LEAD: Afghan Army garrisons along the Pakistani-Afghan border, weakened by Soviet troop withdrawals, are rapidly crumbling in the face of assaults by heavily armed guerrillas, Afghan rebel officials and Western diplomats say.


A FIERY SWAGGART RETURNS TO PULPIT
LEAD: The defrocked evangelist Jimmy Swaggart reclaimed the pulpit at his Family Worship Center today with fire-and-brimstone fervor and an appeal for money.


The Life of the Club Pro Can Be a Winning One
LEAD: TRADITION is not kind to David Glenz the third weekend in May.
It is that time every year that the Morris County Golf Club in Convent Station, N.J., where Glenz is the head professional, stages one of the biggest events on its social calender: a member-guest tournament that includes 184 players.


S.E.C. Seeks Pacts Abroad
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission is negotiating securities enforcement agreements with France, Italy, Australia and New Zealand, David S. Ruder, the agency's chairman, said Thursday night.


Kim M. Burke, a Lawyer, Marries Glenn S. Goldberg
LEAD: Kim M. Burke, an associate in the Manhattan law firm of Semel, Boeckmann, Diamond, Schepp &amp; Yuhas, and Glenn S. Goldberg, the press secretary to Elizabeth Holtzman, the Brooklyn District Attorney, were married yesterday.
Judge Joel M. Goldberg of New York City Criminal Court officiated at the Tappan Hill center in Tarrytown, N.Y.


State Convention Is Disrupted
LEAD: Georgia's Republican state convention adjourned in chaos Saturday after supporters of Pat Robertson shouted down speakers.


Celtics' Mr. Clutch Downs the Hawks
LEAD: Red duffel bags were being lugged out of the tiny dressing room as blue and orange duffel bags were being lugged in.
The Atlanta Hawks were out and the Edmonton Oilers were in, as the only visitors' room in the Boston Garden had to serve double duty in the basketball-hockey doubleheader here today.


Environmental Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Power (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
163,850
83,562
Net loss
456,985
247,841


Farm Lender Revises Policy
LEAD: Long-awaited Federal regulations to overhaul the lending policies of the Farmers Home Administration are expected to cost $8.7 billion and push as many as 65,000 farmers into liquidation or foreclosure, the agency, a part of the Agriculture Department, said.


Topics of The Times; No Show, No Shame in Albany
LEAD: Last fall's indictment of Manfred Ohrenstein, the New York Senate minority leader, on charges of putting campaign workers on the legislative payroll cast an embarrassing spotlight on Albany's job practices.
The Legislature now magnifies the shame: It seeks dismissal of the charges.


Convest Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Convest Energy Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
464,000
552,000
Net loss
108,000
15,000


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed distribution of The New York Times in some areas.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


'Gold Card' Ruling
LEAD: Mastercard may now legally use the expression ''gold card'' in its advertising as a result of a ruling last week by Federal District Judge Charles Metzner.
He indicated that the term is generic and not a trademark of American Express.
A lawsuit was filed by American Express soon after Mastercard began an ad campaign for Gold Mastercard.


Bitter Trade Debate Near in Ottawa
LEAD: Seven months after turning Canada's economic policy around by signing a free-trade agreement with the United States, the Government here is entering a decisive phase of its battle for the agreement at home.


Giorgio Almirante, Italian Neo-Fascist, Dies at 73
LEAD: Giorgio Almirante, who had a minor role in Mussolini's last government and was a founder and longtime leader of Italy's small but vocal neo-Fascist party, died today.
He was 73 years old.


Antipodal Dream
LEAD: Andrew Gaze lived out a fantasy two years ago in the Georgetown University fieldhouse.


Met Takes 'Ring' Cycle Into the Recording Studio
LEAD: Down on West 34th Street, cars were honking and trucks were double-parked and the afternoon seethed with the raucous bustle of midweek in New York City.
But up on the seventh floor of the Manhattan Center, in the old barrel-roofed ballroom that serves as the city's premiere recording studio for classical music, a very different atmosphere prevailed.


Billy Carter Prepares to Try Experimental Cancer Therapy
LEAD: Billy Carter left here today for the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., to undergo a risky experimental treatment for pancreatic cancer.


British Rail Sale Report
LEAD: The British Government is considering selling British Rail, the national railroad system, the Economist reported in its latest issue.
The plan is being worked on by a policy unit within Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's office, the magazine said in its May 21 issue, which was made available today.


The Bird's Eye
LEAD: BEFORE yesterday's game, someone was saying that during this playoff series against Atlanta, Larry Bird hasn't been quite the Larry Bird that we've come to know. ''You mean he hasn't been Superman?'' ''No,'' said the first person, ''I mean he hasn't been Superduperman.'' Yesterday, he was Superduperman.


El Castillo Journal; A Crumbling Fort Sleeps On, Haunted by History
LEAD: No edifice in Central America has seen more drama than the crumbling fortress that sits atop a bluff overlooking this strategic bend in the San Juan River.


Caribbean Officials Criticize Outside Pressure on Panama
LEAD: The foreign ministers of the Caribbean nations closed a two-day meeting here late Saturday by calling for an end to foreign invervention in the affairs of Panama.


Anniversary Festivities For the New York Pops
LEAD: Peter Allen, Nell Carter, Carol Channing, Jackie Mason, Robert Merrill and Roberta Peters are to be guest stars at a concert celebrating the fifth anniversary of the New York Pops, Tuesday at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
Skitch Henderson will conduct.


Lacrosse; Virginia Surprises Hopkins by 11-10
LEAD: In lacrosse, Johns Hopkins almost always beats Virginia, but today the Cavaliers achieved a striking upset by defeating the defending national champion, 11-10, in a National Collegiate Athletic Association playoff contest.


Flea Market Vendors Raided for Tax Evasion
LEAD: Tax compliance agents for the State Department of Taxation and Finance removing clothes from a flea market vendor yesterday at the Yonkers Raceway Flea Market.
They said the vendor owed $24,000 in sales tax.
Page B2. (NYT/Jim Estrin)


Review/Concert; Celtic-Tinged Songs of Paul Brady
LEAD: In 1980 Paul Brady moved from Irish folk music to more personal songwriting.
He came up with a style that occasionally draws on traditional Irish storytelling but more often exalts private feelings to metaphorical heights, like an Irish Jackson Browne.
Two of his songs, ''Steel Claw'' and ''Paradise Is Here,'' were recorded on multimillion-selling albums by Tina Turner - his main exposure in the United States.


Sports of The Times; Lord Stanley's Cup Runs Over
LEAD: THE National Hockey League used to worry only about the new dents and scratches that might appear on the Stanley Cup when the winning players frolicked with the cup in bars, clubs, backyards, race tracks and bedrooms.


Unimed Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unimed Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,068,000
857,000
Net loss
425,000
220,000
6mo rev
2,049,000
1,881,000
Net loss
597,000
254,000


Washington Talk: Briefing; Wine Makers Bitter
LEAD: The California wine industry's annual political invasion is under way, and the capital is already awash with cabernet sauvignon, chardonnay and charges of international discrimination.
The Wine Institute, based in San Francisco, is here with its largest lobby to date, the owners of 17 California wineries, all intent on persuading Congress and the Reagan


Savings Unit Review Ends
LEAD: Lincoln savings and Loan Association said today that a long examination of the savings institution by the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco had ended with an amicable but an unusual twist.


Reviews/Music; New Instruments and Exotic Scales
LEAD: This past week the American Festival of Microtonal Music, or Microfest, has been offering a cornucopia of works in virtually every contemporary style, from razor-edged academicism to post-Minimalist, with a smattering of Baroque music as a change of pace.
The music is scored for both standard instruments and exotically newfangled ones, but what all the works have in common is their departure from the 12-note tempered scale on which


Sandinistas Extending Cease-Fire by 30 Days
LEAD: Nicaragua announced today that it was extending a seven-week-old truce to allow more time for peace talks with the United States-backed rebels.


Occidental Expects Higher Revenues
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation's acquisition of the Cain Chemical Company should help increase its 1988 revenues to $20 billion from last year's $17.09 billion, Dr.
Armand Hammer, the company's chairman, told shareholders at its annual meeting.


Fuji Buying Part of Treasury Dealer
LEAD: Fuji Bank Ltd. and Kleinwort Benson Ltd. announced yesterday that Fuji had agreed to buy a 24.9 percent stake in Kleinwort Benson Government Securities Inc., a Chicago-based dealer in Treasury securities.


Pop Radio Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pop Radio Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,415,349
366,680
Net loss
754,152
721,752
9mo rev
3,144,770
1,062,300
Net loss
1,507,153
1,343,269


Foreign Firms Trade in Tokyo
LEAD: Nine foreign securities firms, including six from the United States, began trading today on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.


Razorback Offer
LEAD: The Razorback Acquisition Corporation said that it was prepared to increase its cash offer for the Arkansas Best Corporation to $23 a common share, from $20.
The New York based Razorback said it was also prepared to raise its offer for Arkansas Best's 7 percent convertible debentures to $886.66, from $771.01.


Boeing May Get Order From Allegis for 60 Jets
LEAD: The Boeing Company is close to getting an order for about 60 airplanes of the 757 class from the Allegis Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, industry experts said yesterday.


Chief Named at Infinity
LEAD: The Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, a New York-based concern that owns several radio stations, said yesterday that its board had named Mel Karmazin president and chief executive of the company.
Mr.
Karmazin succeeds Gerald Carrus as president.
The company said Mr.
Karmazin's position as chief executive, a newly created position, would include responsibilities that he has held for for some time.


Boise Journal; Survival Duty in 'Raptor Capital of the World'
LEAD: Day-old peregrine falcon chicks, hardly acting or eating like birds, gulp down chunks of fresh quail offered at the end of a tweezer.


Banking on America's Word
LEAD: All the World Bank's 151 members have pledged funds to increase its capital.
Among the big ones, only the United States has not delivered.
A House Appropriations subcommittee has refused to approve America's share.
Unless the Reagan Administration bestirs itself, the result will be worldwide embarrassment.


Battles Erupt in Beirut as Truce Talks Falter
LEAD: Artillery duels broke out again between rival Shiite Moslem groups today after the collapse of talks on moving 7,000 Syrian troops into the southern suburbs of Beirut to end the factional fighting.


Man Held to Act Alone In Killing U.S.Judge
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation said yesterday that a retired New York City police officer apparently acted alone in slaying a Federal judge at his home in Westchester County.


Photon Technology International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photon Technology International
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,291,238
613,609
Net loss
799,793
200,120
9mo rev
3,840,935
2,016,630
Net loss
1,538,458
254,984


Landmark Commission Picks Theater Panel
LEAD: The membership of a special committee to review the landmark designation of Broadway theaters, with a view to easing somewhat the regulation of interiors, was announced yesterday by Gene A. Norman, chairman of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.


In Eye of Stormy Africa, Zaire Dictates Stability
LEAD: A dozen women stood on this city's main boulevard recently, handing out leaflets criticizing the Government of President Mobutu Sese Seko until the security police arrested them minutes later.


Exploration Co of Louisiana reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exploration Co of Louisiana
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,910,000
2,182,000
Net inc
455,000
b18,000
b-Net loss  Latest quarter net equals less than 1 cent a share.


Clean Hydrogen Beckons Aviation Engineers
LEAD: VIRTUALLY unnoticed abroad except by aviation experts, a recent broadcast by Soviet television showed an ordinary-looking airliner roaring aloft from a Moscow-area airport, trailing a stream of condensing steam instead of the usual kerosene smoke.


In a More Open Soviet Society, Freedom Can Sprout, Then Vanish
LEAD: When Lev M. Timofeyev's daughter was assigned a school essay entitled ''The Happiest Day of My Life,'' the 14-year-old focused on the day in February 1987 when her father came home from prison as a wave of political dissidents was released from Soviet prisons.


Consolidated Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
127,359,000
117,208,000
Net inc
1,158,000
2,013,000
Share earns
.03
.04


Ross Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ross Stores Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
132,000,000
126,000,000
Net inc
206,000
b2,500,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Southland Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southland Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
26,073,000
18,936,000
Net loss
19,086,000
8,866,000


Israel Weighs Appeal by U.S. Arab
LEAD: A Palestinian-American advocate of nonviolence had his day in court today and vowed that if the Israeli Government succeeded in deporting him, he would convert to Judaism and move back to Israel under the Law of Return.


Trans-Atlantic Fares Are Cut
LEAD: British Airways and Virgin Atlantic Airways began a price war today when they cut trans-Atlantic fares from London to increase sales in Britain.


Curbs on Sea Pollution Voted in Jersey
LEAD: The New Jersey Legislature passed a package of bills today designed to combat the state's growing ocean pollution problems.
While the lawmakers acted, the Coast Guard and the marine police monitored a three-mile skein of seaweed, household garbage and wood that appeared offshore over the weekend.


Phillips and Karolyi Mend Their Ways
LEAD: Kristie Phillips's efforts to regain world-class prominence in gymnastics has taken another surprising turn.
She has decided to rejoin Bela Karolyi, the coach she left in February citing a need for a change.


Barden Corp reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barden Corp (OTC)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Sales
22,600,780
21,253,961
Net inc
1,740,049
1,538,483
Share earns
1.09
.96
6mo sales
42,631,850
39,994,346
Net inc
2,765,133
2,154,984
Share earns
1.73
1.35


Cagle's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cagle's Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
131,625,000
122,226,000
Net loss
b4,315,000
c5,233,000
Share earns
-
2.25
b-Includes a loss of $1,595,000 from discontinued operations.
c-Net income and after a loss of $888,000 from discontinued operations.


First American Health Conepts reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Health Conepts
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
477,000
227,000
Net inc
190,000
b31,600
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
1,208,000
512,184
Net inc
381,000
b371,000
Share earns
.13
-
b-Net loss


Silver State Mining Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silver State Mining Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,867,070
2,987,504
Net inc
336,486
648,804
Share earns
.01
.02


British Delay Ruling on Budd
LEAD: British track officials today delayed a ruling on Zola Budd's eligibility to run for Britain until she returns from her self-imposed rest period in South Africa.


Walter G. Stackler, 83, Long Island Builder
LEAD: Walter G. Stackler, a Long Island builder, died Friday at a nursing home in Delray Beach, Fla., after a long illness.
He was 83 years old and maintained residences in Gulf Stream, Fla., and Roslyn Harbor, L.I.


American Pioneer Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Pioneer Savings
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
502,000
b1,612,000
Share earns
-
.24
b-Net income


A Game for Adults
LEAD: Most adults prefer the slower-paced types of computer games, leaving the fast-reflex, arcade-style amusements to younger players.
Golf and baseball simulations, for instance, rely more on judgment and strategy than on lightning-quick reflexes.
Even the most realistic flight simulators are positively contemplative when compared with games in which you blast hordes of aliens.


F.D.A. Approves Cervical Cap As a Device for Birth Control
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration today approved a birth control device called the cervical cap, a barrier contraceptive that is already available in Europe.


60-Day Plant-Closing Notice Isn't the Half of It
LEAD: To the Editor:


Healthcare Services of Amerca reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthcare Services of Amerca (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
33,618,065
32,269,478
Net inc
b1,221,630
b1,208
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
11,976,806
9,025,546
b-Includes tax benefits of $841,080 for the latest quarter and $79,859 in the year-ago period.


Solitec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Solitec Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,912,000
2,283,000
Net loss
253,000
b16,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo sales
7,925,000
6,823,000
Net loss
248,000
b182,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income and after tax credits of $51,000 for the quarter and $98,000 for the 6 months, and a $77,000 gain on debt restructuring for the both periods.


Fed Nominee Announced By President
LEAD: President Reagan said he would nominate a leading Boston banker, John P. LaWare, to the Federal Reserve Board.
The appointment, if confirmed, would mean all seven governors would be Reagan appointees.


American Mobile Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Mobile Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,788,027
1,500,799
Net loss
1,378,578
920,793
9mo sales
5,215,601
3,219,343
Net loss
4,493,183
2,062,999


Market Place; Disappointments At Paine Webber
LEAD: THE stocks of several major brokerage firms are trading below their book value, a reflection of the fact that investors perceive Wall Street as a potentially dangerous arena in the wake of last October's stock market crash.
But no brokerage industry stock has been hit as hard as Paine Webber.


Rex-Noreco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rex-Noreco Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,922,425
1,626,876
Net inc
321,911
275,533
Share earns
.16
.14
9mo rev
5,675,501
5,296,478
Net inc
932,380
668,904
Share earns
.47
.34


First State Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First State Financial Services
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,021,000
1,093,000
Share earns
.32
-
6mo net inc
1,983,000
2,289,000
Share earns
.62
-
Comparable year-ago quarter and 6-month net figures are not applicable because the company went public December 1987.


U.S. CHARGES GROUP BILKED INVESTORS
LEAD: An Atlanta-based group posing as a national prepaid legal services company took in $3 million in a nine-month period, bilking nearly 400 people who were seeking franchises, according to Federal officials.


Kohlberg's Stake in Texaco Puzzles Traders on Wall St.
LEAD: Wall Street traders have a mystery on their hands: why Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, one of the nation's biggest investment houses, wants more than $500 million worth of Texaco stock.


Bruins Hang On Despite the Odds
LEAD: Randy Gregg, the veteran Edmonton defenseman, could not suppress a smile as he considered the impact his team's three consecutive victories against the Bruins might have on the fourth game of their four-of-seven-game National Hockey League final series.


SHULTZ URGES VOTE ON MISSILE TREATY IN TIME FOR SUMMIT
LEAD: Clearly upset over Senate delays in approving the new arms treaty, Secretary of State George P. Shultz came to Capitol Hill today to plead for a prompt vote on the pact so President Reagan can take it to Moscow for formal approval.


In Indiana, Public School Makes 'Frills' Standard
LEAD: Like most fifth graders, Amanda Cave spends much of her days on the three R's.
But one recent day, she also worked on an architectural drawing, played the trumpet, did improvisational dancing, went on a scavenger hunt in the park and studied Spanish.


Killing Abu Jihad Was Not Murder
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gottschalks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gottschalks Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
37,275,000
29,862,000
Net inc
725,000
b1,460,000
Share earns
.09
.19
b-Includes a gain from an accounting change of $689,000.


Envoy Returns to Panama to Press Talks
LEAD: President Reagan sent a senior State Department official back to Panama today to see again whether a deal could be reached to have the country's military ruler, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, give up power.


Friendly Bid Raised For Irving
LEAD: Banca Commerciale Italiana yesterday increased its offer for 51 percent of the Irving Bank Corporation's stock to $80 a share from $75 in an effort to make its friendly offer more attractive than a competing hostile bid from the Bank of New York Company.


Gold Continues to Advance; Dollar Moves a Bit Lower
LEAD: The price of gold continued to rise yesterday as the dollar moved slightly lower against several major currencies in thin trading.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Dinner Is 'Postponed'
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, President Reagan's former chief of staff, may have more to say about the Reagan White House than he has already made public in his book about his time there as chief of staff, ''For the Record.'' He won't be saying it soon at the Metropolitan Club, whose membership includes a number of


Leisure Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leisure Technology Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
42,246,000
48,069,000
Net inc
3,326,000
1,868,000
Share earns
.61
.31
Yr sales
151,339,000
136,955,000
Net inc
8,166,000
b2,203,000
Share earns
1.33
.21


Lieberman Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lieberman Enterprises Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
69,235,000
53,903,000
Net inc
635,000
b955,000
Share earns
.06
.21
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $453,000.


Drug Files on Noriega Disappear in Panama
LEAD: Documents said to implicate the Panamanian leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, in drug-related activities have disappeared from the offices of the Drug Enforcement Administration at the United States Embassy in Panama, a Government official said here tonight.


Koch's New Diet (Again)
LEAD: Mayor Koch, who has tried more diets than Heinz has varieties, disclosed yesterday that he was trying yet another, a liquid protein regimen that recently helped Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward lose 75 pounds.


Be It Highways or Fairways, Buffalo Are Not Free to Roam
LEAD: As Angelo Abbate addressed a golf ball with a nine-iron at Hollywood Lakes Country Club, a herd of 13 buffalo addressed him with stares.


Sports People; Tolentine Coach to Pitt
LEAD: John Sarandrea, who coached Tolentine High School of the Bronx to a 30-1 record last season, said yesterday he would become an assistant basketball coach at the University of Pittsburgh.
Sarandrea, 30, will replace John Caliperi, who has been named coach at the University of Massachusetts.
Sarandrea said he would give Pitt, coached by Paul Evans, ''some immediate credibility in the New York area,'' where the Panthers have not recruited well.


ABS Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ABS Industries Inc
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,811,000
5,706,000
Net inc
b193,000
c531,000
Share earns
.23
.62
6mo sales
11,392,000
10,214,000
Net inc
b199,000
c981,000
Share earns
.24
1.15


Wedding Information Network reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wedding Information Network
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
421,473
460,007
Net inc
13,597
67,011
Share earns
.01
.05
9mo rev
1,497,960
1,108,976
Net inc
92,261
172,791


Thousands of Hindu Workers Flee Punjab as Sikhs Step Up Violence
LEAD: Thousands of Hindu migrant workers from eastern India have fled Punjab after more than 50 of them were killed last week by Sikhs, the state's top police official said today.


Casino Won't Back Temple-Kansas
LEAD: The Showboat Hotel and Casino withdrew today as sponsor of the Kansas-Temple basketball game on Dec. 10 because of the controversy surrounding casino support of an intercollegiate athletic event.


Beware a Desperate Deal in Panama
LEAD: The Reagan Administration's Panama policy has failed - and all but a few American political leaders now admit it.
Unfortunately, the last believers include President Reagan and Secretary of State Shultz and they are straying into paths of desperation and expediency.
They would be better off to pause and regroup.


A New Chief Executive Is Named at Symbolics
LEAD: Symbolics Inc., a struggling technology company in the artificial intelligence business, announced yesterday that it had named Jay Wurts chairman and chief executive.


Networks to Bid for '92 Games
LEAD: The American television rights to the 1992 Olympic Winter Games in Albertville, France, are expected to be awarded today to either NBC or CBS.


Van Gogh at a Discount
LEAD: The Guggenheim Museum announced yesterday that after years of quiet negotiations, it had privately purchased a work by Vincent van Gogh ''at a fraction of what the same painting would bring at an auction in New York or in Paris.''


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Foote, Cone of Chicago Quits Long John Silver
LEAD: The Chicago office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding is quitting the Long John Silver account, which bills more than $20 million.


Bias Is Weighed In Attack on 2 In Bronx Street
LEAD: A man was hit on the head with a pipe and his cousin was punched outside their apartment house in the Bronx Sunday night in what the police initially characterized as a ''bias-related attack'' involving a dozen or more white youths.


From Carter and Ford, an American Agenda
LEAD: Former President Jimmy Carter was ebullient. ''For the first time in the nation's history,'' he said, ''we'll have a bipartisan effort to help heal the political divisions of our election process.''


BRE Properties Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BRE Properties Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,968,000
8,491,000
Net inc
3,485,000
3,677,000
Share earns
.44
.47
9mo rev
27,275,000
26,067,000
Net inc
10,360,000
b12,734,000
Share earns
1.32
1.62


Farah Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Farah Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
91,289,000
93,928,000
Net inc
1,120,000
1,946,000
Share earns
.19
.33
6mo sales
156,288,000
164,945,000
Net inc
1,727,000
55,000
Share earns
.29
.01


Bridge; By Alan Truscott
LEAD: The gods of the game sometimes play little tricks, to remind us that bridge is a difficult game of chance.


Silicon Valley Water Report
LEAD: A new study by the California Department of Health Services has concluded that ground-water pollution caused by the Silicon Valley electronics industry was ''probably not'' responsible for the higher-than-normal number of miscarriages and birth defects found in one neighborhood.
Its residents had drunk water contaminated by solvents from the semiconductor plants.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council


Universal Holding Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Holding Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,800,000
4,163,000
Net loss
52,000
b340,000
Share earns
-
.15
b-Net income


Books of The Times; Child of Chance: How Pudding Led to Priesthood
LEAD:  Oscar and Lucinda  By Peter Carey  433 pages. Harper &amp; Row. $18.95.


Boston Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to March 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Acoustics
Qtr to March 26
1988
1987
Sales
4,704,000
3,926,000
Net inc
541,000
422,000
Share earns
.27
.21
Yr sales
17,458,000
14,529,000
Net inc
1,933,000
1,515,000
Share earns
.97
.86


Consumers Financial Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consumers Financial Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b331,000
c19,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-After a $40,000 gain on investments and a tax benefit of $78,000.
c-Net income and includes a $315,000 gain on investments and a tax benefit of $58,000.


Children and AIDS: Drug Tests Raise Hope And Ethical Concerns
LEAD: EARLY studies of an AIDS drug in children have recently shown promising results, indicating that the lives of many babies with AIDS can be prolonged and improved.


4 Top Names from Nashville Visit
LEAD: If one were searching for a quick immersion course in mainstream country music, the 1988 Marlboro Country Music tour, which arrived at Madison Square Garden on Saturday, offered just the ticket.
Alabama, George Strait, the Judds and Randy Travis - four of the top names in Nashville - all performed at the four-hour marathon concert, which was a benefit for the national food-bank network, Second Harvest.


Baseball; Boddicker Ends Slump After 13 Losses
LEAD: Mike Boddicker ended his team-record 13-game losing streak tonight and the Baltimore Orioles beat the Oakland Athletics, 7-3, for their third straight victory.


For Australian Dancers, Ballet Is Not Enough
LEAD: ''Australians are a very physical people,'' Graeme Murphy, the director of the Sydney Dance Company, said in an interview the other day. ''For many Australians, the exposure of the body on a beach has become a daily event.
We're also having a great fitness craze.
So, Australian audiences are quite aware of physicality.


Boy, 17, Is Fatally Shot And a 2d Youth Is Held
LEAD: A 17-year-old boy was shot to death by another 17-year-old youth in the East New York section of Brooklyn last night, the police said.


Jackson Offers Budget Plan As Blueprint for Democrats
LEAD: Looking toward the Democratic Party platform, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson today announced detailed budget proposals that would seek to slash military spending in favor of major increases for education, drug law-enforcement, AIDS research and housing.


Equitable Real Estate Shoping Centers LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equitable Real Estate Shoping Centers LP (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,154,000
6,330,000
Net inc
889,000
749,000
Share earns
.08
.07


Steel Output Up 0.9%
LEAD: Steel production rose to 2.009 million tons in the week ended Saturday, an increase of nine-tenths of 1 percent from the previous week's 1.991 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute reported yesterday.
The industry's production amounted to 93.8 percent of capacity for the week, compared with 92.9 percent in the previous week.


David Schoenbrun Is Dead at 73; Veteran Journalist for CBS News
LEAD: David F. Schoenbrun, the witty and versatile CBS correspondent who was one of Edward R. Murrow's original team in the 1940's, died at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan yesterday morning.
He was 73 years old.


TGX Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TGX Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
30,296,000
18,625,000
Net inc
153,000
b336,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Included an income tax benefit of $300,000.


Sports People; Arizona Governor Hurt
LEAD: Gov.
Rose Mofford of Arizona suffered a mild concussion Sunday when she and Gene Stallings, the coach of the football Cardinals, fell from a rostrum during an anti-drug gathering in Yuma, Ariz.
Vada Manager, a spokeswoman for the Governor, said she would stay home all week and do her work there.
The Governor said in a statement: ''Rose Mofford took some pretty hard spills during her years playing softball and basketball.


5 Generic Drug Concerns in Merger
LEAD: Vitarine Pharmaceuticals Inc., a manufacturer of generic drugs, has merged with the Major Pharmaceutical Group, which is made up of four generic drug distributors with outlets in six states.
Vitarine, based in Springfield Gardens, Queens, said the combined companies would have revenues of $120 million in 1988.


Striped Bass, In Comeback, Spur Debate Over Fishing
LEAD: The low-slung aluminum boat, a big electric generator squarely amidships, moved in a lazy S pattern through the tidal waters of the Elk River, two poles in front sending 1,000 volts into the brackish water.
Dozens of small white perch, temporarily stunned, traced a kind of wake behind the boat.


Physicians Insurance Company of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Physicians Insurance Company of Ohio (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,391,355
22,580,981
Net inc
b536,330
462,196
Share earns
.17
.15
b-After a $134,500 tax credit.


Pope, Evans &amp; Robbins Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pope, Evans &amp; Robbins Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
28,755,000
11,414,000
Net loss
b5,412,000
2,004,000
9mo sales
108,262,000
47,343,000
Net loss
b22,811,000
c4,342,000
b-Included pre-tax provisions of $3,450,000 for the quarter and $11.9 million for the 9 months on note receivables; the 9 months also included a pre-tax writeoff of good will of $7,013,000.


Sammy Davis Sr. Dies; Vaudeville Star Was 87
LEAD: Sammy Davis Sr., a vaudeville performer and the father of the entertainer Sammy Davis Jr., died Saturday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 87 years old.


Scherer Opposition Firm on Sale Plan
LEAD: The R. P. Scherer Corporation, a pharmaceuticals supplier, said that it continued to reject its largest shareholder's proposal that the company be sold.
Peter R. Fink, Scherer's president and chief executive, said that Karla Scherer Fink's proposal could override the company's board only if it gained 80 percent of the common-share votes.


Home Starts Are Down 16%
LEAD: Builders started 16 percent fewer new housing units in the first quarter than a year earlier, resulting in the lowest total in five and a half years, a report said yesterday.


Sprucing Up a Russian Shrine
LEAD: The gold-domed Russian Orthodox church in Zagorsk, U.S.S.R., getting a coat of white paint as preparations were made for a possible visit by Nancy Reagan during the U.S.-Soviet summit meeting.
The Zagorsk church is the Russian Orthodox religion's holiest shrine. (Reuters)


Kodak Merger Shifts Sterling Management
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company's absorption of Sterling Drug Inc. ''was an intense experience for all of us,'' said Kay R. Whitmore, Kodak's president.


Edelman Group Lifts Payless Stake
LEAD: An investment group headed by the New York investor Asher B. Edelman has raised its stake in Payless Cashways Inc. to 9 percent from 7.6 percent.


Del Webb Casino To Golden Nugget
LEAD: The Del Webb Corporation said that it would sell the Nevada Club, a hotel and casino in Laughlin, Nev., to the Las Vegas casino operator Golden Nugget Inc. for $40 million.
The sale is the first under a restructuring plan proposed by Del Webb, based in Phoenix, in March to shed its leisure businesses and refocus around its real estate operations.


Sparring to Book Europe's Flights
LEAD: As Europe follows the American lead in deregulating air travel, a high-stakes battle has broken out between United States and European carriers over an increasingly crucial market: computer reservation systems.


Western Union Posts A Big Loss
LEAD: Reflecting the costs of its broad restructuring, the Western Union Corporation yesterday reported a first-quarter loss of $625.2 million.


Nimes Journal; With French Accent, the Fiesta's a Fete Accomplie
LEAD: As the matador Paco Ojeda works the hulking Miura bull with his cape, the silence in the Roman amphitheater is extraordinary, as if one were at the opera in Paris.
A bored Spaniard hollers ''Musica!'' - demanding that the band strike up a tune, as it might in Madrid - but his solitary appeal is drowned in a wave of


Lloyd E. Dickens, 86, Ex-Assemblyman of Harlem
LEAD: Former Assemblyman Lloyd Everett Dickens, a self-made millionaire and veteran of Democratic Party battles, died of a heart attack Saturday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old and lived in Harlem, which he represented in Albany from 1959 to 1964.


Gifted Parents Help Collegiate School
LEAD: When preparatory schools raise money, they often hold auctions or organize dinner parties.
Last night, the Collegiate School held a Carnegie Hall concert.


Primary in Kentucky District: Hard Race Takes Nasty Turn
LEAD: First the incumbent questioned his challenger's religious convictions and branded him a carpetbagger.
Then the Democratic primary race in the First Congressional District really got nasty.


Review/Theater; Black Life in the 50's: Hope, Pain and Dreams
LEAD: It is the 1950's, not yet the time for a large-scale crossover of rhythm-and-blues.
With the emergence of Elvis Presley, however, more black songwriters are thinking about the possibilities of having a broad, popular appeal.
At least that is the dream in Teddy's Barbershop and Records in West Memphis, Ark., the scene of Martin Jones's play, ''West Memphis Mojo'' (at the Negro Ensemble


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Marie Barnard, Jane Carlson, Jane DeFeo, Charles Carlson, Michele Buslik and Barry Fisher have been named senior vice presidents at Wells, Rich, Greene.


U.S. Judge Finds No Conflict In Law Firm's Takeover Role
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Nashville ruled yesterday that the Murray Ohio Manufacturing Company had not adequately proved its accusation that the New York law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell improperly shared information with clients who were on opposite sides of a hostile takeover.


College Lacrosse; Syracuse Zeroes In on Title
LEAD: The world of college lacrosse has begun to appreciate that Syracuse may have one of the best teams in the history of the sport.


Union Says Many Were Exposed To Asbestos at Kennedy Airport
LEAD: A Federal employees union has charged that thousands of travelers and about two dozen immigration officials were exposed to dangerous levels of asbestos in 1986 during a three-month renovation of the International Arrivals Building at Kennedy International Airport.


A Challenge for Bush
LEAD: It is staring right at George Bush and his advisers: a sensible, direct and politically valuable way of saying he really is his own man despite his loyalty to Ronald Reagan.
And it has the added advantage of being useful to the country.


Spotted Fever Reported in the Bronx
LEAD: An outbreak of Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, a sometimes fatal disease never before seen in New York City, has been discovered in the Bronx, according to a medical report.


The Speed of Change in Moscow
LEAD: Again Mikhail Gorbachev appears both bold and cautious, determined to change his deeply conservative country yet uncertain exactly how.
In an interview in The Washington Post on Sunday, he demonstrated his usual mix of candor and calculation.
It's understandable that he seemed in his words, as in his leadership, to pick a path between impatience and conservatism.


Microsoft Offers Money-Back Deal
LEAD: The Microsoft Corporation has announced a money-back guarantee for its Excel spreadsheet software product, saying that it was making the offer to compete with the 1-2-3 software package of the Lotus Development Corporation.
Microsoft's Excel has won acclaim, but many customers are reluctant to switch because they are familiar with Lotus's 1-2-3.


Logitek Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Logitek Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,242,960
739,129
Net inc
89,528
65,848
Share earns
.05
.04
9mo sales
3,033,504
2,127,933
Net inc
220,242
147,747
Share earns
.13
.09


Albany Sees Gap of $900 Million In Budget, Tripling Earlier Figure
LEAD: The New York State budget shortfall will be $900 million -three times what the Cuomo administration had projected just three weeks ago - and programs will have to be cut, the administration announced today.


Soviet Troops Said to Patrol Streets of City in Azerbaijan
LEAD: Soviet troops are patrolling the streets of Stepanakert, capital of the predominantly Armenian region of Nagorno-Karabakh, which has been at the center of Transcaucasian unrest, a local party official said today.


Patterns
LEAD: A Designer Expands


Sports People; Old-Timer Pitches In
LEAD: Ron Oglesby figured his days as a pitcher were well behind him.
After all, he's 38 years old and hadn't pitched competitively since 1973.
But when called upon, he quickly came out of retirement.
Oglesby, the pitching coach of the Riverside Red Wave, took the mound in the 20th inning of a California League game against the San Jose Giants in Riverside and wound up suffering the loss in the 6-hour-19-minute game, which ended early yesterday.


Acton Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acton Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,135,000
3,170,000
Net inc
b192,000
c24,340,000
Share earns
.10
13.70
b-Includes a $75,000 tax credit.
c-Includes $12,990,000 income from a discount of indebtedess and a $4,397,000 tax credit.


Commitment to Minorities Fading in U.S., Study Says
LEAD: The United States is moving backward in efforts to promote equal opportunity for members of minority groups, a commission of political, business, education and civic leaders said today.


Thief Slain and Mulberry St. Grocer Arrested
LEAD: A grocer in the Little Italy section shot and killed a man after he had tried to take money from the cash register Sunday night, the police said.


Subaru of America Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Subaru of America Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
413,269,000
473,374,000
Net loss
8,793,000
b10,118,000
Share earns
-
.21
6mo sales
930,174,000
1,029,174,000
Net loss
8,264,000
b34,673,000
Share earns
-
.72


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Saturday about Motown Records misidentified the chairman of the MCA Entertainment Group.
He is Irving Azoff.


International American Homes reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International American Homes (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
33,214,000
28,085,000
Net inc
743,000
387,000
Share earns
.09
.04
Shares outst
7,947,000
9,062,000
Yr rev
150,645,000
146,034,000
Net inc
3,266,000
3,001,000
Share earns
.40
.40
Shares outst
8,229,000
7,491,000


PAKISTAN ACCUSED OF A NUCLEAR MOVE
LEAD: Pakistan has test-fired a missile capable of carrying a nuclear weapon, according to an Administration official.


News Analysis; Some Second Thoughts On Free Trade
LEAD: Free trade, a hallowed tenet of Western economics, is fading as a goal of American policy, as the debate over the trade bill shows.
Now a minority among those who study the nation's trade policies is saying that, in an imperfect world, some second thoughts about free trade are long overdue.


Visual Graphics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Visual Graphics Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
47,936,000
30,094,000
Net inc
733,000
b517,000
Share earns
.27
.25
Shares outst
2,688,000
2,074,000
Yr sales
141,773,000
83,136,000
Net inc
2,422,000
b1,456,000
Share earns
.90
.79
Shares outst
2,688,000
1,839,000


Acquisition by Vickers
LEAD: Vickers P.L.C., a British military and automobile company, said today that it was acquiring the Imperial Metal and Chemical Company of Philadelphia for about $12 million.
Imperial, the second-largest provider of aluminum plates to American newspapers, will become part of Howson-Algraphy Ltd., a Vickers subsidiary.


Great American Communicaions Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great American Communicaions Co (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
97,876,000
6,189,000
Net loss
b5,384,000
c5,240,000
Share earns
-
.22
b-After net from discontinued operations of $1,477,000.
c-Net income and includes net from discontinued operations of $2,936,000 and an extraordinary charge of $523,000.


Benedict P. Willis Jr. Chemical Executive, 66
LEAD: Benedict P. Willis Jr., a former vice president of the Stauffer Chemical Company, died of colon cancer Thursday at his home in Rutherford, N.J.
He was 66 years old.


U.S. Rig Count Rises
LEAD: The number of working oil and gas rigs in the United States increased by nine this week, to a total of 892, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
The rig count, the widely watched industry index of drilling activity, totaled 762 a year ago.
The count reflects the number of rigs exploring for oil as of last Friday.


First Central Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Central Financial Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,475,369
3,520,639
Net inc
641,163
454,985
Share earns
.10
.07


Tending Future Birds of Prey in Idaho
LEAD: A 5-day-old peregrine falcon being fed fresh quail meat at the World Center for Birds of Prey near Boise, Idaho.
Boise Journal, page A16. (NYT/Teri Davis)


Computer Sabotage Charge
LEAD: In the first application of a Texas law against computer sabotage, a computer programmer is being prosecuted on felony charges of infecting his former employer's computers with an electronic ''virus.''


Oil Investments By Abu Dhabi
LEAD: The emirate of Abu Dhabi plans to make substantial investments in foreign oil companies as a safeguard against oil price fluctuations, an industry official said today.
Khalifa Mohammed al-


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Alternative HealthCare Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alternative HealthCare Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,062,000
919,000
Net loss
258,000
351,000


American Real Estate Parters reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Real Estate Parters (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,528,605
14,501,960
Net inc
b6,788,707
6,421,300
Share earns
.45
.42
b-Includes a gain of $411,548 on property transactions.


Study of Rare Syndrome Yields Clues About Brain
LEAD: STROKE victims who suffer bizarre difficulties in recognizing faces, perceiving colors or seeing objects move are helping to support a new theory that the brain is organized along parallel pathways.


Court Refuses to Hear Appeal on Annuities
LEAD: In a case that has caused concern in the insurance industry, the Supreme Court declined today to hear an industry appeal of a Federal appeals court decision suggesting that millions of ''fixed annuities'' sold by insurance companies are subject to Federal securities laws.


The Exclusive Privilege of the Palestinians
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hetra Computer &amp; Communiations Industries Inc reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hetra Computer &amp; Communiations Industries Inc
Year to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,063,008
6,820,276
Net loss
1,178,264
b42,828
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Appeals Court Faults Judge In Queens Case
LEAD: A New York State appeals court ruled last night that the judge in the Howard Beach racial-attack case had acted improperly in holding a closed proceeding in the case and in planning to hold at least one more.


U.S. and Japan Seek a Pact
LEAD: The United States and Japan will try again next week to break a deadlock over Washington's demand that Tokyo lift quotas on beef and citrus imports, United States officials said today.


Multi-Color Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multi-Color Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Sales
16,208,000
14,469,000
Net inc
521,000
417,000
Share earns
.24
.28
Shares outst
2,150,000
1,467,000
Yr sales
55,393,000
51,468,000
Net inc
1,139,000
968,000
Share earns
.60
.66
Shares outst
1,895,000
1,467,000


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.17
7.15
n.a.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.24
6.27
n.a.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.65
6.60
n.a.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.02
9.01
n.a.
30-YR.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Grey Executive Hired by G.M.
LEAD: General Motors has hired Shirley Young, long Grey Advertising's premier consumer researcher, as vice president of consumer market development.


Our Towns; Minister Teaches The Almighty Isn't Republican
LEAD: The Rev.
Robert Bedingfield is used to dropping out of the sky and surprising folks.
As a Marine chaplain he did 200 jumps, some into combat in Vietnam, unarmed.
About eight years ago he landed as pastor at the very rich Reformed Church of Bronxville.


Art Scholar Gets 3 Years in Stolen Papers Case
LEAD: Charles Merrill Mount, a 60-year-old art scholar, was sentenced today to three years in prison for transporting stolen documents belonging to the National Archives and the Library of Congress.


Teachers Give Poor Marks to School Reform Drive
LEAD: Seven out of 10 teachers give efforts at school reform a grade of ''C'' or less, and half feel that teacher morale has declined even though student achievement is up, according to a nationwide survey.


Drugs as 1988 Issue: Filling a Vacuum
LEAD: The drug issue is often central to elections for mayor or district attorney.
But why have drugs become so important to the 1988 campaign for President of the United States?


Washington Talk: Briefing; 'Did You Hear . . .?'
LEAD: David A. Harris, Washington representative of the American Jewish Committee, is doing his part to humor those traveling with President Reagan to the Moscow summit.
He has sent copies of his book ''The Jokes of Oppression, The Humor of Soviet Jews,'' to President Reagan, Secretary of State George P.


Desperately Seeking Chanel
LEAD: In her red-silk Chanel suit, with its brass buttons and white-trimmed pockets, Debra Sharpe has snap.
But take a closer look.
The hardware is the give-away.
There is no trademark double-C on the buttons.
Ms.
Sharpe, who owns the Sharpe Gallery on Wooster Street in SoHo, is a bit of a fashionable fraud.


Has Bush Lost California?
LEAD: Picture Vice President Bush campaigning in California later this year.
Silent, well-dressed witnesses carrying placards move to the front of the crowd at every stop.
They carry silhouettes shaped like offshore oil platforms and long-armed cactuses.
These images, and Dukakis television spots reinforcing them, reach millions of television viewers, reminding them that Mr.


Image Retailing Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Image Retailing Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,918,000
3,677,000
Net loss
3,000
b69,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo sales
12,301,000
11,674,000
Net inc
107,000
70,000
Share earns
.05
.07
b-Net income


Whittaker Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whittaker Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
125,174,000
106,292,000
Net inc
7,056,000
3,111,000
Share earns
1.02
.37
6mo sales
236,011,000
204,251,000
Net inc
8,240,000
4,633,000
Share earns
1.18
.54


Mallard Coach Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mallard Coach Co (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
56,421,000
42,492,000
Net inc
2,234,000
1,426,000
Share earns
.40
-
6mo sales
90,274,000
68,272,000
Net inc
3,001,000
1,748,000
Share earns
.57
-


U.S. Deports 226 Aliens From Jails in New York
LEAD: More than 200 aliens serving sentences at Rikers Island and other New York City jails have been deported in the last year under a Federal and city program, officials said yesterday.


Bishops Decry Anti-Semitism
LEAD: A committee of Italian bishops expressed ''profound concern'' today over a recent upsurge of anti-Semitic threats and violence here, warning Italian Roman Catholics not to hold Jews responsible for Israeli Government policies toward the Palestinian uprising.


Regan and Speakes Draw Fire on Books
LEAD: Books by two former White House staff members, Donald T. Regan and Larry Speakes, should not have been published until President Reagan left office, the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, says.


Grain and Soybean Prices Fall After Weekend Rains
LEAD: Grain and soybean futures prices plunged on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday after a weekend of unexpectedly wet weather in the Midwest.


FMC in Turkish Deal
LEAD: Turkey signed a billion-dollar contract today with the FMC Corporation of the United States and its Turkish partner to build 1,700 armored combat vehicles, Turkish military officials said.
A consortium formed by FMC and the Nurol Group will build the vehicles over 10 years in one of several joint ventures aimed at developing Turkey's military industry, they said.


Fisher Business Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fisher Business Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
546,000
327,000
Net loss
b720,000
81,000
Yr rev
2,153,000
769,000
Net loss
1,316,000
282,000
b-Includes a $145,000 charge to reflect revised inventory counts and pricing and a $60,000 provision to increase the reserve for doubtful accounts.


Cablevision Plans to Acquire Wometco in a Stock Swap
LEAD: Cablevision Industries said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Wometco Cable TV Inc. in a tax-free exchange of common stock.


Mets Eager to Settle Score With Giants
LEAD: The Mets came home yesterday with a seven-game winning streak, a five-and-a-half-game lead and a yearning for revenge against the only team that has bugged them, the San Francisco Giants, who open a 13-game home stand for the Mets tonight in Shea Stadium.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Two Views Of Agencies On Canter
LEAD: THE consulting firm of Canter, Achenbaum &amp; Associates, whose functions include leading agency searches for advertiser clients, gets mixed reviews from some agencies it has worked with.


Colombian Jet Hijacked; Gunman Vanishes
LEAD: A man described as mentally unstable hijacked a Colombian jet with 135 people aboard today and forced it to fly to Panama and Aruba after letting the passengers off.
The plane later returned to Colombia where the man vanished.


Astro-Med Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astro-Med Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,869,000
3,427,000
Net inc
454,000
202,000
Share earns
.21
.09


Soviet Sets Shuttle For August Launching
LEAD: The Soviet Union's new space shuttle, a reusable craft that lands on a runway, is to make its first voyage at about the same time that the United States space shuttle is scheduled to return to orbit for the first time since the Challenger disaster, an industry magazine has reported.


Fluorocarbon Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fluorocarbon Co (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
60,476,000
27,382,000
Net inc
b3,054,000
1,307,000
Share earns
.69
.30
b-Includes a gain of $1,049,000 from the sale of a 50 percent interest in a Japanese joint venture.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-13


Amtech Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amtech Systems
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,858,286
877,665
Net inc
b99,773
c29,704
Share earns
.05
-
6mo rev
2,712,166
1,591,928
Net inc
b153,914
c89,626
Share earns
.08
-
b-Includes tax benefits of $39,000 and $60,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Chess
LEAD: Once again an Icelander has triumphed on home ground.
Following the success of Jon Arnason in the earlier Reykjavik Open Tournament, his fellow grandmaster Johann Hjartarson won the $3,000 first prize in the Reykjavik Invitational Tournament.


Administration Is Ready to Name Two to Top Posts in Justice Dept.
LEAD: Two men selected by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d to fill top-level vacancies at the Justice Department have passed background checks and are ready for formal nomination, an Administration official said today.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Versa Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Versa Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,916,000
10,752,000
Net inc
1,514,000
1,313,000
Share earns
.39
.34
Yr sales
45,587,000
41,215,000
Net inc
5,758,000
4,231,000
Share earns
1.49
1.10


Trans World Music reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans World Music (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
48,312,000
34,821,000
Net inc
1,672,000
1,473,000
Share earns
.19
.16


Alliance Well Service Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alliance Well Service Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,886,000
1,865,000
Net inc
139,000
b1,609,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Two Suits Filed By 60 Families At Harlem Fire
LEAD: Sixty families that suffered either deaths, displacement or injuries in the fire at the Schomburg Plaza high-rise apartment house in Harlem last year filed lawsuits yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan seeking a total of $414 million in damages from the city and the building's managers.


Dale McConathy, 48, N.Y.U. Art Professor
LEAD: Dale McConathy, chairman of the Department of Art and Art Education of the New York University School of Education, died of a heart attack Sunday at his home in Manhattan, an N.Y.U. spokesman, Randi Wershba, said.
He was 48 years old.


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for 12mo April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
12mo April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,774,179,000
1,821,469,000
Net inc
304,856,000
276,409,000
Share earns
3.50
3.20


New Law in Maryland Bans Sale And Manufacture of Some Pistols
LEAD: Gov.
William Donald Schaefer signed into law today a bill that makes the state the first to ban the sale of some cheap pistols.


Centennial Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centennial Group Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,740,000
5,717,000
Net inc
6,000
73,000
9mo rev
69,413,000
24,500,000
Net inc
8,206,000
1,891,000
Share earns
.31
.07


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed distribution of The New York Times in some areas.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


By Design: Weekend Savers
LEAD: There are some items that, when tossed into a weekend bag at the last minute, can make all the difference.


Unequal Stock Class Opposed
LEAD: The chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee has told the Securities and Exchange Commission that he believes the commission has the legal power to stop companies listed on public exchanges from issuing stock with unequal voting rights.
In a letter released today, Representative John D.


Comcoa Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comcoa Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 17
1988
1987
Revenue
4,993,148
2,741,849
Net inc
b279,657
b198,104
Share earns
.06
.05
b-Includes tax credits of $102,909 for the latest quarter and $78,215 for the year-earlier period.


Bottom of Order Tops the Angels
LEAD: Their combined averages do not equal what Dave Winfield is hitting these days, but tonight, as the Yankees began a 12-game, 14-day trip, Joel Skinner and Rafael Santana delivered.


What Drug Dealers Are Doing to America's Housing Projects
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dress Barn Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dress Barn Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 23
1988
1987
Sales
48,143,000
41,330,000
Net inc
3,025,000
2,425,000
Share earns
.14
.11
9mo sales
148,933,000
127,952,000
Net inc
11,231,000
9,079,000
Share earns
.51
.41


AIDS Babies' Prospects
LEAD: A NEW study, the first to provide data on the medical prospects of infants who carry the AIDS virus, found that some were doing better than experts had expected, even after several years.


Another Challenge For Weary Celtics
LEAD: After a softening up by the Knicks and a struggle to outlast the younger, quicker and more athletic Atlanta Hawks in a seven-game series, the National Basketball Association's oldest team, the Boston Celtics, now face another challenge.


Protecting Crops
LEAD: American and Malaysian scientists have discovered that a plant found in Malaysia has apparently learned to synthesize hormones of juvenile insects as a means of self-protection.


As Science Moves Into Commerce, Openness Is Lost
LEAD: SCIENTISTS, scholars and Congressmen are raising alarms about what they see as major new assaults on the traditional openness of science, a rise in secrecy they fear may undermine the long-term progress of science and innovation.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Thursday about the Beretta pistol misidentified the parent company of a Beretta competitor, Smith &amp; Wesson.
It is F. H. Tomkins, a British corporation, which acquired Smith &amp; Wesson in 1987 from the Lear Siegler Holdings Corporation.


Policy on Ship Seizures Is Altered
LEAD: The Customs Service and Coast Guard today altered part of their aggressive campaign against illegal drugs, a spokesman for the Customs Service said.


Indonesia, Spain in Deal
LEAD: Indonesia and Spain agreed today to market aircraft jointly in the United States and discussed cooperation in agriculture, energy and tourism.
The Indonesian Minister of State, Murdiono, said the two countries had agreed to form a joint marketing company in the United States to sell Spanish-designed aircraft built in Indonesia by the state aircraft company.


GMI Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GMI Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,322,000
7,031,000
Net inc
76,000
b19,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Met Pro Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Met Pro Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
7,092,335
5,514,530
Net inc
533,204
193,554
Share earns
.27
.10


Production at Shell
LEAD: The Shell Oil Company plans to increase its North Sea oil production by developing eight new oil and gas fields.
A spokesman for Shell Exploration and Production, a part of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group, said that the fields were discovered several years ago, and improved technology and recent rises in oil prices had made them economical.


Business Digest
LEAD:  Companies


Hurco Companies reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hurco Companies (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
16,033,000
11,294,000
Net inc
b1,260,000
c23,000
Share earns
.29
-
6mo rev
30,556,000
22,146,000
Net inc
b1,917,000
c147,000
Share earns
.44
.01
Shares outst
4,117,000
3,736,000


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allegheny International Inc., Pittsburgh, which makes electrical appliances and personal-care products, said negotiations to sell its Thermco Systems Inc. unit to BTU Engineering of Billerica, Mass., had been ended because of opposition to the proposed merger by the antitrust division of the Justice Department.


Zenith Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zenith Laboratories Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,038,000
12,482,000
Net loss
6,105,000
1,489,000


Land Bank Reopens; Liquidation Set
LEAD: The Farm Credit Administration reopened the Federal Land Bank of Jackson, Miss., today under the supervision of a court-appointed receiver, but did so only to prepare the insolvent bank for liquidation.


A.T.&amp;T. Officer Joins Olivetti
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company has maintained a link with its Italian partner, Ing.
C.
Olivetti &amp; Company, through the election of a top A.T.&amp;T. executive to Olivetti's board, the company said yesterday.


Del-Val Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Del-Val Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,210,000
3,764,000
Net inc
1,745,000
1,397,000
Share earns
.45
.45
Shares outst
3,883,000
3,105,000
The company said the increase in both net and revenue in part reflects the results of the company's public offering of 805,000 shares of common in December 1987 and January 1988.


Citipostal Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citipostal Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,398,733
2,312,335
Net loss
486,525
b216,369
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
43,525,263
7,256,901
Net inc
183,008
785,138
Share earns
.04
.18
b-Net income


Banker's Notes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banker's Notes Inc
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
10,181,000
11,269,000
Net inc
355,000
331,000
Share earns
.11
.10


Personal Myths Bring Cohesion to the Chaos of Each Life
LEAD: THE ancient myths are not dead; they live on in the stories people tell about their own lives.


The Mayor's Sound Bet on Schools
LEAD: Though Mayor Edward Koch of New York likes to proclaim the importance of education, dollars haven't always followed his declamations.
This year they do, partly as a show of confidence in Richard Green, the new Schools Chancellor.
That's a compliment, and also a challenge.


Steve's Homemade Ice Cream reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Steve's Homemade Ice Cream (OTC)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Revenue
3,833,899
3,758,235
Net inc
227,403
b243,861
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Fischbach Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fischbach Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
235,796,000
288,084,000
Net loss
3,948,000
5,511,000
6mo rev
463,799,000
566,335,000
Net inc
b10,675,000
c12,614,000
Share earns
2.73
-
b-Includes a gain of $17,323,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Hungarians Hail Wide Broom Used to Sweep Out Old Guard
LEAD: Politically active Hungarians, supporters and critics of the Government, today welcomed the removal of Janos Kadar from the Communist Party leadership and expressed open elation over the sweeping character of what some called a ''housecleaning.''


Review/Ballet; From Cakewalks to the Classics
LEAD: The School of American Ballet, the New York City Ballet's official school, modestly calls its annual student performances ''workshops.'' Yet the workshop label refers more to the idea of young dancers in training than to experimentation.


Poland Rejects Notion of Another 'Marshall Plan'
LEAD: Poland's Communist leadership has rejected plans being discussed in the West under which it said Poland was being asked to make deep changes in its political system in exchange for a large infusion of financial aid.


Ex-Im Bank Record Loss
LEAD: The Government agency that assists United States exports reported today that it had lost a record $460.9 million in 1987 and said its financial condition would remain bleak for several years.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Interest Is Reviving in Hydrogen Aircraft Rendering of hydrogen-powered plane that could operate both in the atmosphere and in space.
Sparked in part by a recent Soviet experiment, American interest in producing such a plane is reviving.
Science Times, page C1.
Panama Talks Are On Again  A State Department official returned to Panama to seek a deal for the removal of Gen.


PC's on a Target Range
LEAD: THE annual Spring Comdex computer show in Atlanta earlier this month meant a booming business for the Bulletstop, an indoor firing range in suburban Marietta where customers can rent firearms and bullets to shoot anything they please, as long as it is already dead and fits through the doors.
The Bulletstop gave Comdex visitors a chance to vent their frustrations by venting


'GOD IS WEEPING'
LEAD: Eight-year-old Nicholas Corwin, slain in a woman's rampage through this Chicago suburb, was buried today after more than 1,000 mourners heard a rabbi say, ''We know that God is weeping.''


Many Newspapers Hurt by a Slump in Retail Ads
LEAD: A slump in local retail advertising and higher newsprint prices are hurting many newspapers, according to industry analysts.


Toledo Zoo Receives Approval for Pandas
LEAD: The United States Fish and Wildlife Service has decided to allow the Toledo Zoo to begin exhibiting two giant pandas on loan from China while zoo officials work to produce the required export papers, the service said today.


Count Dino Grandi, 92, Early Ally of Mussolini
LEAD: Count Dino Grandi, an early leader of the Italian Fascists and a close ally of Mussolini, died on Saturday at his home in Bologna.
He was 92 years old and, according to a report by the state-run Italian television network, had suffered from cardiac and circulatory problems for some time.


KIDNAPPING DEATH BRINGS CONVICTION
LEAD: A jury convicted a 31-year-old man of kidnapping and murder today in the death of a prominent businessman who was buried alive in a box as part of a $1 million ransom attempt.


Dow Falls 11.11 as Volume Hits Low for '88
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange yesterday recorded its slowest day since Nov. 27, the Friday after Thanksgiving.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 11.11 points, to 1,941.48, and broader indexes were down as well.


Albertson's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Albertson's Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 28
1988
1987
Sales
1,554,585,000
1,398,831,000
Net inc
35,433,000
29,097,000
Share earns
.53
.44


Arnox Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arnox Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,700,000
3,800,000
Net loss
832,612
672,738


At 100, Journal Is Still Lawyers Forum
LEAD: Irving Berlin was not yet born, the snow from the Great Blizzard had not yet melted and Brooklyn was still a city when The New York Law Journal made its debut.
It was dedicated ''to the reporting of legal decisions, the production of topics of interest to the Bench and Bar, and the publication of court calendars and of legal notices.


Harvard Sex Bias Case Opens With Ex-Professor Testifying
LEAD: A former faculty member suing to become the fifth woman granted tenure in the 80-year history of Harvard Business School testified today that the academic guidelines had been manipulated to deny her tenure because of her sex.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; British Agency Buying Babbit of Atlanta
LEAD: In its first acquisition move into the United States, Gold Greenlees Trott, a publicly held London-based agency, has negotiated the purchase of Babbit &amp; Reiman Advertising, Atlanta, for $2.5 million down and additional payouts based on profits during the next four or five years.


From Boom to Bust: Trendy Shops Take a Fall on Columbus Avenue
LEAD: When chic stores catering to the rich began opening on Columbus Avenue in the early 1980's, real-estate executives thought the strip on New York's Upper West Side would become a gold mine.
It has not worked out that way.
As one pricey boutique after another has closed, unable to attract the business necessary to pay the stratospheric rents, real-estate professionals are calling Columbus Avenue - from 72d to 86th


Carol Neilson Wilder, Speech Pathologist, 58
LEAD: Dr.
Carol Neilson Wilder, an adjunct associate professor of speech pathology at Teachers College of Columbia University, died of colon cancer Thursday at her home in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
She was 58 years old.
She sang professionally with the Robert Shaw Chorale and the American Bach Society.
She was a board member of the Voice Foundation and associate editor of The Journal of


Designcraft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Designcraft Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
12,785,000
568,000
Net loss
1,213,000
568,000
Yr sales
60,937,000
63,127,000
Net loss
b1,239,000
c96,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Includes a pre-tax gain of $1,989,000 from the sale of real estate.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There is no violation of human rights in the Soviet Union.
They just don't exist here.''  - Sergei L. Petrov, Soviet freelance photographer.  [ A12:2. ]


Jackson Finds a Brother In Redeemed Bert Lance
LEAD: The phone on Bert Lance's desk rings.
Jesse Jackson is on the line.
Suddenly, the sleepy Southern afternoon crackles with the Democratic Presidential candidate's tales of the crowds and excitement of his Western campaign and his dreams of changing America so that people who never considered the idea of a black


Refac Technology Development Corp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Refac Technology Development Corp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
805,000
1,078,000
Net loss
b192,000
c370,000
Share earns
-
.07
b-After a loss of $332,000 from discontinued operations.
c-Net income and after a gain of $45,000.


CREDIT MARKETS Bonds and Notes Little Changed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes were little changed to down slightly in slow trading yesterday.


Northwestern Steel &amp; Wire Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northwestern Steel &amp; Wire Co (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
142,276,000
111,875,000
Net inc
b10,466,000
c4,961,000
Share earns
1.39
.66
9mo sales
364,028,000
289,839,000
Net inc
b21,956,000
c9,130,000
Share earns
2.92
1.22


Talking Business: with Milstein of Burlington Coat; Discounter Curbs: A Strong Protest
LEAD: Monroe G. Milstein, the chairman and president of the Burlington Coat Factory Warehouse Corporation, thinks a Supreme Court ruling this month has increased the possibility that manufacturers and full-price retailers will reach agreements that will hurt discount retailers.
The decision, upholding a lower court ruling involving the Sharp Electronics Corporation and two retailers, said that a producer's agreement with one dealer to stop supplying a price-cutting dealer with merchandise did not necessarily violate the Sherman Antitrust


Iran Reports Raids on Iraqis
LEAD: Iran said its jets flew five bombing missions Monday against Iraqi positions east of Basra, inflicting heavy losses on enemy troops and equipment.
The Teheran radio, monitored here, said all attacking jets returned safely from the raids on the southern front.
In another report, the radio said Iranian military exercises in the Gulf of Oman continued for a second day on Monday.





HOUSE APPROVES RAIL SAFETY BILL
LEAD: The House passed legislation today that for the first time would require licenses for trains' engineers, make it illegal for crews to tamper with safety devices and give the Government a greater role in handling safety violations.


Review/Television; Wilderness Extremists Stalk 4 Women
LEAD: Last night, NBC's ''CAT Squad'' followed the adventures of three men as they set about foiling a South African nuclear plot.
Tonight, on CBS at 9, ''Nightmare at Bitter Creek'' features four women being stalked through a mountain wilderness by white-supremacist killers calling themselves the Aryan Survival Brigade.


60-Day Plant-Closing Notice Isn't the Half of It; Modest and Crucial
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cambridge Analytical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cambridge Analytical
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,729,578
1,176,952
Net inc
20,057
b189,756
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Diet Eases Transplants in Rats
LEAD: ASTRINGENT diet alone can make a kidney acceptable to a transplant recipient if the donor is put on the special diet for two months before the organ is removed, an experiment with rats has suggested.


Danish Film Wins Top Prize at Cannes
LEAD: ''Pelle Erobreren'' (''Pelle the Conqueror''), directed by Bille August, was awarded the Palme d'Or, or Golden Palm, tonight at the Palais du Festival in ceremonies bringing to a close the 41st Cannes Film Festival.
The prize to the Danish film carried with it a citation acknowledging the exceptional contribution to the film by its star, Max Von


Moynihan Declares Bid For 3d Term
LEAD: Declaring that social welfare issues would be his priority, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan yesterday announced his candidacy for a third term.


Texaco Still Hopeful on Icahn Truce
LEAD: The management of Texaco Inc. said yesterday that it still hoped to avoid a proxy fight with Carl C. Icahn, the company's biggest shareholder.
But people familiar with the Texaco-Icahn talks seemed less optimistic about a truce than they were over the weekend.


Koch Disputes Reports on Effects of Sewage
LEAD: Mayor Koch expressed ''strong disagreement'' yesterday with the assertion of New England lobstermen that sewage sludge from New York City's newest and only ocean dump site is harming marine life in undersea canyons.


Results Plus
LEAD:  College Baseball  Fordham Gains N.C.A.A.
Berth: Tom Levy's two-run double keyed a six-run seventh inning yesterday as Fordham overtook Hartford, 10-8, at New Britain, Conn., to win the E.C.A.C. championship and a berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: A charge that Jerry Olson, the basketball coach at Iowa Wesleyan University, attempted to scalp complimentary tickets to the N.C.A.A. tournament's Final Four in Kansas City, Mo., in late March has been dismissed in a Kansas City, Mo., municipal court. . . .
Rod Baker, the head basketball coach at Tufts University the past five years, has been named an assistant at Seton Hall to Coach P.J.


Gordimer to Read in South African Artists Benefit
LEAD: Four short stories by South African writers will be read at Symphony Space on Wednesday evening.
The reading, which will be introduced by Nadine Gordimer, the white South African novelist and short-story writer, is a benefit for the African Arts Fund, which provides scholarship assistance for black South African artists to study in the United


Neeco Inc () reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neeco Inc ()
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
34,435,000
18,910,000
Net inc
1,486,000
679,000
Share earns
.33
.19
Shares outst
4,352,000
3,680,000
Yr sales
111,674,000
59,311,000
Net inc
4,837,000
2,209,000
Share earns
1.08
.70
Shares outst
4,487,000
3,171,000


Kaisertech in Accord On Sale to Maxxam
LEAD: Kaisertech Ltd. said today that it had agreed to be acquired by the Maxxam Group Inc. for $19.375 a share in cash, or about $871.9 million.


Film Tells Of Building Of Memorial
LEAD: The Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington was planned and completed in just three years because people with widely divergent views on the war in Vietnam joined forces to support the project.
In a similar way, ''To Heal a Nation,'' the television film about the building of the memorial - which will be shown Sunday on N


Datavision Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datavision Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,567,000
2,189,000
Net loss
469,581
b5,158
6mo rev
6,754,000
4,367,000
Net loss
948,164
b69,487
b-Net income


Allis-Chalmers Unit Sale
LEAD: The Allis-Chalmers Corporation said today that it had agreed to sell its Power Generation Services business for $14.5 million cash to a new company formed by the subsidiary's managers.
Allis-Chalmers said sale of the unit, based in West Allis, Wis., was subject to review by constituencies in its Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceeding, the bankruptcy court and the Allis-Chalmers board.


Bunshaft and Niemeyer Share Architecture Prize
LEAD: Gordon Bunshaft and Oscar Niemeyer, two of modern architecture's venerated masters, were awarded the Pritzker Architecture Prize yesterday in Chicago.
The presentation marks the first time that the award, which is given annually for achievement in architecture as an art and carries a $100,000 stipend, has been divided between two architects.


Sports People; Challenge for Nixon
LEAD: Russ Nixon indicated he was undaunted by the prospect of taking over the lowly Atlanta Braves, but he acknowleded that the team's pitching problems were a major challenge for him. ''The club is struggling . . . got a ways to go,'' Nixon said yesterday in Chicago after succeeding Chuck Tanner, who was dismissed Sunday night.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Apogee Enterprises Inc., Minneapolis, said Russell Baumgardner would step down as chairman after the company's annual meeting on June 28 but would continue as a director.
Mr.
Baumgardner, Apogee's founder, has recommended that Donald Goldfus, president and chief officer, succeed him.


Mexico Extending Freeze
LEAD: The Government of President Miguel de la Madrid has decided to extend for three more months a freeze on wages and prices of federally regulated goods and services,the Government news agency Notimex reported on Sunday.


Settlement That Shuts Shoreham Is Called Less Costly by Analysts
LEAD: A settlement between New York State and the Long Island Lighting Company that would result in the abandonment of the Shoreham nuclear power plant is likely to be less costly to Long Island residents and businesses than a public takeover of the troubled utility, independent financial analysts say.


Washington Talk: Briefing; War on Chauvinism
LEAD: Federal agencies are outdoing one another in designing eye-catching posters to convey messages to their employees.
Last month, it was the Treasury Department, which used a poster showing two spies seated on a park bench in view of the Capitol to warn employees to ''report hostile contacts'' to the authorities.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: How do birds know when it's time to come back north?


Phoenix American Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phoenix American Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,858,000
5,814,154
Net inc
57,000
430,000
Share earns
.01
.07
9mo rev
18,819,000
16,770,000
Net inc
2,077,000
1,365,000
Share earns
.32
.20


Sex and Moths' Spray
LEAD: Female moths of at least two species squirt sex attractants from their abdomens like perfume from an atomizer, researchers have found.


Lakers Jump Out To One-Game Lead
LEAD: James Worthy scored 28 points and Byron Scott had 23 as the Los Angeles Lakers turned back a second-quarter Dallas rally and beat the Mavericks, 113-98, tonight in Game 1 of the National Basketball Association's Western Conference final.


Worker Slain in Bowling Alley; Fleeing Gunman Kills Himself
LEAD: A gunman walked into a bowling alley card room today and opened fire, killing one person and critically wounding another before fleeing and then fatally wounding himself, the police said.


SFE Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SFE Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,361,000
10,125,000
Net inc
b171,000
c971,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
18,215,000
19,170,000
Net loss
b49,000
2,969,000
b-After an extraordinary gain of $683,000 from the purchase of a long- standing note at a discount.


Radical Air Force Maneuver Reduces Sonic Boom Damage
LEAD: Three ear-shattering booms mark the flight of an F-111 fighter-bomber thundering at supersonic speed just 200 feet above a test range in the Florida Panhandle.


Gorbachev Aide Urges an Alternative to the Party
LEAD: A key adviser to Mikhail S. Gorbachev called today for creation of a nationwide ''popular front'' that would be a political alternative to the Communist Party.


N.H.L. Players Honored
LEAD: The National Hockey League named the winners of several awards for hockey excellence at the league's annual luncheon today.


In Paris, Tout le Monde Cheers McEnroe
LEAD: The crowd roared and jumped to its feet to welcome John McEnroe back to the big time today on the first day of the French Open tennis tournament.
As admired here as any Frenchman, McEnroe nodded to his supporters, then went on to the serious work of defeating Aleksandr Volkov of the Soviet Union in three uneven sets, 7-6, 6-1, 7-6.


TM Communications Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TM Communications Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,296,174
1,210,780
Net inc
b132,119
87,152
Share earns
.02
.01
b-Included a gain of $520,692 from the disposal of the company's corporate communications segment earlier this year.


AW Computer Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AW Computer Systems Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
546,401
1,326,038
Net loss
367,872
b117,565
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Western Union Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Union Corporation (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
234,556,000
204,583,000
Net loss
b625,203,000
18,845,000
Shares outst
39,939,000
24,396,000
b-Included provision for asset writeoffs and non-recurring charges of $603 million.


The Politics of Roast Beef In Albany
LEAD: Every legislative session, State Senator Emanuel R. Gold nibbles his way through more than 1,000 shrimp, a few hundred slices of roast beef on little rounds of rye and dozens of carrot sticks swirled in creamy white dip.
It is, he says, all in a day's work.


Supreme Court Roundup; Court Will Examine Law on Child Pornography
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether a Massachusetts law designed to ban child pornography is so broadly worded that it violates free speech rights.


McCormick Bid Is Dropped
LEAD: McCormick &amp; Company today dropped its plan to acquire a smaller rival spice maker, Specialty Brands Inc., after the Federal Government moved to block the purchase, saying it would reduce competition.


6 Hurt as Jet Skids in Texas
LEAD: Six people, including the three-person cockpit crew of an American Airlines DC-10, suffered minor injuries Saturday when the crew aborted takeoff at Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport after a warning light flashed.


Royce Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royce Laboratories
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
636,444
19,338
Net inc
320,542
b175,206
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Republic American Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic American Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,410,000
7,384,000
Share earns
.29
.33
The latest quarter included a 2 cents-a-share benefit attributable to the fresh start allowance of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, compared with a 4 cents-a share benefit in the year-ago period.


Metro Datelines; Firecracker Injures A Brooklyn Teacher
LEAD: A 71-year-old high-school teacher was injured yesterday after a firecracker exploded in her hand, the police said.
Two students were arrested in the incident.


Latshaw Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Latshaw Enterprises (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,771,000
6,234,000
Net inc
536,000
455,000
Shares outst
568,216,000
571,063,000
Share earns
.94
.80
6mo sales
12,335,000
11,840,000
Net inc
935,000
821,000
Share earns
1.68
1.44
Shares outst
568,521,000
571,328,000


Deportation Possible For Polish Defector Released From Jail
LEAD: A Polish seaman who jumped ship in a bid for political asylum has been released from jail after two months, still facing possible deportation but flooded with offers of money and shelter.


Iroquois Brands Chief Resigns and Sells Stake
LEAD: Terence J. Fox, who took over a faltering Buffalo brewery as a young man and turned it into Iroquois Brands Ltd., which at its height was a major food, beverage and vitamin company, has resigned as chairman and chief executive.
He has also agreed to sell his 21.4 percent stake for an undisclosed price.


Big Socialist Majority Seen in Assembly Vote
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand's Socialist Party appears likely to achieve an impressive victory in next month's parliamentary election, a likelihood that could complicate Mr.
Mitterrand's search for an understanding with centrist politicians.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The United States Olympic Hall of Fame, created in 1979, will induct five former Olympians tomorrow night aboard the M.S.
Seaward at Pier 88, 12th Avenue and West 55th Street.
The inductees are Bill Bradley, captain of the 1964 gold medal men's basketball team; the late Charles Daniels, winner of five gold medals in swimming in 1904, 1906 and 1908; Mal Whitfield, winner of three gold medals in track in 1948 and 1952; Tenley Albright, winner of a gold medal and a silver medal in women's figure skating in 1952 and 1956; and Jim McKay, the sports broadcaster, a special contributor.


Texaco Meeting May Get Delay
LEAD: Texaco Inc. said yesterday that it would postpone its annual meeting by 10 days if requested by Carl C. Icahn.


Tigers' Streak Snapped at 5
LEAD: Tom Filer of Milwaukee, making his first major league appearance in three years, checked Detroit on five hits as the Brewers ended the Tigers' five-game winning streak with a 7-0 victory tonight.


Dukakis, Back in Massachusetts, Relishes Role as Split Personality
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis was back home as Governor today, but more often than not he lapsed into the role of Democratic Presidential candidate.


Caesars New Jersey Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caesars New Jersey Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
77,910,000
76,332,000
Net inc
6,852,000
5,272,000
Share earns
.43
.32
9mo rev
238,166,000
223,890,000
Net inc
23,017,000
14,127,000
Share earns
1.42
.86


Harold Henning, 69, Ex-Swimming Official
LEAD: Dr.
Harold W. Henning, a former president of the International Swimming Federation and the International Swimming Hall of Fame, died suddenly yesterday at his home in Naperville, Ill.
He was 69 years old.


Prab Robots reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prab Robots (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,988,000
4,902,000
Net inc
167,000
b528,000
Share earns
.09
-
6mo sales
12,008,000
9,309,000
Net inc
426,000
b992,000
Share earns
.22
-
b-Net loss


Sick of 'Supermoms'
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Call it invasive surgery.''  - Dr.
Saul Cooperman, Education Commissioner, on state takeover of Jersey City's troubled public schools.  [ A1:1. ]


Rangaire Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rangaire Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
20,432,000
20,429,000
Net inc
152,000
372,000
Share earns
.04
.10
9mo sales
58,518,000
60,968,000
Net inc
1,257,000
1,018,000
Share earns
.33
.21


Guerrero's Wrist Slap
LEAD: ONLY four days for flinging a bat at a pitcher.
Judging by previous sentences in A. Bartlett Giamatti's baseball courtroom, notably Pete Rose's recent 30-day suspension, Pedro Guerrero got off easy.


Topics of The Times; Laxity in the Lab
LEAD: Proper clinical testing of blood and tissue samples can provide early detection of cancer, heart disease and other life-threatening ailments.
But lax oversight of lab performance has led to a frightening level of inaccuracy.
Sound legislation proposed by Representative Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat, would begin to set higher standards for the $20 billion medical testing industry.


Santa Fe Shareholders Reject 'Poison Pill' Plan
LEAD: Shareholders of the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation voted today to recommend overturning a ''poison pill'' anti-takeover defense instituted by the company's management.


Noriega Informer Files May Be Missing
LEAD: Federal agents are investigating whether documents related to the drug case against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the Panamanian leader, disappeared from a box of records turned over to American drug agents in Panama, according to the United States Attorney in Miami.


Hong Kong Trade Gap
LEAD: Hong Kong's trade deficit doubled in April from its level a year earlier, the Census and Statistics Department reported today.
It said the deficit was 3.39 billion Hong Kong dollars, or $434 million (United States), last month, compared with 1.70 billion Hong Kong dollars in April 1987.


Pressure Rises for U.S. Flexibility on 'Star Wars'
LEAD: President Reagan heads for Moscow apparently determined to resist any proposals that would place limitations on the Pentagon's plans to test anti-missile systems in space.
But arms control experts, including some in the Administration, are saying that he may have already lost the leeway he is seeking to preserve.


Orders for Durables Up For 3d Straight Month
LEAD: Orders to the nation's factories for ''big ticket'' durable goods increased for the third consecutive month in April, indicating strong demand for United States exports.


By Tass, With Love: Your Summit T-Shirts
LEAD: Here's the latest bulletin from Tass: The official Soviet press agency is going into the souvenir T-shirt, button, record and cassette business, just in time for the summit.


In Philippines, One Last Symbol Lies in State
LEAD: Small stickers on the wall read ''Let him come home,'' but in the San Jose chapel where his mother's body lies in an open coffin, hopes are fading that former President Ferdinand E. Marcos will be allowed to return for the funeral.


Budget Battle Is Heating Up In Albany
LEAD: A major confrontation between the Legislature and Governor Cuomo seemed in the making today as they began to address ways to close what the administration says is a $900 million shortfall in the state budget.


Let Europe Pay Its Defense Bills
LEAD: To the Editor:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Amev N.V., the Netherlands, a diversified financial services company whose American arm is Amev Holdings Inc., said Frans Roos had retired as chairman and would be succeeded by J. L. M. (Hans) Bartelds.


Hondurans' Trust of Military Leaders Plummets With Drug Arrest
LEAD: The arrest of a Honduran diplomat for drug smuggling in Miami and the detention of more than a dozen employees of the Honduran national airline appear to have shaken many Hondurans' already fragile confidence in the military-dominated leadership.


Giving Amax New Life Is 'a Ball' for President
LEAD: ''I've had a ball,'' said Allen Born yesterday, describing his three years as president and chief executive of Amax Inc., the large metals company based in Greenwich, Conn.


Ex-Envoy Indicted on Drugs
LEAD: A former Honduran diplomat was indicted by a Federal grand jury here today on charges of smuggling and possession of cocaine with the intention of distributing it.


Hogan Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hogan Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,837,000
14,536,000
Net inc
b1,144,000
c3,355,000
Share earns
.08
.22
Yr rev
46,705,000
48,348,000
Net inc
b2,119,000
c9,371,000
Share earns
.15
.63


Emmanuel Paul, Jazz Saxophonist, 84
LEAD: Emmanuel Paul, a jazz saxophonist who played with the Preservation Hall Band for years, died Monday.
He was 84 years old.


The Turf Fight In Crash Debate
LEAD: THE prose is hard to distinguish from that in a thousand other official reports destined to disappear into the void: a boiler-plate introduction, recommendations for ''important initiatives to be implemented in timely fashion,'' a slew of scholarly appendices.
But the message that the White House Working Group on Financial Markets delivered last week hit Washington like a bucket of ice water.


Nestle-Rowntree
LEAD: Nestle S.A. has increased its holding in Rowntree P.L.C., the British chocolate maker, to 16 percent from 15 percent.
British Government sources said the Trade and Industry Department would publish a decision on Wednesday or Thursday about whether the bid the Swiss company is making for Rowntree would be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.


A Redevelopment Agency In California Offers Bonds
LEAD: The Redevelopment Agency of the City of Concord, Calif., is tentatively offering $92.3 million of central Concord redevelopment project tax allocation bonds with a maximum yield of 8 percent for an issue due in 2018.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


NASA Turns to Dynamics
LEAD: After more than 30 years of launching its own rockets, the Government has for the first time hired someone else to do the job.


Canadians Facing Fight On Trade Bill
LEAD: The Canadian Government went before Parliament today with legislation that would put into effect the free-trade agreement with the United States.
But the measure received a cool greeting, indicating it may take the Government several months to get the bill passed in the House of Commons.


Ford Chairman Backs Tax Idea
LEAD: The chairman of the Ford Motor Company on Monday endorsed the idea of a national value-added sales tax as a method of reducing the United States trade deficit and the Federal budget deficit.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.06
7.21
6.77
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.29
6.24
5.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.71
6.65
6.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.02
9.02
8.76
30-YR.


Sandinistas Said to Prepare an Attack
LEAD: United States and Honduran officials say Nicaraguan forces appear to be preparing to attack the contras if cease-fire talks fail to produce a negotiated settlement to the civil war.


Mexican Oil Tank Fire Forces Mass Evacuation
LEAD: At least 20,000 Mexicans fled from their homes today when a fire at an oil storage depot threatened to ignite millions of gallons of gasoline.


'Into the Woods' Wins Award
LEAD: ''Into the Woods'' was selected by the Drama Desk yesterday as the outstanding musical of the 1987-88 season. ''M.
Butterfly'' was named best new play and ''Anything Goes'' the outstanding revival.
The Drama Desk, formed in 1949, is an association of New York critics, editors and reporters.


Where Are the Fathers?
LEAD: To The Living Section:


A Touch of Surrealism, Ready to Wear
LEAD: ''NOT OUT OF FASHION'' was the title of the fashion show last week that highlighted the New York Academy of Art's spring benefit for its scholarship fund.
But only a few of the clothes shown (direct from Seventh Avenue) have ever been in fashion.
The rest, designed by artists, architects and Off Off Seventh Avenue talents, were infinitely imaginative.


Propane Truck Fire Disrupts L.I. Traffic
LEAD: Three major transportation arteries on Long Island were closed yesterday for most of the day when a tank truck carrying as much as 3,000 gallons of propane overturned and burst into flames on the Seaford-Oyster Bay Expressway, causing large traffic delays and congestion.


U.N. CHIEF MAKING NEW GULF EFFORT
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar has started a new effort to bring about a cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war and restore credibility to the Security Council's attempts to end the conflict, according to diplomats and United Nations officials.


Alfred C. Clapp, 84; Former Jersey Judge Led Kean Campaign
LEAD: Alfred C. Clapp, a former New Jersey judge who managed Governor Kean's first successful gubernatorial campaign, died of heart disease Monday at his home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 84 years old.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: MANY cooks use the terms fricassee and stew interchangeably, although there are fundamental differences between the two.


Dow Rebounds 21.05 on Blue-Chip Trading
LEAD: Some institutional bargain hunting among blue-chip issues helped the stock market averages yesterday.
But plays to capture utility dividends accounted for a large part of the volume.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  International


The Treaty and Its Enemies
LEAD: For a while, it looked as though several willful men could derail the Euromissile treaty and President Reagan's wish to make the treaty a centerpiece of his summit meeting in Moscow next week.
Two of them are Jesse Helms and Gordon Humphrey, Republican Senators who have been trying to obstruct ratification with one niggling amendment after another.


9 Accused of Arranging Marriages So Aliens Could Gain Citizenship
LEAD: Nine people were arrested today and charged in two separate schemes that provided mates - and the promise of United States citizenship - to foreign nationals in exchange for money, the United States Attorney said.


Continental Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Graphics (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
72,122,000
65,538,000
Net inc
2,319,000
2,141,000
Share earns
.22
.21


The Way in Jersey City for 70 Years
LEAD: When Frank Hague, starting in 1918, insinuated his political machine into every facet of Jersey City life, including the school system, he planted roots so deep that they have continued to surface to the present day.


Lendl Tested a Bit by No. 240
LEAD: Ivan Lendl, ranked No. 1 among the men, and Martina Navratilova, No. 2 among the women, today led a string of veterans into the second round of the French Open.


Nodaway Valley Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nodaway Valley Co (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,431,264
8,727,242
Net inc
305,084
158,294
Share earns
.13
.07


Saul, B F Real Estate Investment Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Saul, B F Real Estate Investment Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
8,065,000
c4,740,000
6mo net loss
b17,085,000
c8,206,000
b-After an extraordinary charge for early extinguishment of debt of $129,000.


Arthur M. Kreidmann, Lawyer, 80
LEAD: Arthur M. Kreidmann, a partner in the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, died of complications from a heart attack Saturday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Washington Talk: The First Lady; Strong Opinions With No Apologies
LEAD: She has been vilified and ridiculed, gossiped about and even dreaded by some who work in the White House, but Nancy Reagan remains the President's most influential and trusted adviser.


Corrections
LEAD: A Company Briefs listing in Business Day on Saturday about the Atlantis Group gave an incorrect location for the company.
Its headquarters are in Miami.


Neoax Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neoax Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
71,013,000
46,734,000
Net loss
863,000
b1,985,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income  The latest quarter loss included $3.3 million of unusual financing fee charges related to an acquisition.


Guerrero Banned 4 Days, Fined $1,000
LEAD: Pedro Guerrero, who flung his bat toward David Cone, the Mets' pitcher, last Sunday, joined Pete Rose on the National League's suspended list yesterday.


My Career Mother
LEAD: To The Living Section:


ACM Government Securities Fund reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ACM Government Securities Fund (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Assets
710,642,600
-
Share earns
11.02
-
The fund commenced operations on Jan. 28, 1988.
The net investment income for the period from Jan. 28 to March 31 was $13,107,992, or 20 cents a share.


Food Notes
LEAD:  The Flavors of Kansas


Changes At Atlanta Symphony
LEAD: Robert Shaw started his classical music career in New York with the Beethoven Ninth, and his return to it this week marks a farewell: Mr.
Shaw is concluding his 21st and final season as music director of the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra.


Himont Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Himont Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
435,829,000
283,254,000
Net inc
86,694,000
50,866,000
Share earns
1.33
.83
6mo sales
803,566,000
537,679,000
Net inc
163,724,000
b114,537,000
Share earns
2.51
2.06
Shares outst
65,209,722
55,629,972


Metro Datelines; Mother Dies in Leap; Girl, 6, Found Dead
LEAD: A woman from Waterford who had apparently killed her daughter jumped to her death Tuesday from the Gold Star Bridge on Interstate 95 into the Thames River, the police said.


Review/Film; Rugged Tasmanian Grandeur
LEAD: ''The Tale of Ruby Rose'' tries hard to live up to the mountains and mists of Tasmania's central highlands, where it is set in 1933, but the story cannot compete with the country's rugged grandeur.
Ruby Rose makes her rough home in the wilderness with her trapper-skinner husband, Henry, and a young fellow whom they have adopted.


Murray Ohio Stock Jumps $8, to $59.25
LEAD: Shares of the Murray Ohio Manufacturing Company soared $8, to $59.25, on the New York Stock Exchange, indicating that investors expect Sweden's A.B.
Electrolux to raise its current $52-a-share bid.
Market analysts have said the offer must rise to at least $227 million - $60 a share -to be accepted.


New Storage Function For Digital Audio Tape
LEAD: DIGITAL audio tape, embroiled in a controversy as a consumer product, will soon come to market in another guise - as a computer data storage medium.


Chip Maker's I.B.M. Accord
LEAD: Chips and Technologies Inc. said today that it had reached an understanding with the International Business Machines Corporation so it would not need a license for its products under I.B.M.'s patents.


BEHIND THE TRADE-BILL VETO
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Reagan's message to Congress discussing his veto of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988.
Notice of Plant Closings


Northrop to Drop 700 MX Workers
LEAD: The Northrop Corporation said it will dismiss about 700 employees working on the MX missile-guidance system in Hawthorne, Calif., by year-end as the company's engineering requirements decline.
The move represents 18 percent of the 3,800-member division work force and will primarily affect engineers and support staff.


Bridge
LEAD: Until a decade ago, the bylines of North America's major syndicated bridge columnists (Becker, Goren, Jacoby and Sheinwold) remained unchanged for a generation.


44 Unhurt as Jet Lands at Abandoned Strip
LEAD: A Boeing 737 jetliner making an approach to New Orleans in bad weather lost power in both engines today and made an emergency landing near an abandoned World War II airstrip six miles short of the airport.


Baker, J Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baker, J Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
53,922,000
45,176,000
Net inc
1,961,000
1,901,000
Share earns
.24
.20
Shares outst
8,159,000
9,653,000


Capital Inflow Called Helpful
LEAD: Large inflows of foreign capital into the United States can help to increase United States productivity, a Federal Reserve Board governor, Wayne D. Angell, said today.


New Company Finds Success Selling 'Champagne of Teas'
LEAD: IN a storefront in downtown New Bedford, Mass., a 32-year-old entrepreneur, Sam Barrows, is busy packing his imported Darjeeling tea.
What distinguishes Barrows's brand Darjeeling Tea from other Darjeelings is its single-estate provenance: it is one of a handful of unblended Darjeeling teas sold in this country.


Surprising Choice on Saturn Ads
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation announced yesterday that it had chosen Hal Riney &amp; Partners, a relatively small advertising agency best known for its commercials for Bartles &amp; Jaymes wine coolers, to create advertising for the Saturn, its new line of cars.


J. C. Penney Sells New York Building
LEAD: The J. C. Penney Company said it had sold its Manhattan quarters at 1301 Avenue of the Americas for $350 million to a partnership consisting of two national developers - Tishman Speyer Properties Inc. of New York and Trammell Crow Real Estate Investors of Dallas.
William R. Howell, Penney's chairman, said the sale would result in a $150 million after-tax gain, to be recorded in August, when the closing is scheduled.


Raven Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raven Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
16,809,000
14,650,000
Net inc
406,000
554,000
Share earns
.25
.35


ACM Government Income Fund reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ACM Government Income Fund (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Assets
520,248,161
-
Share earns
11.24
-
Assets represent net assets.
The fund began operations in January 1988.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Budget Battle in Albany


They're Young and Chosen and Dancing
LEAD: Oscar Bravo's third-grade schoolmates teased him when he was chosen to study ballet at the New Ballet School, a program sponsored by the Feld Ballet in cooperation with the New York City Board of Education.


BRIEFS
LEAD: AMP Inc., Harrisburg, Pa., agreed to acquire the shares it does not already own of Matrix Science Corp.


Death Sentence in Missouri
LEAD: A Missouri dairy farmer was sentenced to death today for the slaying of his wife and two nephews in September.
Judge John E. Parrish followed the recommendation of the jury that convicted 37-year-old James Schnick last month and imposed the death sentence.
The defendant will be the 60th inmate on death row in Missouri, where no one has been executed since 1965.


Dorsett Deal Near
LEAD: Tony Dorsett, a Dallas Cowboys' running back, said he could be traded to the Denver Broncos this week, when the Broncos make a new proposal on his hefty contract.
The proposal, which would retire Dorsett's $6 million annuity, is expected in the next few days, according to an interview with Dorsett in The Dallas Morning News yesterday.


A Summer Preview (but Don't Put Those Raincoats Away)
LEAD: Strollers enjoyed the promenade along the East River at the United Nations yesterday as the temperature hit 83 degrees.
Cloudy skies and rain are expected today, however, with a high in the 60's. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


Personal Computer Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Personal Computer Products (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,143,000
1,205,000
Net inc
72,400
b196,900
9mo rev
8,072,000
3,880,500
Net inc
148,000
b323,100
b-Net loss


A Boon to Volunteerism
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Leiter Rebounds As Yankees Win
LEAD: When the no-hitter finally faded in the sixth inning tonight, Al Leiter did not react.
He simply watched Wally Joyner's single drop softly into center field, then waited for the ball to return to the pitcher's mound.


Crazy Eddie Loss
LEAD: Crazy Eddie Inc., now under the control of a new board backed by Entertainment Marketing Inc., said it expects to report additional, significant losses for the fourth quarter ended Feb. 28.
The company said the latest losses were caused by insufficient sales, a soft consumer electronics market, adjustments arising from the new management's completion of its evaluation of the company and certain business practices and policies of prior management.


Parents Call Reading Vital but ...
LEAD: Nearly all parents think reading is very important to their children's success but only a bare majority report their children are very interested in reading, according to a national survey released today.


Must Work Be So Hard?
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Hancock Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hancock Fabrics (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
78,021,000
76,488,000
Net inc
5,017,000
5,880,000
Share earns
.39
-
Year-ago share earnings is not available because the company did not go public until May 4, 1987, when it was spun off by Lucky Stores to Lucky Stores shareholders.


Sahlen &amp; Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sahlen &amp; Associates (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,559,467
5,475,039
Net inc
620,075
b271,627
Share earns
.05
.03
Shares outst
12,023,746
7,795,071
9mo rev
38,336,454
12,180,789
Net inc
1,825,989
b911,743
Share earns
.15
.12
Shares outst
11,806,300
7,646,182


Investment Magazine To Begin Taking Ads
LEAD: For the last year and a half, Fidelity Investments has been publishing a six-a-year magazine called Investment Vision for its customers.


Another Sad Polish Joke
LEAD: The story of Stefan Olszowski is so absurd it would be hilarious, if the ruination that he and his comrades have visited on Poland were not so sad.


CBS Is Awarded '92 Winter Games
LEAD: The American television rights to the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville, France, were awarded yesterday to CBS Sports, whose bid of $243 million exceeded the International Olympic Committee's expectation by $43 million and NBC's bid by as much as $68 million.


Thomas H. A. Lewis; Film Producer Was 86
LEAD: Thomas H. A. Lewis, a film and broadcasting producer and writer who founded the Armed Forces Radio Service during World War II, died Friday at his home in Ojai, Calif.
He was 86 years old.


No Lights, Then No Crowd; Hockey Halted for the Night
LEAD: In the year of the playoff jinx for the National Hockey League, the league's image grew still darker tonight.
A power failure in Boston Garden late in the second period forced officials to order the fans to leave the arena and then suspend the fourth game of the Stanley Cup championship series between the Boston Bruins and the Edmonton Oilers.


Ship Seizure Policy Is Revised
LEAD: The Customs Service and Coast Guard have altered part of their aggressive campaign against illegal drugs, a spokesman for the Customs Service said Monday.


Lowe's Companies reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lowe's Companies (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
590,599,000
569,135,000
Net inc
15,086,000
b19,072,000
Share earns
.39
.48
b-Includes a gain of $5,226,000 from an accounting change.


California Considers Cancer Warning on Alcohol
LEAD: SCIENTIFIC advisers to Gov.


An Ear for the English of the English
LEAD: He knows what ''O.K.'' really stands for, where ''Podunk'' actually is, and why ''Dixie'' has nothing to do with the Mason-Dixon line.


Review/Dance; Gamson In Works By Duncan
LEAD: Annabelle Gamson describes her company, Dance Solos, as a group of solo dancers.
And a program presented on Thursday at St.
Mark's Church by Ms.
Gamson and the six women in her group made it clear that these were, indeed, performers with a distinctive sense of style and maturity.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Foul Air at E.P.A.
LEAD: It appears that the Environmental Protection Agency, the Federal watchdog agency created to protect the nation from pollution, has polluted its own headquarters building.


Navigators Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Navigators Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,679,000
9,810,000
Net inc
b1,814,000
b1,418,000
Share earns
.52
.41
b-After investment gains of $13,000 for the latest first quarter and $404,000 for the year-ago period.


45-Ton Drug Cargo on Barge
LEAD: Forty-five tons of hashish and marijuana aboard a barge in San Francisco Bay were seized by Federal agents today in what the Coast Guard said was one of the largest such drug confiscations in the nation's history.


Charming Shoppes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charming Shoppes Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
150,105,000
137,898,000
Net inc
3,436,000
10,415,000
Share earns
.07
.21


An Irving Suitor Gets More Time
LEAD: The conclusion of the eight-month-old takeover struggle for the Irving Bank Corporation was further delayed yesterday when the Bank of New York Company gained more time to continue its efforts to acquire Irving.


How a Takeover Works
LEAD: Governor Kean, in signing the school intervention law last Jan. 13, said, ''New Jersey is the very first state to make the moral statement that when schools fail, adults will pay the price - not just the children.''


Campaign Trail
LEAD:  Gephardt's Openness


Newport Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newport Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
13,814,000
10,665,000
Net inc
2,003,000
1,166,000
Share earns
.24
.12
Shares outst
8,356,000
9,454,000
9mo sales
38,571,000
31,874,000
Net inc
5,088,000
3,485,000
Share earns
.58
.37
Shares outst
8,739,000
9,424,000


Sigma Designs reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sigma Designs (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
15,473,000
10,879,000
Net inc
1,835,000
1,295,000
Share earns
.36
.26


Vartanig G. Vartan Is Dead at 64; Times Financial Writer Since '63
LEAD: Vartanig G. Vartan, the main writer of the ''Market Place'' column in The New York Times since 1983, died of cancer at Roosevelt Hospital early yesterday.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: D EAR Diary:


Queen's Envoy Accused of Bludgeoning Pigs
LEAD: Queen Elizabeth's representative in New Zealand has resigned as a leader of an animal protection group after complaints that he clubbed two pigs to death in ritual ceremonies.


Beijing Journal; Out She Goes, Again, Miss Ideological Impurity
LEAD: In 1947, Daisy Wang walked away with Shanghai's last beauty crown.


Vehicle Sales Up By 2.6%
LEAD: Mid-May sales of new American-made cars and light trucks rose 2.6 percent above the comparable period last year, the eight domestic manufacturers reported today.


Eating Well
LEAD: ONE cloud that seems to hang over an otherwise sunny hamburger-and-hot-dog-bar becue day is all the talk about burnt meats containing carcinogens.


Thompson Selects Surprises
LEAD: David Robinson and Danny Manning were supposed to make the cut after a week of tryouts for the United States men's Olympic basketball team and they did.
Todd Lichti and Dan Majerle were barely known, and they made it, too.


Another Palestinian Is Killed By Israeli Soldiers in Gaza
LEAD: Israeli soldiers killed another Palestinian today in the occupied Gaza Strip.


Julio Tanjeloff, 72, an Importer Of Gems and Precious Minerals
LEAD: Julio Tanjeloff, an importer of gems and minerals who had a meteoric career in New York retailing in the 1970's before most of his ventures collapsed, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old.


Montedison In Joint Venture
LEAD: Montedison S.p.A., the chemicals group based in Milan, and Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi, the Italian state energy company agreed today to a major joint venture in a bid to compete in international markets.


Bushnell to Atari
LEAD: The Atari Corporation said that Nolan K. Bushnell, chairman and chief executive of Axlon Inc. and the founder of Atari, will be coming back to Atari ''to make more fun and games.'' The two companies declined to give details before the formal announcement next Wednesday, but sources close to the industry said it was likely that Mr.


Where Down-Home Cooking Becomes Sophisticated Fare
LEAD: JACK McDAVID, the chef and owner of the Down Home Diner in Philadelphia, speaks with a thick Appalachian accent, says ''yes ma'am,'' and ''no sir'' and wears denim overalls, a plaid shirt and a peaked cap.
He has also trained in the kitchens of La Cote Basque in New York, Lion d'Or in Washington and Le Bec-Fin in


Not Just Another Day at the Beach
LEAD: With the Boardwalk as a backdrop and mounted police officers on hand, lifeguards prepared for swearing-in ceremonies yesterday at Coney Island.


Review/Jazz; 'Spillane,' a Blend of American Styles
LEAD: The composer and saxophonist John Zorn opened ''Spillane,'' the centerpiece of his last set of a four-night stand at the Knitting Factory Saturday, with a vicious screech from his saxophone.
His new group, called Naked City, including some of New York's best musicians - Bill Frisell on guitar, Wayne Horvitz on piano, Fred Frith on bass and Joey


What Exit Polls Don't Predict
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ohio Power Selling 9 7/8% Bonds at Par
LEAD: The Ohio Power Company, a unit of the American Electric Power Company, is offering $100 million of first-mortgage bonds through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Hutton, which won the financing in competitive bidding.


Harper &amp; Row Names a New Chief
LEAD: George Craig, who had been joint chief executive of Harper &amp; Row Publishers Inc., has been named chief executive and president of the publishing company.


New Grolier President
LEAD: Hachette S.A. said yesterday that it had appointed Eric Laffont as the president and chief operating officer of Grolier Inc.
Mr.
Laffont succeeds Andrew J. Reinhart, who is retiring.
Robert B. Clark will remain chairman and chief executive of Grolier, which is a textbook publisher based in Danbury, Conn.


Students Turning to Nonprofit Companies for Tuition Loans
LEAD: Margaret E. Hankard, a 23-year-old student at the University of Massachusetts, learned last year that scholarship and marriage are not always a happy union, at least as far as the Federal Government is concerned.


BID FOR TAKEOVER OF SCHOOL DISTRICT IS BEGUN BY JERSEY
LEAD: Declaring that Jersey City's public schools are plagued by a ''cycle of failure,'' New Jersey's Education Commissioner moved today to have the state take over the district for at least five years.


Thaddeus W. Hentz, Advertising Executive, 61
LEAD: Thaddeus William Hentz, a retired vice president of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Advertising Inc., died of heart failure May 7 at the Head Injury Center at Highgate in Troy, N.Y.
He was 61 years old and lived in Allendale, N.J.


Tour Moves to Ban New Irons
LEAD: The PGA Tour took a first step today to ban irons with U-shaped or square grooves and restrict its players to clubs with V-shaped grooves, the only modern clubs played before 1984.


National Video Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Video Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,651,296
2,548,908
Net inc
327,020
b142,921
Share earns
.09
-
Yr rev
12,094,305
8,380,610
Net loss
1,209,606
c125,465
Share earns
-
.04


Norway Says More Heavy Water May Be Missing
LEAD: Norwegian officials said today that they are looking into whether a shipment of heavy water sent to Rumania had been improperly diverted.


Preakness Debate Echoes in Print
LEAD: The controversy over the rough early duel between Winning Colors and Forty Niner in the Preakness Stakes last Saturday intensified yesterday when The Daily Racing Form printed a rare front-page editorial accusing the trainer Woody Stephens of contemptuous and dishonorable tactics.


Four Die When Private Jet Crashes in West Paterson
LEAD: A twin-engine airplane crashed into a hillside minutes after taking off today, erupting into flames and missing a large condominium project and several houses by a short distance.


Mesa Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mesa Medical Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
252,000
233,000
Net inc
52,000
b80,000
Share earns
.01
-
Yr sales
956,000
972,000
Net inc
34,000
b368,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Modest Rise for Bonds and Notes
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes inched slightly higher in light trading yesterday.


COMMENCEMENT
LEAD:  The New School


Review/Theater; 'Romeo and Juliet' in the Shakespeare Marathon
LEAD: The New York Shakespeare Festival's Shakespeare Marathon, which got off to a fizzy start (''A Midsummer Night's Dream'') before shifting into low gear (''Julius Caesar''), has come to a dead halt with ''Romeo and Juliet.'' The production at the Public Theater is so devoid of pulse that it seems a form of indentured servitude.


Winjak Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Winjak Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,753,000
11,356,000
Net loss
1,215,000
b202,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income and included a gain from a tax credit of $60,000.


Giants Continue To Dominate Mets
LEAD: So the Mets can't beat the San Francisco Giants in May.
The more important matter is will they be able to beat them in October?


Tighter Security For Soccer Game
LEAD: More than 1,000 policemen will provide security when PSV Eindhoven meets Benfica Lisbon in the European Champions' Cup soccer final Wednesday.


2d Defendant In Racial Case Pleads Guilty
LEAD: A defendant in the Howard Beach racial-attack case pleaded guilty yesterday to a riot charge, and court records were unsealed confirming that another defendant pleaded guilty to the same charge in a closed session last week.


S. Dudley Nostrand, 80, Real-Estate Broker
LEAD: S. Dudley Nostrand, a well-known real-estate broker in Manhattan, died Monday at Lenox Hill Hospital after a long illness.
He was 88 years old and lived in Forest Hills Gardens, Queens.


SOVIET AND ALLIES SHIFT ON DOCTRINE
LEAD: The Soviet Union and some of its principal allies in Eastern Europe have eliminated or changed longstanding doctrines over the last 13 months, nominally ending Moscow's supremacy in deciding the ideology of Communist parties.


Review/Dance; Up From Down Under, a Celebration of the Self
LEAD: Showing plenty of nerve as usual, Australia's Sydney Dance Company came back to town last night for its third visit and with an unexpected program.


Culebra Journal; Caribbean Paradise Found and Lost
LEAD: The year was 1961.
A crisis in Berlin led to a lot of saber rattling on both sides of the cold war.
Marcus Knowlton, a professor of aeronautical engineering at Princeton University, studied oceanographic and weather charts, searching for a sanctuary from thermonuclear fallout if the threat of war increased further.


Statesman Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Statesman Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
169,913,000
121,605,000
Net inc
b1,009,000
c1,573,000
Share earns
.08
.16
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $45,000 and a pre-tax loss of $1.4 million on investment and mortgage banking.


Kansas Base Again Is Army's Harvard
LEAD: After a seven-year effort, the Army has restored this post to its pre-World War II pre-eminence as a center of military education, with a sharp new focus on the operational art of war.


Deere &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deere &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,450,000,000
1,143,000,000
Net inc
86,400,000
35,300,000
Share earns
1.26
.52
9mo sales
2,495,000,000
1,622,000,000
Net inc
153,900,000
b157,200,000
Share earns
2.25
-


Reviews/Film; Stallone's 'Rambo III,' Globe-Trotting Cowboy For the 80's Audience
LEAD: ''The first was for himself,'' say the ads for ''Rambo III.'' ''The second was for his country.
This time is for his friend.'' And the next may be for returning an overdue library book, but whatever John Rambo's reason for raising hell, there's one point that should never be misunderstood.
John Rambo does not do these things because he enjoys them.


Try to Stop Terrorists With 'Star Wars'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond Picks Up 2 Accounts
LEAD: Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond has won two accounts that seem made for each other.
One is Soap Opera Digest.
The other is Joan Collins Fragrance, named for the star of ''Dynasty,'' the soapiest of soaps.


Wine Talk
LEAD: RUN-of-the-mill Burgundy: $30 a bottle. Middle-level 1985 Bordeaux: $27.50.


House Republicans Rail at Democrats
LEAD: The Republicans in the House of Representatives, chafing in their chronic status as the minority party, struck out at the Democratic leadership today, charging that it had abused its power and House procedures.


4 New Schools Planned in Brooklyn District
LEAD: New York City officials said yesterday that four schools will be built in School District 17 in Brooklyn for elementary and junior high school students.


International Consumer Brands reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Consumer Brands
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,660,218
4,203,333
Net loss
783,873
b77,207
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Review/Opera; A Visual 'Rusalka,' Staged Purely as a Fairy Tale
LEAD: Dvorak's fairy-tale opera ''Rusalka,'' long recognized as a masterpiece in the Slavic world, has been gaining apostles in the West of late.
Thanks largely to the efforts of Gabriela Benackova, the Czechoslovak soprano who has sung the title role in celebrated concert performances and recordings, the work's expressive power and abundant lyricism have been made clear.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Fraternity Life Beyond 'Animal House'; Fund-Raising Work
LEAD: To the Editor:


Newsday Is Making a Profitable Investment in New York City
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rolls-Royce Jet Engine
LEAD: The chairman of Rolls-Royce P.L.C., Sir Francis Tombs, said today that his company expects to receive certificates of airworthiness for the V2500 engine next month.
He told the company's first annual meeting since privatization last year that the engine would go into service in 1989 as planned.
The V2500 was developed by a joint venture whose participants included Rolls-Royce, the United Technologies Corporation's Pratt &amp; Whitney unit and Fiat S.p.A.


'Streetcar' Closes
LEAD: ''A Streetcar Named Desire,'' a revival of Tennessee Williams's 1947 drama, closed after the Sunday matinee at the uptown Circle in the Square Theater.
Directed by Nikos Psacharopoulos, the play ran for 85 regular performances and 20 previews.


Corrections
LEAD: A Health page article on May 12 about prenatal diagnosis misidentified an institution conducting research in the field.
It is the medical center of the University of California at San Francisco.


Soybeans Resume Advance As Dry Weather Returns
LEAD: Shaking off the effects of last weekend's rains, the soybean futures market resumed its dry-weather rally yesterday.
Prices of some contracts advanced nearly the 30-cents-a-bushel daily limit.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Initials First
LEAD: The Defense Department, long suspected of fashioning an acronym for a program or weapon before actually giving it a name, appears to have outdone itself.
Now comes Snort, which stands for Supersonic Naval Ordnance Research Track, a site in the California desert.


Lessons
LEAD: On the long sweep of green among the maples in front of the Central Middle School here is a new apple tree, put in the ground this spring to honor Tennessee's newest hero.
He is not an Andrew Jackson or a Davy Crockett or a Sergeant York.
He is a teacher, Terry Weeks, the national teacher of the year.


Seattle to Soviet Georgia: Salmon With Less Salt
LEAD: Hospitality takes on new, and overwhelming, dimensions when the purveyors of good will are Government officials and food professionals here in the Republic of Georgia, and its recipients are three chefs from the United States.


Guitarist Is Partner In a Duet
LEAD: Gus Solomons Jr. is a lanky and loose-moving dancer with an engaging stage presence that is both good-natured and grave.
He is also a dance reviewer of unfailing commitment to the art.
But those qualities were seldom in evidence in a program presented by the Solomons Company/ Dance at the Joyce Theater on Friday as part of the 3-D at the


Intermedics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermedics Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Revenue
57,047,000
48,751,000
Net inc
8,335,000
b7,476,000
Share earns
.48
.45
Shares outst
17,449,655
16,801,435
6mo rev
110,226,000
91,546,000
Net inc
15,134,000
b12,047,000
Share earns
.88
.73
Shares outst
17,120,523
16,654,542


A French Delegation to New Caledonia Is Rebuffed
LEAD: The most volatile issue inherited by France's new Prime Minister, Michel Rocard, grew hotter today when a French soldier shot and killed a Melanesian in the South Pacific territory of New Caledonia.


Chemical to Sell Branches
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation said yesterday that it planned to sell most of its European and all of its Asian private banking offices, which manage more than $1 billion in assets for wealthy customers.


Editor in Chief Leaves Elle
LEAD: Catherine Ettlinger, editor in chief of the American edition of Elle, resigned yesterday after nine months on the job, the fourth senior member of the fashion magazine's staff to resign in the last month.


Tax Break Measure Gains in Albany
LEAD: To keep the Dreyfus Corporation from moving its headquarters and 1,200 jobs from New York City to New Jersey, the Assembly today approved tax breaks for the state's mutual-fund industry.


The PopLife
LEAD: Sade Speaks Out With her silky pop-soul voice, statuesque features and aura of unruffled composure, Sade, the Nigerian-born British pop star, is a figure who often seems swathed in enigma.
Contrary to widely published speculation, ''Stronger Than Pride'' (Epic Records), her first album in more than two years, is not the artistic swan song of an artist fleeing the limelight in disillusion.


EDUCATION: ABOUT EDUCATION
LEAD: ''For the first time in history, principals sat down next to teachers so that they could learn together.'' This indictment of aloof school administrators comes from Judith Hodgson, director of a Philadelphia program created to bring principals and teachers together to make schools more effective.


CHANGE ON SOVIET URGED BY JACKSON
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson today urged ''a very different relationship with the Soviet Union'' and a recognition by the United States that a ''new order'' was emerging in the third world.


American Airlines Tightens Program for Frequent Fliers
LEAD: American Airlines yesterday announced a major tightening of its frequent flier program, after a similar move last month by United Airlines.
American's decision makes it likely that the rest of the major carriers will follow.


New York City Police Are Switching to a Bullet That Is Easier to Trace After Firing
LEAD: The New York City Police Department has stopped purchasing a type of high-velocity ammunition because of the extreme difficulty in tracing bullets to service revolvers used in police shootings, department officials said yesterday.


Properties of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Properties of America
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,882,269
4,466,430
Net inc
356,185
187,207
Share earns
.12
.10
Shares outst
2,889,651
1,874,700
9mo rev
22,636,707
12,572,711
Net inc
b1,514,052
680,709
Share earns
.64
.36
Shares outst
2,369,498
1,874,700


Punta Gorda Isles Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Punta Gorda Isles Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,619,000
4,474,000
Net loss
1,109,000
1,013,000
Yr rev
24,364,000
28,404,000
Net loss
2,825,000
b2,966,000
Share earns
-
1.02
b-Net income and after an extraordinary gain of $1,460,000 from a tax benefit.


Rockwell to Move From Pittsburgh
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation said it would relocate its corporate headquarters from Pittsburgh to El Segundo, Calif., although the aerospace company plans to retain 300 workers in mostly administrative jobs at its former corporate office.


Key Wedtech Witness Says He Lied
LEAD: A key Government witness in the corruption trial of Representative Mario Biaggi admitted yesterday that he had lied to the court and prosecutors about a secret bank account containing $178,000.


Parliament in the 1980's: Naughty (and Not Nice?)
LEAD: Parliament is only in its eighth century of existence, but still the 1988 session is turning into a collector's item, with nude frolicking reported in the House of Commons shower room and, of even greater prurient interest for the avid British politician watcher, naked powerbrokering displayed on the floor of the House of Lords.


A.T.&amp;T. Increases Its Holding in Sun
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company has raised its stake in Sun Microsystems Inc. to 7.1 percent, a total of 2.48 million shares, from about 6.1 percent.


Soccer Fans Riot
LEAD: Clashes in London during an exhibition game between fans of the national teams of England and Scotland last Saturday at Wembley Stadium resulted in injuries to 90 people and the arrests of 200.
Also hurt were the chances that English teams would be readmitted next season to Europe's three club soccer competitions, a leading official of the sport's ruling body for the European continent said yesterday.


Harvard Says Union Organizers Broke Rules
LEAD: Harvard University said today that it had filed objections with the National Labor Relations Board contending that union representatives acted improperly last week as office, service and technical workers voted to form a local union.


Bush and Dukakis Sweep Idaho; 3 Lawmakers Win
LEAD: Vice President Bush and Michael S. Dukakis won overwhelming victories today in Idaho's Presidential primaries.


Networks Face a Drop In Viewing by Children
LEAD: Network programmers are struggling with a drop in television viewing by children during the 1987-88 season and by what appear to be new tastes among young viewers.


Hal Riney: Small but Competitive
LEAD: HAL RINEY &amp; PARTNERS, which won the multimillion-dollar General Motors Saturn account, could have easily been voted the least likely competitor to succeed.
And that vote would have come on size alone.


Topics of The Times; Broken Glass Beach
LEAD: A newly renovated boardwalk and improved maintenance by New York City's Parks Department is helping to restore some of Coney Island's lost luster.
Unfortunately, beer bottle vandals have made strolling along the vast sand beach where Brooklyn meets the Atlantic less delightful than it might be.


DDB Needham Team Gets Tourism Account
LEAD: DDB Needham Worldwide New York and Arthur Young International, a consultant, have teamed up to win an assignment from the Caribbean Regional Development Office of the Agency for International Development, based in Bridgetown, Barbados.


Arafat Regaining Supremacy in Embattled Beirut
LEAD: Five years after they were routed by opponents within the Palestine Liberation Organization, guerrillas loyal to the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, are regaining supremacy in refugee districts in Lebanon.


Art Under The (Little) Big Top
LEAD: Two dancers are flirting.
He plays the oboe as she pirouettes toward him.
Then he advances toward her, leaping and doing a somersault, only to be pushed away.
It could be ballet or modern dance - but it's a tightrope act.


Citicorp Paper Rate Up Again
LEAD: Interest rates at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper, held yesterday, continued their monthlong rise.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council


Multi-Local Media reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multi-Local Media (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,499,663
5,737,640
Net loss
2,534,719
1,429,113
6mo sales
14,133,705
12,312,024
Net loss
4,998,239
2,110,319
The company said results for the latest two quarters reflect $1.4 million in writeoffs for expenses associated with the start-up of new Florida operations.


Long Lake Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Long Lake Energy
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,078,960
548,926
Net loss
1,289,431
824,612


Financial Corp. Deal Is Seen
LEAD: The chairman of the Financial Corporation of America said today that Federal regulators might be able to complete a deal on the sale of the company's American Savings and Loan Association unit to the Robert M. Bass Group Inc. as early as July.
Last month, the Federal


APL Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* APL Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
305,536,000
62,341,000
Net loss
6,226,000
2,189,000
6mo rev
604,296,000
128,858,000
Net loss
b9,064,000
c5,958,000
b-After an extraordinary gain of $8,159,000 from an accounting change by Fischbach Corp.


TRADE BILL VETOED AS PRESIDENT ASKS FOR NEW MEASURE
LEAD: President Reagan today fulfilled his pledge to veto the sweeping trade bill produced by Congress after three years of work, but he struck a conciliatory note in his veto message.


G.O.P. Designs a Colorful Convention
LEAD: In the absence of any surprise about the party's nominee for President, the Republican National Committee held a news conference here today to introduce a stage.


Corn Pesticide Tests Backed
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency today approved field tests of a genetically altered corn pesticide, which has the potential to reduce farm use of chemicals.


Books of The Times; Writer and Narcissistic Social Butterfly
LEAD:  Capote  A Biography  By Gerald Clarke  Illustrated. 632 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


Shifts at 2 Bayer Units
LEAD: Bayer USA Inc. and the Mobay Corporation, two Pittsburgh-based subsidiaries of the chemical and pharmaceutical concern Bayer A.G. of West Germany, announced that Wilhelm C. Ostern, the vice chairman and chief financial officer of Bayer USA, will retire on Aug 1.
He will be succeeded by Gerd D. Mueller, 51 years old, who is the executive vice president of Mobay, who will in turn be succeeded by Milan J.


Hannah J. Howell, 82, Art Librarian at Frick
LEAD: Hannah Johnson Howell, chief librarian of the Frick Art Reference Library of the Frick Collection from 1948 until 1970, died Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 82 years old.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf


U.S. Constitution Rejected
LEAD: Deciding that it was best not to tinker with history, residents here have affirmed a vote by their forebears 200 years ago and have voted against ratification of the United States Constitution. ''We're not changing history,'' said Donald Spector, one of about 700 town residents who turned out for a town meeting Monday night.


Mafia Killer Reported Slain
LEAD: Sicilian officials believe that the Mafia's most feared assassin, Pino Greco, has been killed, police officials said today.
Mr.
Greco, convicted of 58 murders at a Mafia trial in Palermo in December, was responsible for many of the Mafia's most notorious killings.


Study Finds Chemotherapy Can Be Cut by 25% for Testicle Cancer
LEAD: The extent of chemotherapy needed to cure cancer of the testicles can be safely reduced by 25 percent, sparing men from some of the misery of the effective but difficult treatment, a study has found.


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed distribution of The New York Times in some areas.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


Length of Average Hospital Stay Drops 22%
LEAD: The average number of days spent by patients in hospitals fell 22 percent over a recent five-year period, the Department of Health and Human Services said today.


Fraternity Life Beyond 'Animal House'
LEAD: To the Editor:


How Sweet They Are: Onions That Hardly Ever Bring a Tear
LEAD: WHEN Virginia Cenedella first walked into her neighborhood bank, she did not expect to be handed a five-pound sack of sweet onions.
But onion giveaways are a tradition at the University National Bank and Trust Company in Palo Alto, Calif., whose chairman, Carl Schmitt, is a particular devotee of sweet onions.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-15


Geothermal Resources International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geothermal Resources International Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
895,000
952,000
Net loss
b1,839,000
c707,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-After income of $502,000 from discontinued operations.
c-Net income and after a tax credit of $2,256,000 and a loss of $31,000 from discontinued operations.


Ames Department Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ames Department Stores Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
493,980,000
448,480,000
Net inc
5,868,000
6,952,000
Share earns
.16
.19


The Night the Lights Went Out for Hockey
LEAD: As a power failure darkened Boston Garden during Game 4 of the Stanley Cup playoffs, emergency lights were employed to evacuate the arena.
At far left, a Garden employee, perched atop a Zamboni, used a megaphone to direct fans to exits.
Wayne Gretzky of the Oilers looked at the darkened rink and John Ziegler, the N.H.L.


Honor at Yale
LEAD: For several years, Yale University has been manufacturing an astounding number of gifted students.
In 1986, for example, more than half the graduating class received honors of one sort or another.
The class of 1987 slipped a bit; even so, 46.4 percent graduated with honors - 23.9 percent cum laude, 11.5 percent magna cum laude, and 11 percent summa cum laude.


Ford Aerospace to Buy A Military Researcher
LEAD: The Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation said today that it had reached a definitive agreement to purchase BDM International Inc., a military research company based in McLean, Va., for $34.75 a share in cash, or about $425 million.


Plastic Peanut Menace
LEAD: It's easy to foresee a time not too far off when garbage disposal will be a bigger threat to the world than nuclear war.
There was a hint of that future in the famous voyage of the Long Island garbage last year, and there is another hint in the recent passage on Long Island of a statute aimed at stopping fast-food shops from packing their burgers in indestructible plastic foam.


America's Cup Defender Is Unveiled
LEAD: The Stars &amp; Stripes on display in San Diego.
The two-hulled ship has a rigid sail similar to an airplane wing.
She must overcome legal challenges to her unorthodox design from the New Zealand challenger, Michael Fay, before the September showdown. (AP)


Hijacker in Colombia Wielded Toy Grenade
LEAD: A man suspected of hijacking a Colombian airliner to Panama and Aruba and then escaping into the night after returning to Colombia was captured Tuesday carrying a toy grenade, a military statement said.


Washington Talk: Briefing; G.O.P. and Gorbachev
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev is quoted approvingly in the first issue of a glossy 24-page magazine published by House Republicans. ''We have lost and keep losing a lot,'' the Soviet leader is quoted as saying, ''because of our failure to unshackle grass-roots initiative, endeavor and independence completely.


Amerifirst Savings
LEAD: The Transcapital Financial Corporation, the parent of the Transohio Savings Bank, agreed to acquire the Amerifirst Federal Savings and Loan Association for $20 a share, or $230 million.
Amerifirst, which had assets of $4.4 billion at the end of 1987, said it would continue to operate under its own name, but as a unit of Transohio.


Arthur M. Carter, 76, Afro-American Editor
LEAD: Arthur M. Carter, a longtime editor and publisher of The Washington Afro-American newspaper, former managing editor of the Afro-American newspaper chain, and a former Pulitzer Prize juror, has died of cancer.
He was 76 years old.


Paul Hogan Is Back to His Tricks
LEAD: The screen success of Mick (Crocodile) Dundee is based, quite literally, on nothing.
Nothing is the thing that Dundee, in the disarming person of the Australian star Paul Hogan, does best.
Mr.
Hogan's calm, unflappable reactions to the various facts of New York City life were the comic foundation of ''Crocodile Dundee,'' turning its mild, genial humor into box-office gold.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Michigan State Building Authority is tentatively offering $78.7 million of revenue bonds.
The underwriters are led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Study of G.M. Cars Is Expanded
LEAD: Federal engineers have broadened their examination of sudden acceleration in autombiles built by the General Motors Corporation, adding 1.4 million C-body cars to the 703,000 H-body vehicles already under study, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said today.


Review/Television; Ed Flanders as Dr. Westphal in ''St. Elsewhere.''
LEAD: The doors of television's ''St.
Elsewhere'' close tonight, at least as far as further first-run episodes are concerned.
After six feisty seasons of being ensconced in the midsection of the weekly ratings lists, the NBC series will say goodbye at 10 o'clock.
But St.
Eligius - the offbeat teaching hospital in a poor Boston neighborhood is derisively called St.


About New York; Tracking AIDS: Streetwise Study Of Prostitutes
LEAD: It was 1956 and Joyce I. Wallace of Flushing, Queens, was awaiting a favorite uncle visiting from Des Moines.
They had chosen to meet in Bryant Park behind the Public Library, and she was early.
A man sat down beside her.


Syntex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Syntex Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
324,300,000
286,700,000
Net inc
73,600,000
62,400,000
Share earns
.62
.53
9mo sales
940,500,000
840,600,000
Net inc
229,300,000
193,700,000
Share earns
1.94
1.60


Dollar Dips in Thin Trading; Gold Loses $1.60 on Comex
LEAD: The dollar fell against most major currencies in thin, uneventful trading yesterday.


Trade Deficit Cut Seen
LEAD: C. William Verity Jr., Secretary of Commerce, predicted today that the United States trade deficit would be cut more than 15 percent this year, to below $150 billion.
Secretary Verity, interviewed on NBC's ''Today'' program, forecast that the Reagan Administration would cut last year's $171 billion deficit to a little below $150 billion and said he believed it could be cut below $100 billion in two or three years.


What's Fresh, Crisp and Grilled?
LEAD: WHEN it comes to grilling, vegetables often get shortchanged.
All the attention goes to those juicy, sizzling steaks that send mouthwatering aromas into the soft summer air.
If vegetables do make an appearance on the grill, they are usually stabbed through the heart with skewers, and included only to give color to a brochette.


New Future For Queens Warehouse
LEAD: WHEN a group of developers bought a former Gimbels warehouse in Long Island City in 1986, their plan was to transform the huge five-story structure into a mixed-use commercial building primarily for office and furniture design tenants.


VIETNAM OFFICIAL RECEIVES U.S. VISA
LEAD: State Department officials said today that they had granted a visa to visit the United States to Ngyuen Xuan Oanh, an American-educated Vietnamese who is a leading advocate of economic liberalization in his country.


Protection for Referees
LEAD: Big Eight basketball coaches who persist in publicly criticizing game officials next year could be suspended for one game under a policy adopted yesterday. ''At the request of coaches, the conference approved a rule stating that under no circumstances shall a coach comment publicly criticizing a game official's performance,'' said Tim Allen, the director of the Big Eight service bureau.


Tax-Exempt Sales Action
LEAD: A House Ways and Means subcommittee voted today to allow museums and other nonprofit organizations to continue to earn tax-free income from mail-order sales of education-related items and moderately priced mementos, one subcommittee member said.


Meow Mix Cat Food Goes to DDB Needham
LEAD: DDB Needham Worldwide, a Ralston Purina agency since 1986, has just received its first cat food assignment.
A watershed certainly.


Newspaper's Computer Is Infected With a 'Virus'
LEAD: A rogue computer program introduced into personal computers at The Providence Journal-Bulletin earlier this month destroyed one reporter's files and spread to floppy disks throughout the newspaper's computer system, the Rhode Island newspaper said.


This Trade Bill Deserves to Die
LEAD: In vetoing the trade bill, President Reagan made the right move for the wrong reason.
The quick House vote to override was just wrong - a Democratic election-year stunt.
The supposed point of this massive exercise was to expand trade.
Yet the bill that finally emerged is a monster of disguised protectionism that would do the opposite.


Senate Leaders Move to Speed Arms-Pact Vote
LEAD: Annoyed with the tactics that have delayed approval of a new arms treaty, Senate Democratic and Republican leaders moved today to shut off amendments by opponents of the pact so that the treaty can come to a vote before President Reagan arrives in Moscow on Sunday.


Qmax Technology Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Qmax Technology Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
868,872
1,332,780
Net inc
12,419
408,765
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
5,848,229
4,344,792
9mo sales
2,537,204
2,814,449
Net loss
17,111
116,604


Robertson Backers Set North Carolina Boycott
LEAD: Supporters of Pat Robertson said today that they would boycott next week's Republican convention in North Carolina because party regulars want to deny them influence at the national convention.


Metro Datelines; Request by Mother Of Lisa Steinberg
LEAD: The mother of Lisa Steinberg, the 6-year-old who died from a beating last November, emerged from seclusion yesterday and called for a law to safeguard children given up for adoption.


Clones May Speed Up Laser Printing
LEAD: The clone makers of Silicon Valley are at it again.


Banctec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banctec Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 27
1988
1987
Revenue
23,176,000
22,878,000
Net inc
2,230,000
1,468,000
Share earns
.36
.31
Shares outst
6,277,000
4,718,000
Yr rev
93,385,000
85,571,000
Net inc
b6,428,000
3,815,000
Share earns
1.11
.71


On 'Car Talk,' Sound Repair Tips, No Charge for the Humor
LEAD: ''HI, this is Steve from New York,'' Steve says to Tom and Ray Magliozzi.
Steve's 1970 Volkswagen bus seems to run on three cylinders, but that's all right.
The problem is that the ignition absolutely will not work, and he has resorted to some agonizing methods of starting the bus.
He wants to know if the Magliozzi brothers, whose ''Car Talk'' show is broadcast on National Public


Caesars World Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caesars World Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
194,997,000
194,836,000
Net inc
14,684,000
10,730,000
Share earns
.60
.35
Shares outst
24,457,000
30,507,000
9mo rev
616,605,000
578,116,000
Net inc
60,043,000
38,277,000
Share earns
2.20
1.26
Shares outst
27,296,000
35,496,000


Westvaco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westvaco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
533,313,000
461,145,000
Net inc
45,219,000
24,299,000
Share earns
.70
.37
6mo sales
1,034,643,000
902,005,000
Net inc
82,863,000
43,794,000
Share earns
1.28
.67


New Offer Made To Hambletonian
LEAD: The New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority has offered to raise the purse for the Hambletonian by $200,000 in an attempt to keep the prestigious event at the Meadowlands.


Mott's Super Markets Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mott's Super Markets Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
568,299
523,827
Net loss
b405,535
b512,421
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $479,685 for the latest first quarter and $595,684 for the year- ago period.


Midwestern College Beseiged by Applicants
LEAD: Except for the Latin motto engraved in stone above the leaded windows, the Gothic archway at Washington University in St.
Louis looks for all the world like Blair Hall at Princeton.
And well it might.
Built in 1900, the ivy-covered towers were designed by the same canny architects who sold an almost identical set of plans to Princeton a few years earlier.


Prime Capital Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Capital Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,939,357
5,799,649
Net loss
536,690
b122,461
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Brawley's Mother Defies a Grand Jury Subpoena
LEAD: The mother of Tawana Brawley ignored a grand jury subpoena today, defying New York State's first effort to compel her family's cooperation in the investigation of what the family says was the racially motivated abduction and rape of the black Dutchess County teen-ager.


A Protein Is Found to Help Fight Bone Cancer
LEAD: The natural protein interferon shows promise in controlling multiple myeloma, a lethal form of bone cancer, when used in combination with standard chemotherapy drugs, researchers said today.


SAHARAN ACCORD: BROAD GAINS SEEN
LEAD: The renewal of diplomatic relations between Morocco and Algeria will have far-reaching consequences in North Africa, Europe and the Middle East, North African and Western officials believe.


Graham-McCormick Oil &amp; Gas Partnership reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Graham-McCormick Oil &amp; Gas Partnership (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,357,000
5,089,000
Net loss
931,000
1,017,000


Coach Serves Notice
LEAD: After coaching the United States men's volleyball team to victories at the 1985 World Cup and the 1986 world championships, Marv Dunphy will return to college coaching after the Summer Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea.
Dunphy, who in three years as coach of the United States team has a 162-27 record, will return to Pepperdine in Malibu, Calif., as men's volleyball coach, a position he held before taking the job as coach of the American team.


Proxmire Assails Report on Stock Fall
LEAD: Senator William Proxmire strongly criticized the White House working group on the stock market collapse today, calling the report it issued last week ''pitiful'' and ''very disappointing.''


Outstanding N.A.S.D. Short Sales Rise Slightly in Month
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers yesterday reported a small monthly rise in the ''short interest'' for the most active over-the-counter securities in its national market system.


Interactive Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interactive Technologies
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,746,000
5,061,000
Net inc
700,000
515,000
Share earns
.17
.13
6mo sales
13,188,000
8,562,000
Net inc
1,399,000
888,000
Share earns
.34
.22


Hechinger Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hechinger Co (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
241,129,000
168,134,000
Net inc
8,827,000
b9,480,000
Share earns
.24
.30
Shares outst
40,892,617
32,659,235
b-Includes a gain of $1,930,000 from an accounting change.


New York Philharmonic Prepares for Soviet Tour
LEAD: ''These last few weeks, the trip to the Soviet Union is all the orchestra has talked about,'' Zubin Mehta said the other day, a few moments after leading the New York Philharmonic through a performance of the Mahler Ninth Symphony. ''The works we've been playing here the last few weeks - the Brahms Second, the Mahler -is music we are bringing with us.


A.T.&amp;T.'s Link to Olivetti
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company confirmed yesterday that it was re-evaluating aspects of its relationship with Olivetti S.p.A., which builds its personal computer line.


Democratic Candidates Spar Over Budget Issues
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson and Michael S. Dukakis disagreed on economic priorities in a televised debate here tonight, with Mr.
Jackson terming Mr.
Dukakis a conservative who declines to describe his priorities in detail.


French Open; A Teen-Ager Knocks Off Mandlikova
LEAD: The third day of the French Open brought the the first major upsets of the tournament.


House of Fabrics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* House of Fabrics Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
74,985,000
73,535,000
Net inc
2,002,000
1,757,000
Share earns
.30
.27


Engineer in Fatal Crash Admits Federal Charge
LEAD: Conrail engineer at the controls in the worst crash in Amtrak history pleaded guilty today to a Federal charge of conspiring to obstruct an investigation of the wreck.


Sanderson Farms reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sanderson Farms
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
37,597,000
36,682,000
Net inc
830,000
2,917,000
Share earns
.09
.34
6mo sales
71,279,000
73,235,000
Net inc
b2,229,000
6,531,000
Share earns
.24
.77


Reason to Celebrate
LEAD: To be present at a friend's triumph is a rare pleasure.
It was mine last weekend at the opening of the new National Gallery of Canada, designed by Moshe Safdie.


MGM Grand Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MGM Grand Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
37,125,000
-
Net inc
b900,000
c1,214,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Includes a $311,000 tax credit.
c-Net loss  The latest quarter includes results for the Desert Inn and Sands Hotels from their acquisition on Feb.


Compaq's Sales
LEAD: A shortage of computer chips has limited production at the fast-growing Compaq Computer Corporation.
The company said second-quarter sales would be reduced by the shortage of memory chips, which has squeezed manufacturing for the entire United States computer industry.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q.I live in an old house with wood floors, and in one room the floor squeaks when you walk across it.
Is this a major problem, or is there a simple remedy?
A.It is seldom a major problem, although in rare cases it can indicate a structural defect.
Squeaking is most often due to loose floorboards that move up and down when stepped on, making the edges squeak as they rub against each other.


Karl A. Wittfogel, Social Scientist Who Turned on Communists, 91
LEAD: Karl August Wittfogel, a social scientist and former Communist whose theories caused him to be denounced in Communist circles, died of pneumonia yesterday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on the Education page on Wednesday about Washington University in St.
Louis misidentified a campus building.
The building shown in the photograph was Graham Chapel.


Minstar Agrees To Bid by Jacobs
LEAD: Minstar Inc. said it had agreed to an improved buyout offer from its controlling shareholder and chairman, Irwin L. Jacobs, valued at $400 million.
Minstar signed a merger agreement under which a group led by Mr.
Jacobs will conduct a leveraged buyout of the company at $31.50 a share in cash, up from a previous offer of $29.


Yanks Win in 10; Mets Top Giants; Yankees 4, Angels 2
LEAD: Dave Winfield, whose night had consisted of two strikeouts and one ill-advised attempt to score from third base on a grounder to the left side, slammed a bases-empty home run inside the left-field foul pole tonight to help lift the Yankees to a 4-2, 10-inning victory over the California Angels.


Etz Lavud Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Etz Lavud Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,946,000
16,625,000
Net inc
292,000
924,000
Share earns
.18
.53
Shares outst
1,608,750
1,743,750
The U.S. dollar figures are translated from new Israeli shekels at the rate as of March 31, 1988, which was $1 equals 1.5596 Shekels.


Quarter's Spectacular Trade Gain
LEAD: Sharply rising exports in the first quarter produced the most spectacular improvement in the nation's trade deficit in any quarter since the dollar began its decline in 1985, the Commerce Department said yesterday.


WOMAN'S SENTENCE IS BIRTH CONTROL
LEAD: A judge has ordered a young woman to remain on birth control for the rest of her childbearing years because she abandoned her two young sons in a sweltering apartment last summer.


New Clients for In-Home Shopping
LEAD: THE living room of the country-style apartment in the Chelsea section of Manhattan was filled with a dozen women, mostly in their 30's.
In another era, they might have been gathered for consciousness raising.
But the women, most of them busy with jobs and children, were there to shop: they were looking at children's fashions sold by a new company, Clothes to


George Rose Memorial
LEAD: Actors, singers and other theater professionals will take part in a tribute to the actor George Rose at 11 A.M.
June 8 at the Shubert Theater, 225 West 44th Street.
Mr.
Rose was slain in the Dominican Republic on May 5; he was 68 years old.
Those appearing at the tribute, which is open to the public, will be Joseph Papp, Graciela Daniele, Rupert Holmes, Maureen McGovern, Betty Buckley, Jack Gilford and Estelle Parsons.


Contract Talk
LEAD: Danny Manning said yesterday that he deserved a big contract from the Los Angeles Clippers.


IRAQ RETAKES LAND NEAR BORDER PORT
LEAD: Iraq announced today that it had begun an offensive near the battered city of Basra, a southern Iraqi port on the Iran-Iraq border, recapturing territory lost to Iran east and south of the city.


A Commuter's Solution: Bicycle That Folds Up
LEAD: CYCLISTS are elegant people, in the engineering sense: their solution to a transportation problem is simple and uses a minimum of energy.


Meese Is Told He Harms G.O.P.
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d was told by some conservative Congressmen today that his legal troubles were causing political damage to the Republican Party and the Presidential candidacy of Vice President Bush.


Books of The Times; Cold-War Novelist Takes a Moral View of History
LEAD:  The Revolutionist  By Robert Littell  467 pages. Bantam Books. $18.95.


Commonwealth Savings Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Savings Assn
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b58,406,000
2,452,000
9mo net loss
b143,885,000
20,175,000
b-Includes $33.9 million and $95.4 million for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, in additions to loan loss reserves.


Sports People; Out of a Job
LEAD: Minnesota's first female high school hockey coach is out of a job after allegations that she either furnished team members under her supervision with beer or allowed them to drink it.


Suffolk's Reckless Screen Scream
LEAD: On Long Island and nationally, Suffolk County's legislature has developed a reputation for being out front on, for instance, smoking and bottle return laws.
At other times, however, it has strained way too far out, as when it contemplated creating a county navy.
Now it has passed another bizarre bill, to regulate video display terminals, that would set a reckless precedent for other jurisdictions.


Sahara Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sahara Resorts (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
23,631,847
24,581,013
Net inc
34,952
151,067
Share earns
.01
.04
6mo rev
45,442,373
48,780,078
Net loss
192,416
b215,661
Share earns
-
.06
b


Neglect Cited In the Deaths Of 4 Infants
LEAD: A Family Court judge has ruled that a young Brooklyn couple showed ''gross negligence'' in the care of their five infant children, four of whom died of natural causes in the last five years.
None of the four children lived past the age of four months.


Brandon Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brandon Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,943,000
5,270,000
Net inc
562,000
367,000
Share earns
.24
.18
Shares outst
2,305,078
2,047,829
6mo rev
14,086,000
10,125,000
Net inc
1,123,000
668,000
Share earns
.49
.35


Review/Concert; Premieres and Bernstein
LEAD: A few weeks ago, when Ascap held a reception in honor of Leonard Bernstein's 70th birthday, the composer and conductor protested that his birthday was not until Aug. 25.
Nevertheless, several early tributes have already been offered, the most recent being an installment of the Brooklyn Philharmonic's Meet the Moderns series Tuesday evening at Town Hall.


Carbide Trades Investigated
LEAD: The American Stock Exchange confirmed yesterday that it was investigating the trading of put options on the stock of the Union Carbide Corporation last week.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Art Director Buys Way Into Agency
LEAD: JERRY WHITLEY, an art director from Texas, has passed through quite a number of ad agencies, moving frequently.
Unlike most of his peers, he has not been searching for a higher salary.


Malrite Communications Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Malrite Communications Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
26,995,000
23,191,000
Net loss
b3,591,000
4,272,000
Shares outst
13,778,000
13,795,000
b-After an extraordinary gain of $399,000.


Rights Abuses Seen in 3 North Africa Nations
LEAD: In the midst of recounting a severe beating by a police chief, Mohammed Guessous's voice softened to a whisper and trailed off.
He had developed a headache and fatigue and had to cut short the conversation.


Bush Wins in Idaho in Light Turnout
LEAD: Vice President Bush won an easy victory in the Idaho Presidential primary Tuesday, but his relatively light vote raised Democratic hopes for November.


Property Capital Trust (Boston) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Property Capital Trust (Boston) (A)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,165,000
c13,330,000
Share earns
.42
1.45
9mo net inc
b16,122,000
c21,003,000
Share earns
1.66
2.29
b-After a gain of $3,809,000 from the sale of an investment.


Clues of Stellar Explosions Found Deep in Mine, Scientists Say
LEAD: By analyzing ore from a mine nearly a mile deep, two physicists believe they have hit upon traces of the death throes of thousands of Milky Way stars that have collapsed in the past 14 million years.


Damon Creations Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Damon Creations Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,152,000
9,808,000
Net loss
906,000
226,000
The company said the loss increased due to a decline of sales, and to the inclusion of $155,000 in royalty income in the year-ago quarter.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: Healthtrust Inc., a hospital management company based in Nashville, is offering a total of $745 million in debt securities through underwriters led by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
The four-part financing includes $365 million of zero-coupon senior subordinated debentures due in 1999, priced at $574.12 per $1,000 of bonds to yield 16.50 percent.


Reviews/Dance; Dancing the Lives of Poets
LEAD: Jerry Pearson's love of classic poetry and fiction was evident in the intelligent program his Pearson Dance Company presented Sunday night as the final attraction in the 3-D series at the Joyce Theater.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


Senate Approves a Ban on Plastic Firearms
LEAD: The Senate, by voice vote, today approved a bill that would ban the manufacture, sale or possession of plastic firearms and other weapons not detectable by security devices.
The action clears the way for a conference committee to work out a compromise with the House, which overwhelmingly approved similar legislation earlier this month.


Game That Wasn't Is Talk of Boston
LEAD: The power is back for now at the venerable Boston Garden, but all this sports-crazed city could talk about today was the night the lights went out at the celebrated arena.


Blue Mountain Owners Hail Ruling on Cards
LEAD: Stephen Schutz and Susan Polis Schutz had cause to celebrate yesterday: a ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit in favor of their small greeting card company, Blue Mountain Arts, against their huge competitor, Hallmark.


Stake in Payless
LEAD: The New York investor Asher B. Edelman has again raised his stake in Payless Cashways Inc., to 9.9 percent from 9.1 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Edelman did not change his previous statement that he may seek control of the chain of building materials stores, which is based in Kansas City, Mo.


Enstar Indonesia Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enstar Indonesia Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
34,286,000
27,716,000
Net inc
10,068,000
7,810,000


For 'Arbat' Author, Novel Is Yoked to Perestroika
LEAD: Anatoly Rybakov considers it appropriate that his novel ''Children of the Arbat'' is identified with the campaign of economic and social restructuring that Mikhail S. Gorbachev has begun under its Russian name of perestroika.


Reviews/Music; Karen Akers Sings Ballads
LEAD: Among the younger generation of cabaret performers, Karen Akers stands apart from her peers as an icon of cool, contained elegance.
Ms.
Akers, who has returned to the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street) for a semiannual engagement through Saturday, possesses a dark, glowing contralto that echoes Carly Simon but without any rock inclinations.


Israel and Allies Raid Lebanese Village
LEAD: Israeli Air Force and artillery units and Lebanese in a Christian-led militia attacked a Shiite Moslem stronghold in southern Lebanon today.
It was the second attack against the pro-Iranian Party of God forces in three weeks.


Transnational Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transnational Industries
Qtr to Jan 29
1988
1987
Sales
7,996,000
11,212,000
Net loss
b4,690,000
c1,038,000
Yr sales
40,352,000
43,107,000
Net loss
b6,610,000
cd67,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $1,824,000 for the quarter and $2,620,000 for the year.


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: ONE of the things I like most about our neighborhood is the parades.
They're good old-fashioned small-town parades, with fire engines and police cars and high-school cheerleaders carrying their pompons and kicking their legs in the air.
The Mayor marches, and the Council members, and occasionally there's a minor - a very minor - beauty queen.


One Blow for Liberty
LEAD: The most abusive intrusion on the privacy of Americans - the polygraph, falsely claiming to be a ''lie detector'' - is on the verge of receiving a setback.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; WPP Group in Deal To Buy Dutch Agency
LEAD: The WPP Group, another publicly held British holding company best known these days for its legal problems with defectors, announced yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the PPGH Group B.V. of Amsterdam, the fourth-largest agency in the Netherlands.
It will pay as much as $71.6 million over the next five years.


Nestor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nestor Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
84,611
8,016
Net loss
632,863
539,252
9mo rev
237,700
58,016
Net loss
1,806,254
1,438,007


Publicized Tranquilizer Getting Mixed Reviews
LEAD: A drug that appeared to be a major advance over Valium and other tranquilizers when it was approved for use 20 months ago is getting mixed reviews from psychiatrists who have prescribed it.


Hundreds Attend a Celebration Of Armand Hammer's Birthday
LEAD: Shortly after President Reagan left for his summit meeting in Moscow, hundreds of people gathered tonight to celebrate the 90th birthday of one of the first advocates of United States-Soviet cooperation, Dr.
Armand Hammer.


Chicago Bank's Money Is Back
LEAD: The First National Bank of Chicago has recovered the last of the nearly $70 million embezzled in a fund transfer scheme, according to officials of the bank.
The remaining $19.8 million was returned by the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York, along with $37,046 in interest, they said Tuesday.


Spelling, Aaron Productions reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spelling, Aaron Productions (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
25,278,000
41,170,000
Net inc
5,377,000
5,578,000
Share earns
.29
.30
9mo rev
106,548,000
122,050,000
Net inc
b18,130,000
c17,169,000
Share earns
.99
.93


Look of a Winner Helps Dukakis Reap Support
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis today won the high level of praise here that is usually reserved for veteran Capitol Hill legislators, not outsiders from New England.


Washington Talk: Briefing; 'High Noon' on the Hill
LEAD: When the House of Representatives voted to override President Reagan's veto of the trade bill on Tuesday, Representative Robert J. Mrazek felt about as alone as Gary Cooper in ''High Noon.''


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Bankers Insurance Group Inc., Miami, said it had agreed to sell its Financial Insurance Group Ltd. unit to Allegiance Capital Partners for $:39.8 million, or $74 million, in cash and debt.


Tenneco Wants to Sell Its Oil and Gas Unit
LEAD: Under pressure from investors to improve its performance and the price of its stock, Tenneco Inc. said today that it planned to sell its large oil and gas operations.
Analysts said the sale could bring in $5.4 billion or more.


Future Help for Those Who Look Back
LEAD: A CHARITABLE trust has been set up by the architectural firm of Beyer Blinder Belle in honor of the preservationist James Marston Fitch.
Dr.
Fitch, 79 years old, founded the country's first university program in historic preservation at Columbia University and currently directs preservation projects for the firm.


Calendar of Events: Unusual Azaleas
LEAD:  Azalea Walk, Bartlett Arboretum Association, University of Connecticut, 151 Brookdale Road, near Route 137, Stamford, Conn.; 203-322-6971.


Farm Bank Bonds
LEAD: Among government agency issues expected this week is a Federal Farm Credit Bank three-part bond sale totaling $3.02 billion, which was priced yesterday at par and offered through various securities dealers.
An $828 million issue due Sept. 1 yields 7.25 percent, while $1.4 billion of an issue due Dec.


Boeing 757's Ordered By American Airlines
LEAD: American Airlines said yesterday that it would buy 50 Boeing 757 jetliners and put Rolls-Royce engines in them.
The carrier said the multibillion-dollar deal would give it the newest and quietest fleet of the nation's major airlines.


Million Bullets Recalled by New York City Police
LEAD: The New York City Police Department yesterday ordered the immediate recall of one million .38-caliber revolver bullets because the ammunition does not meet departmental specifications intended to make it easy to trace in criminal investigations.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Medicare Expansion Gains


Utility Sets Plan to Cut Power Use
LEAD: New England's largest electric company today filed with the State of Connecticut a conservation plan intended to cut in half the growth in demand for electricity.


Not Just Grand, but 500 Grand
LEAD: THE design is a carefully orchestrated secret.
But a trickle of information is known about the 500,000th Steinway piano, which is to make its debut at Carnegie Hall next Thursday.
The instrument was crafted by Wendell Castle, a furniture designer and woodworker.


Swensen's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Swensen's Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,299,000
2,265,000
Net inc
77,000
95,000
Share earns
.01
.01


McKesson Corp reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McKesson Corp (NYSE)
Year to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,282,800,000
6,671,600,000
Net inc
95,000,000
b89,700,000
Share earns
2.23
2.07
b-After a $4.4 million loss from discontinued operations.


Review/Music; Collegiate Sings Verdi And Janacek
LEAD: The Collegiate Chorale celebrated two geriatric wonders among composers at Carnegie Hall Saturday night.
The music was Janacek's ''Amarus'' and the Four Sacred Pieces by Verdi.
Robert Bass conducted.
Curtis Rayam and Karen Williams sang the solo parts.


Yanks Win in 10; Mets Top Giants; Mets 6, Giants 3
LEAD: It was easy to forgive the crowd for leaving early.
It was wet and cold and unlikely to improve, although those weren't the only conditions that argued for heading to the parking lot after just seven innings.
After all, the Mets were leading and the bullpen was working.


U.S. Airliners Just Miss Collision; Focus of Inquiry is Air Controller
LEAD: Two jet airliners came within about 100 yards of colliding Monday while flying in opposite directions outside radar coverage over the Caribbean, according to Government officials.


Presidential Life Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Presidential Life Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
79,874,000
44,705,000
Net inc
b5,625,000
b9,973,000
Share earns
.26
.46
b-After realized investment gains of $1,395,000 for the latest first quarter and $5,254,000 for the year-ago period.


Altai Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altai Inc
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,508,000
2,389,000
Net inc
161,000
38,000
Share earns
.07
.02
9mo rev
10,135,000
6,443,000
Net inc
491,000
152,000
Share earns
.21
.07


Review/Dance; Yeager and Bocca in Ballet Theater's 'Don Quixote'
LEAD: American Ballet Theater's production of ''Don Quixote,'' staged by Mikhail Baryshnikov after choreography by Marius Petipa and Alexander Gorsky, is an unflagging swirl of toreador capes and gypsy skirts.
The women all jump on point, the men flirt and quaff wine and there is even a little bravura dancing tucked into the proceedings.


U.S. AGENCY VOTES BAN ON A DART TOY
LEAD: The Consumer Product Safety Commission voted today to ban most lawn darts, citing the danger of death or serious injury from the pointed metal darts.


Moscow Issuing Visas To Israel's Delegation
LEAD: The Soviet Union has agreed to issue visas that would allow an official Israeli delegation to visit Moscow for the first time since the Kremlin broke off relations in 1967.


Behind Big Gap in Cuomo Budget: A Big Gamble Lost
LEAD: Just five weeks after its budget was enacted, the Cuomo administration says the state will be $900 million in the red, and the story of how it came to be that way, according to state officials and independent economists, is one of politics and miscalculation.


Nonprofit Tax Plans Advance
LEAD: After two days of closed-door debate, a House subcommittee today tentatively endorsed a package of proposals for taxing more types of income-producing activities of nonprofit organizations.


College Extends Honor Roll to High-School Teachers
LEAD: Cornell University today did something rare among the nation's colleges: It honored some of the high-school teachers of its top undergraduates.


Brajdas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brajdas Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Sales
12,967,000
8,765,222
Net inc
252,769
134,477
Share earns
.09
.05
Yr sales
47,525,633
33,885,267
Net inc
1,861,453
928,522
Share earns
.64
.33


Litton Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Litton Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,197,010,000
1,146,959,000
Net inc
42,038,000
34,271,000
Share earns
1.60
1.29
9mo sales
3,551,511,000
3,185,577,000
Net inc
123,326,000
102,696,000
Share earns
4.67
3.83


GERMANS ARE WARY OF JEWISH SCANDAL
LEAD: In the week since the news broke that the much-honored head of West Germany's main Jewish organization evidently helped himself to millions in money intended for victims of the Nazis, the dominant reaction among politicians and newspapers has been a nervous circumspection.


Female Sportswriters Make Their Mark
LEAD: Female sportswriters, who once toiled for months at a time without seeing another member of their sex, are now numerous enough to have formed a professional organization that gathered here this week for its first convention.


U.S. Aluminum Outlook
LEAD: Aluminum output in the United States is likely to rise 15 percent this year, to 3.85 million metric tons, reversing a slump during most of the 1980's, the London office of Shearson Lehman Hutton said today.
It cited declining production costs and the fall in the dollar, making American smelters more competitive.


Commercial Intertech reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial Intertech (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
102,283,000
81,217,000
Net inc
4,089,000
1,887,000
Share earns
.36
.17
6mo sales
181,878,000
148,397,000
Net inc
5,723,000
2,739,000
Share earns
.51
.25


Golfer Hospitalized
LEAD: Byron Nelson, the Hall of Fame golfer, was admitted to a hospital yesterday after he complained of dizziness and fatigue.


How Banquets Can Feed Ethiopians
LEAD: The Ethiopian Government of Lieut.
Col.
Mengistu Haile Mariam appears bent on starving some two million people.
It refuses to allow international relief agencies access to stricken areas.
According to a State Department calculation, only 850,000 people are being fed out of perhaps three million threatened by famine.


John David House, 83, Co-Founder of Union
LEAD: John David House, a founder of the 110,000-member United Rubber Workers union, died Sunday.
He was 83 years old.


Passing Lie Test Said to Lead To Howard Beach Plea Deal
LEAD: A plea deal in the Howard Beach racial-attack case was made possible when a defendant passed two lie-detector tests backing his position that he had not seen the beating of a black man, according to people familiar with the case.


N.F.L. Roster Move
LEAD: National Football League owners voted to increase rosters to 47 players and approved the conditional sale of the New England Patriots to the Reebok International chairman, Paul Fireman, before adjourning their annual spring meeting yesterday at Miami Beach, Fla.


Precious Metals Off Broadly As Inflation Worries Ease
LEAD: Precious metals futures prices fell broadly yesterday on profit taking as fears of inflation eased and the dollar gained strength against other currencies.


Gardeners All, British Flock To Chelsea
LEAD: From noble Queen to common daisy, the ranking fauna and flora of the kingdom are congregating brightly here this week for the Chelsea Flower Show, a 75-year-old event that has evolved from a diversion for the Edwardian aristocracy to a blockbuster for the modern gardener.


Toll Mounts as Fighting Continues in Lebanon
LEAD: Shiite Amal militiamen taking cover behind a bullet-pocked wall as they battled pro-Iranian fighters yesterday in the southern suburbs of Beirut.
Syrian and Iranian efforts to end the fighting have been unsuccessful.
The Lebanese police said 296 people have been killed and 1,000 wounded in 20 days of fighting.


Parkway Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parkway Co
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
681,000
859,000
Net inc
75,000
307,000
Share earns
.05
.18
9mo rev
2,342,000
6,568,000
Net inc
1,035,000
4,937,000
Share earns
.63
2.94


2 at Princeton Get Jail Terms For Roles in Pledge Drinking
LEAD: Saying he would not treat the case ''as an undergraduate frolic that got out of hand,'' a judge yesterday sentenced two officers of one of Princeton University's private eating clubs to 30 days in jail for their roles in parties in February during which 45 students suffered alcohol-induced medical problems.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: THERE are times when a child needs more than parents' love and guidance.
When teachers notice that a child is not behaving or learning appropriately or parents see a significant change in their child's behavior, it is time to seek professional help.
Where do you turn?


Harry Bade, 69, Dies; Ex-Mobil Oil Executive
LEAD: Harry A. Bade Jr., a retired vice president of the Mobil Oil Corporation, died of a heart attack Friday at the Florida Hospital Medical Center in Orlando, Fla.
He was 69 years old and lived in Vero Beach, Fla.


Suspect Is Indicted In Killing of Officer
LEAD: A former convict being held in Philadelphia as a suspect in the slaying of a housing police officer in Brooklyn was indicted yesterday for the killing.


Granges Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Granges Exploration (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,404,875
2,524,153
Net loss
249,858
b49,715
b-Net income  Results are in Canadian dollars.


Anti-Job Bias Law for Ulster
LEAD: Britain published a draft law today to strengthen prohibitions against religious discrimination in job recruitment in Northern Ireland.


Corrections
LEAD: An Executive Changes listing in some editions of Business Day last Wednesday about Sun Management described the company incorrectly.
It is an international business management concern.
In addition, a listing in some editions on the accounting firm of Pannell Kerr Forster misidentified its former managing partner.


Hughes Supply Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hughes Supply Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
116,496,000
95,761,000
Net inc
2,135,000
1,958,000
Share earns
.65
.58
Share earnings figures have been adjusted for the 3-for-2 stock split announced last week.


Atlanta Gets Ready for the Democrats
LEAD: A crane being used to lift ''sky booths'' into place at the Omni in Atlanta, which will be the site of the Democratic National Convention in July.
The booths will be used by press organizations from around the world as they cover the convention, where the Presidential nominee will be chosen. (NYT/Alan S.


HELMS ENDS FIGHT AGAINST ARMS PACT
LEAD: Outflanked and outmaneuvered, Senator Jesse Helms gave up his fight against the new missile treaty today, paving the way for a compromise agreement that could permit the Senate to vote final approval of the treaty as early as Friday afternoon.


Funeral Service for Slain Judge
LEAD: The coffin of Judge Richard J. Daronco being carried yesterday from St.
Catherine's Church in Pelham, N.Y.
Judge Daronco, only the second Federal judge to be assassinated this century, was killed Saturday by a retired New York City police officer, apparently because of the judge's dismissal of a Federal sex discrimination suit filed by the killer's daughter.


Manila Journal; Battling the 'Culture of Corruption' Day by Day
LEAD: One day, a neighbor told Miriam Defensor Santiago, the Commissioner of Immigration, that there was a burglar in her house.


Corrections
LEAD: The movie review and listing last Sunday on page 7 of the Television section for May 22-28 included ''The Birth of a Nation'' erroneously.
The program, on Channel 13 tonight at 10, is a contemporary British drama in the ''Channel Crossings'' series, not the 1915 film.


Review/Television; 'Omnibus,' a Potpourri From ABC
LEAD: ''Omnibus'' is a venerable name; it was the title of the wonderful series that ran first on CBS and then on ABC from 1953 to 1957.
High art and Pop art mixed, and then along came Jacques Cousteau or Jack Benny.
ABC News resurrects the series tonight with a special at 10 o'clock.
It is also called ''Omnibus,'' and it is intelligent and easy and nice.


Private Brands reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Private Brands (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,782,000
4,746,000
Net inc
36,000
264,000
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
10,110,000
9,530,000
6mo rev
13,665,000
9,216,000
Net inc
263,000
500,000
Share earns
.02
.05
Shares outst
10,088,000
9,265,000


Singapore Political Alliance Will Challenge Ruling Party
LEAD: Three small oppositon parties in Singapore have announced that they will form an alliance to challenge the People's Action Party of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew in the next election.


Renaissance Picks Editor
LEAD: Robert Manning, 68 years old, former editor in chief of The Atlantic, has been named editor in chief of Renaissance, the Magazine for Living Well, which is expected to seek an audience of readers 55 and over who are both sophisticated and affluent.


Bridge
LEAD: The world's oldest pair event, the Goldman, will be contested for the 60th time Saturday.


MEDICARE ADVANCE CLEARS BIG HURDLE
LEAD: A House-Senate conference committee reached agreement today on legislation to protect the nation's Medicare beneficiaries against the cost of prolonged, acute illness.


A STALEMATE ENDS FOR CONTRA TALKS
LEAD: Contra leaders announced today that they planned to travel to Managua to open a third round of peace talks with the Sandinista Government, ending a stalemate over where the talks would be held.


For Airbag's Inventor, 17-Year Wait Pays Off
LEAD: John Pietz has spent 17 years tinkering in the laboratories of Talley Industries waiting for his favorite invention to pay off.
Now, two years away from retirement, the chemist responsible for a key breakthrough in the development of automotive airbags is finally seeing his discovery become standard equipment on many cars.


Metro Matters; Marcus Garvey And Ed Koch In Perspective
LEAD: Wesley McDonald Holder chooses his words carefully, as someone might who can apply nine decades of perspective to today's political conundrums.


Leon Shimkin, a Guiding Force At Simon &amp; Schuster, Dies at 81
LEAD: Leon Shimkin, who joined Simon &amp; Schuster as a 17-year-old bookkeeper and helped build it into one of the nation's major book publishing companies, died yesterday in New Rochelle Hospital in New Rochelle, N.Y.
A resident of Larchmont, N.Y., he was 81 years old.


Defense Counsel Seized as a Fake
LEAD: A man on probation in Westchester County for impersonating a lawyer was arrested on the same charge yesterday in a Manhattan courtroom.


Where Corridors of Justice Are Curved
LEAD: ''YOU meet a better class of criminal here,'' said Louis Varron, an employee at the North Dade County Justice Center in North Miami, the first public building designed by Arquitectonica, the Miami architectural firm known for its breezy, irreverent style.


Development Bank Offers 9 3/8% Notes
LEAD: The Asian Development Bank is offering $100 million of 9 3/8 percent notes due in 1995 at a price of 99.77 to yield 9.42 percent through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


American Stores Accedes to F.T.C.
LEAD: The American Stores Company said it had agreed with Federal regulators not to buy any shares of Lucky Stores Inc. until Saturday.
A 10-day waiting period expired today, following American's filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on its $2.5 billion buyout bid for Lucky, the country's sixth-largest grocery retailer.


Hyponex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hyponex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
44,991,000
48,247,000
Net inc
114,000
2,464,000
Share earns
.02
.41
Shares outst
5,194,000
6,081,000
The company said the net in the latest quarter was reduced by the carrying costs of senior subordinated debentures sold in March 1987.


Equipment Trust Issue by USAir
LEAD: USAir Inc., a unit of USAir Group Inc., is offering $166.4 million of equipment trust certificates through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
The equipment trust certificates are backed by eight Boeing 737-300 jets.


Maxwell To Focus On Canada
LEAD: Robert Maxwell, the British publishing entrepreneur, said today that he was turning his attention for the time being to Canada, where he said he planned to invest up to $2 billion (Canadian), about $1.6 billion (United States), in the next two years.


Chairman of Santa Fe Faces Shareholder Fight
LEAD: Robert D. Krebs, who heads the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation, faces a situation that pits management against shareholders who voted against the company's ''poison pill'' anti-takeover defense.


Petroleum Development Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petroleum Development Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,102,100
3,227,220
Net loss
133,500
b14,300
b-Net income


Varity Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Varity Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
554,200,000
453,600,000
Net inc
b15,200,000
c13,800,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
183,453,000
165,026,000
b-After a tax credit of $7.1 million.


Balk Deluge Finally Ends
LEAD: After 50 days and 50 nights, major league baseball had its first balk-free day of 1988 on Tuesday.


Moscow Plans 2d Bond Sale
LEAD: The Soviet Union plans to sell bonds in West Germany to help finance perestroika, Mikhail S. Gorbachev's program of social and economic restructuring, bankers said today.


Blueprint For Architects
LEAD: ATTITUDES About Architects Department: At the recent convention in New York of the American Institute of Architects, the pollster Louis Harris presented the results of a survey the institute had commissioned on what people think about architects.
The survey had two parts: a poll of 1,253 members of the public and a survey of 201 leaders in the building industry, social sciences, education and government.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about Zaire's politics and economy referred incorrectly to the country's living standard.
The average Zairian's wages, after accounting for inflation, are 10 percent of what they were in 1960.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Saatchi's Net Up 23.6%
LEAD: Britain's Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, the largest advertising holding company in the world and the parent of a number of agencies, announced its financial results for the six months ended March 31.
Revenues were up 25.1 percent, to $714.3 million, from $571 million in the 1987 period.
Net income rose 23.6 percent, to $40.8 million, from $33 million, or $1.18 for each American depository receipt, compared with $1 a year earlier.


National Parks Urged to Ban All Concessions
LEAD: The Federal Government should move all hotels and other concessions out of the national parks, an environmental group said Tuesday in issuing a report on what it considers the 10 most threatened parks.


CNW to Sell Unit
LEAD: The CNW Corporation said it had agreed to sell its snowplow manufacturing unit, Douglas Dynamics Inc, to Park-Kenilworth Industries for $100 million.
Park-Kenilworth is a new holding company affiliated with the Grabill Corporation, a closely held suburban Chicago company.
Douglas Dynamics is the nation's largest manufacturer of medium-size snowplows, sold under the Western and Fisher brands, for use on four-wheel-drive pickup trucks and utility vehicles.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-19  Failure on Panama succession talks was acknowledged by the Reagan Administration, which said it would not engage in any more efforts to persuade Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to leave the country.
Page A1


International Mobile Mahines Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Mobile Mahines Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
595,519
297,389
Net loss
3,382,876
1,682,379


Still Out in Front: The Country Look
LEAD: THESE days the word country means big business in American towns and cities.
Country sells clothing and fabrics, groceries and restaurants, house plans and home furnishings that range alphabetically from afghans to zinc-lined dry sinks.


Shelbyville Journal; Shepherding the Flock Till the Dreaded Summer
LEAD: At 4 feet 10, he's easy to miss, standing by the stoplight every morning and afternoon in the sun, the rain, the heat and the snow.
Now, according to the regular rhythms of these early days of summer, he is about to disappear -again.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Kepke/Fink Promoting Itself in the Hamptons
LEAD: The year-old Kepke/Fink agency, which has found the $20,000 it spent for small-space Manhattan newspaper advertising for itself so rewarding, is going to try something a little bigger, a four-color two-page spread in a newspaper that circulates in the chic precincts of Long Island's South Fork.
You know, darling, the


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: LAWN, patio and picnic furniture rarely receive the proper care.
When it is time to store outdoor furniture in the fall, many people just fold up the portable pieces and stack them away without cleaning them.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: You are 35 years old, or maybe 55, and when you look in the mirror the worst you expect to see are some wrinkles or perhaps a receding hairline.
But pimples?
Shouldn't they have disappeared with adolescence?


Pretoria and Mozambique in Pact
LEAD: Mozambican and South African officials agreed at a meeting in Maputo today to revive a nonaggression pact prohibiting support for guerrilla groups operating from each other's territories.


Outlook for Summit: Not Much Chance of Breakthrough on Arms Accords
LEAD: The summit meeting in Moscow may be the last chance for the superpowers to revive the prospects for completing a new strategic arms treaty before President Reagan leaves office.


Mexican Output Surges
LEAD: Mexico's public finances improved in the first quarter while exports remained strong and inflation dropped sharply, according to Finance Minister Gustavo Petricioli.
He told the Mexican Congress Tuesday that industrial production climbed 9.7 percent after a rise of 3.1 percent in the final quarter of 1987 and a drop of 2.5 percent in the first 1987 quarter.


Umbrellas, Parasols And Replacement Ribs
LEAD: SHOW me someone who has to open and close umbrellas indoors all day long and I'll show you someone who isn't superstitious. ''I can't afford to be,'' said Gilbert Center, manager of the Uncle Sam Umbrella Shop, which has manufactured, sold and repaired umbrellas since 1866.


Critic's Notebook; The Images at Cannes, On and Off the Screen
LEAD: The circus has left town.
Within 12 hours of the close of the Cannes Film Festival Monday night, most of the 20,000 or so film people have departed.
The huge advertising billboards along the Croisette have suddenly vanished.
Concierges, waiters and taxi drivers have become polite again.
The noise level has dropped by half and even the winds have stopped.


Angola Says U.S. Uses Zaire Bases to Train Rebels
LEAD: Angolan military commanders have charged that the United States is using six bases in southern Zaire to train and supply Jonas Savimbi's rebels for attacks in Angola.


Cybermedic Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cybermedic Inc
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,252,578
1,665,897
Net loss
8,428
b12,751
6mo sales
2,353,320
3,274,049
Net loss
113,175
b45,461
b-Net income  Share earnings for the year-ago periods are less than one cent a share.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Reviews/Dance; Male Motion and Emotion at the Joyce
LEAD: Terry Creach and Stephen Koester might simply be two performers who enjoy dancing together.
If they are also interested in suggesting the wide range of movement and emotional coloring men can cover in dance, they proved their point in a program presented by Creach/Koester on Saturday at the Joyce Theater as part of the ''3-D at the


LeFrak Wins Development Right
LEAD: The LeFrak Organization has been formally selected to develop a housing complex, with 1,200 apartments, on city-owned land on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, city housing officials said yesterday.


Cup in Court
LEAD: Attorneys in gray suits took the place of yachtsmen in blue blazers for the third time yesterday to argue the future of the America's Cup.
Justice Carmen Beauchamp Ciparick, presiding over a packed courtroom in the New York State Supreme Court building in lower Manhattan, began the task of deciding whether a multihull yacht can race against a monohull yacht in cup races scheduled for San Diego this


Times Publisher Cites High Cost of Slowdown
LEAD: The publisher of The New York Times said yesterday that a two-week work slowdown by unionized truck drivers had cost the newspaper several million dollars and warned that ''our options are narrowing'' for dealing with the drivers' union.


Rowntree Is Offered $3.9 Billion by Suchard
LEAD: Jacob Suchard A.G., the Swiss chocolate maker, today offered $:2.1 billion, or about $3.9 billion, for Rowntree P.L.C. if the British confectioner agrees to a friendly merger.


Market Place; Moves by Coastal Could Help Stock
LEAD: THE price performance of shares of the Coastal Corporation has lagged that of less profitable competitors for some months now.
Despite Coastal's record as one of the best growth companies in the energy business, investors are cautious about its debt load, which was $3.6 billion, or a steep 81 percent of total capital, last


A $44,000 Mistake, A Guilty Plea to Theft
LEAD: A Pakistani national who used $44,000 mistakenly credited to his bank account to woo his future wife has pleaded guilty to first-degree larceny.


Reviews/Music; One-Man Trombone Choir
LEAD: Albert Mangelsdorff, a West German trombonist who played solo concerts at the Knitting Factory on Friday and Saturday nights, is best known for his technique: he'll play three or four notes at once, or move a melody around over static tones.
At first it's a shock to hear the sound of a trombone choir coming from one person.


Cyprus to Buy A Copper Unit
LEAD: The Inspiration Resources Corporation, a leading producer of metals and agricultural products, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Inspiration Consolidated Copper Company subsidiary to the Cyprus Mineral Company, for about $125 million.


Panamanian Denies Noriega Talks Have Collapsed
LEAD: A senior Panamanian official denied this afternoon that talks with the United States on the future of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega had collapsed, and said the Panamanian Government hoped discussions would begin again when President Reagan returns from the Moscow summit meeting.


Iraq Seeking To Expand Oil Output
LEAD: Defying the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries' attempt to restrain production by its members, Iraq is making a major effort to expand its oil output and export capacity, its oil minister, Issam Abdul-Rahim al-Chalabi, said here today.


We're Not Condemned to Carbon-Based Fuels
LEAD: To the Editor:


Washington Talk: Briefing; Ford Portrait Coming
LEAD: Former President Gerald R. Ford is coming to Washington on June 6 with a painting of himself to be presented to the Smithsonian Institution's National Portrait Gallery.
The painting, by Everett Raymond Kinstler, a gift of the Gerald R. Ford Foundation, will hang in the gallery's Hall of Presidents.


New Scholarship Test Sought By Albany Education Official
LEAD: A year after the state began awarding state scholarships on the basis of grade-point averages and standardized test scores, the New York State Education Commissioner wants to develop a new and fairer test.


An Amicable Parting for Man and Home
LEAD: IT was supposed to have been a fairy tale: boy meets house, and they live happily ever after in the Hamptons.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Pepperdine Player Advances: Top-seeded Robbie Weiss of Pepperdine won his first-round singles match at the N.C.A.A. individual tennis championships yesterday at Athens, Ga., but the second-seeded player was eliminated.
Weiss defeated Jari Koho of Utah, 6-0, 6-0.
Second-seeded Scott Melville of U.C.L.A., was eliminated by Olivier Lorin of Oklahoma, 6-3, 4-6, 6-4.


Year-Round Blossoms Possible Even in North
LEAD: AMONG gardeners, part of what John Kenneth Galbraith dubbed, in other matters, the conventional wisdom holds that our pleasures begin in March with the first crocuses and end in October when frost blackens the dahlias.


Square Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square Industries Inc
Qtr to Feb 29
1988
1987
Revenue
13,408,000
11,814,000
Net inc
69,000
129,000
Share earns
.06
.11
Yr rev
51,506,000
45,164,000
Net inc
1,101,000
1,652,000
Share earns
.95
1.42


6 Radicals Deny Charges in '83 Capitol Bombing
LEAD: Six left-wing radicals stood in a Federal court walled off with bullet-proof glass today and pleaded not guilty to charges of bombing the Capitol in 1983.


Reviews/Music; Piano and Violin Duo
LEAD: Therese Dussaut was to have given a solo piano recital Monday evening at Weill Recital Hall, but she was apparently in the mood for chamber music instead, so she turned up with Vartan Manoogian, a violinist, with whom she played sonatas by Schubert, Debussy and Franck.
By retaining top billing and keeping the piano lid open, she conveyed her intention to be an equal collaborator rather than merely an accompanist; and in her performance, she made good on that promise, bringing some exquisite texturing and detail to her performance, but by no means overshadowing Mr.


Royal Palm Beach Colony Inc LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Palm Beach Colony Inc LP (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,585,000
687,000
Net inc
8,000
b760,000
6mo rev
2,776,000
2,003,000
Net inc
126,000
b888,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Farm Income Drop Seen
LEAD: A new report by the Agriculture Department forecasts that net cash income of farmers will total $50 billion to $55 billion this year, down from a record $57 billion in 1987.


Dollar Up in Quiet Trading; Gold Loses Recent Gains
LEAD: The dollar rose against major foreign currencies in quiet trading yesterday, while gold gave back the gains of recent sessions.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: * Omni magazine to Angotti, Thomas, Hedge for trade advertising.


Baseball Notebook; Fans Are Getting Two Messages About Drinking
LEAD: Baseball continues to confuse its fans.
While the commissioner's office and individual clubs work on reducing the number of problems created at ball parks by the consumption of beer and other alcoholic beverages, they relentlessly hit fans over the head with messages suggesting they drink.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Doyle Graf Awarded Hoechst-Celanese Job
LEAD: The Hoechst-Celanese Corporation has awarded Doyle Graf Mabley its corporate advertising account following a two-month review.
The ad budget is $8 million.


We're Not Condemned to Carbon-Based Fuels; Change to Hydrogen
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Jordan, McGrath Ends 11-Year Tie With Aetna
LEAD: Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor has said farewell to Aetna Life and Casualty after an 11-year relationship during which billings went from about $1 million, to $19 million last year, and the agency could say in heartfelt fashion, ''Aetna, I'm glad I met ya.''


Quintuplets Born in Texas
LEAD: Quintuplets were born Tuesday to a 28-year-old woman who thought she was having twins. ''They told me two,'' Maria Esther Chavez said in Spanish. ''They're fine, thanks to God.'' Mrs.
Chavez said she was about 7 1/2 months pregnant when a girl was born about 1 A.M., followed by another girl, then three boys, within about four minutes.


Washington Talk: The Diplomatic Corps; African Envoys Take Their Case to Capitol HIll
LEAD: African diplomats in Washington, many of them representing countries that are burdened with debt and are in economic distress, have hit upon a new maneuver for gaining Congressional attention.
Since the lawmakers rarely go to their embassy parties, they have moved their social occasions to Capitol


DeRose Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DeRose Industries
Qtr to April 1
1988
1987
Sales
4,027,000
6,029,000
Net loss
929,000
696,000
6mo sales
9,683,000
11,550,000
Net loss
1,225,000
1,497,000


Rohr Industries Corp reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rohr Industries Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Sales
230,755,000
150,338,000
Net inc
8,520,000
2,820,000
Share earns
.49
.16
9mo sales
653,397,000
463,141,000
Net inc
23,321,000
19,877,000
Share earns
1.33
1.13


Bush's Chief Spokesman Requests Transfer in Dispute Over Strategy
LEAD: Peter Teeley, the chief spokesman for Vice President Bush, has asked to take another senior position in the campaign.
Campaign aides said the action reflected a sharp disagreement within the organization over how aggressive the Vice President should be.


Peace Corps Grants for Graduate Students
LEAD: To the Editor:


Washington Talk: Briefing; Summit Previews
LEAD: Eager to know what Alexander M. Haig Jr., a former Secretary of State; Richard M. Perle, a former Assistant Secretary of Defense, or Max Kampelman, the chief American arms negotiator, think about the Moscow summit meeting?
There is good news if you live in New York, Buffalo, Miami or one of five other cities.


Mandlikova Upset
LEAD: Hana Mandlikova during a break in her French Open match against Bettina Fulco.
Mandlikova was beaten, 6-4, 6-3.
Page D24. (Reuters)


Acid Fumes Fell 7 in Bronx
LEAD: Seven staff members received medical treatment yesterday after inhaling fumes from sulfuric acid that had been poured into a drain at the Bronx State Hospital, a Fire Department spokesman said.
The acid apparently came from a laboratory at the hospital at 1500 Waters Place, near the Hutchinson River Parkway.


Hanoi Plans 50,000-Man Pullout From Cambodia
LEAD: Western diplomats said today that they had been told that Vietnam was withdrawing 50,000 troops from Cambodia by the end of this year.


Donaldson Co reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donaldson Co (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
98,572,000
81,875,000
Net inc
b5,474,000
c3,683,000
Share earns
.57
.36
9mo sales
269,920,000
217,474,000
Net inc
b13,810,000
c9,107,000
Share earns
1.40
.89
Shares outst
9,893,418
10,230,260


New I.B.M.Wafers
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said it had begun making computer chips from the biggest wafers in the industry - platters that are eight inches across.
Most semiconductor manufacturers use wafers that are four to six inches across.
I.B.M. said the bigger wafers can cost less and increase productivity.


Airbags on the Way As Chrysler Gives In
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation's decision to install airbags as standard equipment on several car lines this year and all its domestically made cars by 1990 signals the end of a nearly 20-year battle over use of the devices, according to auto industry executives and safety advocates.


Review/Ballet; Young Dancers in Recital
LEAD: Among the pleasures of attending the annual workshop programs by the School of American Ballet is that of seeing young dancers cope with the artistic challenges of ballets in several styles.
There was much to applaud in the performances offered Saturday and Monday nights at the Juilliard Theater.


American Vanguard Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Vanguard Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,240,000
4,817,000
Net inc
294,000
375,000
Share earns
.16
.21


Soviet Lists Afghan War Toll: 13,310 Dead, 35,478 Wounded
LEAD: The Soviet Union, ending a long silence about the exact number of its casualties in the war in Afghanistan, said today that 13,310 soldiers had been killed, 35,478 wounded and 311 are missing.


Death Ends 1,600-Mile Flight Of Learjet Stolen by Mechanic
LEAD: A flight mechanic who did not have a pilot's license stole a private jet in Virginia early today and flew it 1,600 miles to Denver, where he shot himself to death as the authorities closed in, officials said.


Relatives Ruled Eligible to Lease Vacated Units
LEAD: In a decision that further complicates the legal and political debate over who can inherit a rent-stabilized apartment, a New York State appeals panel ruled yesterday that live-in relatives could take over an apartment after the tenant named on a lease dies.


Reagan in Finland to Rest Before Summit
LEAD: President Reagan arrived here tonight for three days of rest before continuing to Moscow for his summit meeting with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, but the traveling White House was distracted by lingering political troubles at home.


Jordan Named M.V.P.
LEAD: Michael Jordan, the National Basketball Association's scoring champion for the last two seasons, was named the league's most valuable player yesterday.


Olympia &amp; York
LEAD: Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. sait it would increase its stake in four companies, including the Campeau Corporation.
The real estate development company also said it would increase its majority stakes in Gulf Canada Resources Ltd., Abitibi-Price Inc. and GW Utilities Ltd.


Burying Bush Already? That's Silly.
LEAD: According to the latest polls, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's biggest problem now is deciding what to say in his inaugural address.


Corrigan Sees Market Flaw
LEAD: The financial markets need stronger systems for clearing and settling trades to help reduce the risk of a large default that could snowball and tie up the system, E. Gerald Corrigan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said yesterday.


Shows in Accord With Guild
LEAD: David Letterman could return to the air and Johnny Carson would have his writers back under agreements both entertainers have reached with the striking Writers Guild of America, the union's president said Wednesday as talks resumed in the 12-week-old strike.


Black and White on Campus: Learning Tolerance, Not Love, and Separately
LEAD: In Sproul Plaza, the central gathering place on the University of California campus here, students congregate in racial groups, the blacks in one part of the great flagstone expanse, the whites in another.


Pace Membership Warehouse reports earnings for Qtr to April 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pace Membership Warehouse (OTC)
Qtr to April 24
1988
1987
Sales
237,000,000
165,000,000
Net inc
b601,000
c478,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-After a tax credit of $221,000 and a gain of $15,000 from the repurchase of subordinated notes.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council  Meets at 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.  Trusteeship Council
Meets at 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Reviews/Music; 4 Scarlatti Piano Sonatas
LEAD: Christine Diwyk is a pianist who plays with startling power, clarity and variety, and who puts her impressive technique at the service of consistently insightful interpretive ideas.
At Weill Recital Hall on Sunday afternoon, she addressed works that ranged from the delicate to the grandiose, and from the formal to the impassioned, and retained a persuasive gracefulness from start to finish.


AME Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AME Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,335,947
8,754,565
Net inc
918,871
1,084,851
Share earns
.19
.27
Shares outst
4,939,000
4,000,000
6mo rev
22,264,570
16,981,311
Net inc
2,171,667
1,756,489
Share earns
.44
.44
Shares outst
4,965,000
4,000,000


Killer Admits More Murders
LEAD: Richard Kuklinski, who was convicted in March of murdering two accomplices in a crime ring, pleaded guilty today to two other killings and confessed to a fifth murder.
In return for the pleas, prosecutors agreed to drop weapons possession charges against his 46-year-old wife, Barbara, and dismiss unrelated drug and weapons charges against his 19-year-old son, Dwayne.


Forstmann &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forstmann &amp; Co (AMEX)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Sales
70,705,000
58,056,000
Net inc
1,862,000
3,014,000
Share earns
.34
.90
Shares outst
5,456,252
2,998,364


Phone System Feared Vulnerable To Wider Disruptions of Service
LEAD: A switching station fire that melted fiber optic communications lines, damaged computers and interrupted telephone service in the suburbs of Chicago has raised questions about whether the nation's telephone system is becoming more vulnerable to major disruptions.


Victoriana Amid the Lupins
LEAD: From noble Queen to common daisy, the ranking fauna and flora of the kingdom are in London this week for the Chelsea Flower Show.
The 75-year-old event, once a diversion for the aristocracy, has become a blockbuster for the modern gardener.
Francis X. Clines reports in The Home Section, page C1. (AP for N


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Riney Is About to Lose Account for Sterling
LEAD: The Miami-based Austin Rover Cars of North America, which last May assigned its Sterling luxury sedan to Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, announced yesterday that it would be looking for a new agnecy because Riney has been awarded the General Motors' Saturn business.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Brian Burns and Carol Cotton have become executive vice presidents and management directors at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/San Francisco.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.12
7.07
6.60
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.33
6.29
5.68
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.75
6.71
6.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.98
9.02
8.76
30-YR.


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed distribution of The New York Times in some areas.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


Margaret M. Ryan, Editor, 70
LEAD: Margaret M. Ryan, a retired editor with House Beautiful magazine, died of a heart attack yesterday at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
She was 70 years old and lived in Sparta, N.J.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
B.
Altman's, a division of L. J. Hooker Retail Group, as part of its executive restructuring, named as senior vice presidents: Robin Clairfield-Tolvin, director of stores; Philip Blanco, marketing and sales promotion, and Joseph Giudice, operations.


Yields Post Modest Rise
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were modestly higher for the week ended yesterday.


Chicago Smoking Ban Is Passed by Aldermen
LEAD: Aldermen in the nation's third-largest city approved an ordinance today that sponsors said would bar smoking in most public areas and force restaurant owners and employers to create smoking sections.


Sony Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sony Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,029,848,000
2,371,704,000
Net inc
66,768,000
51,472,000
Share earns
.26
.22
Yr sales
11,449,776,000
10,360,352,000
Net inc
293,872,000
200,168,000
Share earns
1.19
.87


U.S. Abandons Effort to Persuade Noriega to Yield Power in Panama
LEAD: The Reagan Administration announced today that it had failed in its campaign to persuade Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to give up power in Panama, and it said it would not engage in any more talks with him.


Reviews/Music; Pianist in Chopin and Liszt
LEAD: Krystian Zimerman is a pianist with so much to give that one longs for him to choose his gifts more carefully.
His program at Avery Fisher Hall Sunday afternoon settled into the deep ruts of familiar repertory - the Ballades and Fantasy in F minor of Chopin and the Liszt Sonata.
It is territory crossed and recrossed so many thousands of times in this city and elsewhere that its beautiful prospects and startling promontories no longer startle.


Laser Photonics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laser Photonics Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,245,981
954,377
Net inc
111,232
b329,992
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Commuter Chaos: Accidents and Rain
LEAD: As flames billowed from a disabled propane tank truck on Long Island for a second day yesterday, the traffic jams the accident created symbolized a chaotic day for commuters in the New York metropolitan region.


Navy Is Seeking Ships Undetectable by Radar
LEAD: The Navy is studying the possibility of making warships largely undetectable by radar in the same way as the Stealth aircraft, a development that would revolutionize naval warfare tactics, Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci said today.


Cherokee Gets Takeover Offer
LEAD: The investment firm Deutschman &amp; Company said that its newly formed Green Acquisition Company had offered to acquire Cherokee Group, which makes women's footwear and other ready-to-wear apparel, for about $166 million.
The $12.50-a-share offer sent the price of Cherokee stock up $4.125, to $12.125, in the over-the-counter market.


Transplant Baby Dies
LEAD: Michael Steward, a 10 1/2-month-old who was the last survivor among several children with rare multi-organ transplants, died Sunday of multiple organ failure.
He received a liver, small bowel, pancreas and a portion of his stomach in February at Rush Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Medical Center.


McDermott International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDermott International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
635,721,000
631,067,000
Net loss
b19,839,000
c260,027,000
Yr rev
2,351,705,000
2,430,792,000
Net loss
b261,771,000
c102,421,000
b-After net of $260,000 for the quarter and a loss of $34,698,000 for the year both from discontinued operations, and an extraordinary credit of $4,276,000, in connection with a tax loss carryforward for the quarter and year.


Women Aren't Guys
LEAD: A young woman, a lawyer, strides into a conference room.
Already in attendance, at what looks to be the start of a high-level meeting, are four smartly dressed women in their 20's and 30's.
The arriving woman plunks her briefcase down at the head of the polished table and announces, ''O.K., guys, let's get started.


Jersey School Report Paints Portrait of a Disgrace
LEAD: Buried in the New Jersey Education Department's eight-inch-thick report outlining the reasons for a state takeover of Jersey City's public schools are two critical subsections.


Researchers Identify Subtle Biological Signs That Warn of Diabetes
LEAD: Recent findings are giving doctors a new ability to predict who is most susceptible to the most common form of adult diabetes.


Water Crisis Imperils India's Farms and Cities
LEAD: For several weeks now, New Delhi has been struggling to assure itself of enough water this summer for its seven million citizens.


Media General Claims Victory
LEAD: Media General Inc. said yesterday that its board nominees had apparently defeated a slate backed by the Hollywood producer Burt Sugarman.
According to the preliminary count, the management slate won more than 56 percent of the votes, Media General's president, James S. Evans, said.
The final report will be issued after both sides inspect the proxies.


Former Taiwanese Postman Is a Hunter Graduate
LEAD: Kuo-Ching Ying outside the Felt Forum, where Hunter College held its commencement.
The 81-year-old former Taiwanese postal worker, who came to the United States in 1980, received a bachelor's degree. (NYT/Fred R. Conrad)


Baseball; Leary's One-Hitter Beats Phils
LEAD: Tim Leary pitched a one-hitter, allowing only a third-inning single by Darren Daulton, and Mike Scioscia and Jeff Hamilton each hit two-run homers tonight as the Los Angeles Dodgers beat the Philadelphia Phillies, 4-0.


New Study Sees Lower Costs for AIDS Care
LEAD: A new prediction of the nationwide cost of providing medical care to AIDS patients is slightly lower than previous forecasts despite the high cost of AZT, the only drug proved effective in treating the AIDS virus, a Government economist reported today.


Dr. Peale, Nearing 90, Still Thinks Positively
LEAD: A sign outside the town hall proclaims Pawling the ''Pride of the Harlem Valley and Home of Positive Thinking.'' It went up in 1984, soon after the Chamber of Commerce and the Rotary Club gave a testimonial dinner in the Y.M.C.A. lodge for the positive thinker in residence, the Rev.
Dr.
Norman Vincent Peale.


Discovery Could Speed Diagnoses of Dystrophy
LEAD: A discovery that is expected to improve early diagnosis of forms of muscular dystrophy and prediction of the long-term outcome for children suffering from the wasting disease was reported yesterday.


Gerber Scientific Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gerber Scientific Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
68,935,000
59,784,000
Net inc
7,928,000
6,353,000
Share earns
.32
.24
Shares outst
24,999,000
26,182,000
Yr sales
263,983,000
223,854,000
Net inc
29,612,000
21,057,000
Share earns
1.15
.81
Shares outst
25,803,000
26,054,000


N.B.A. Playoffs; Scott Leads Lakers Past Dallas, 123-101
LEAD: Byron Scott scored 30 points tonight as the Los Angeles Lakers breezed to a 123-101 victory over Dallas and took a two-games-to-none lead in the Western Conference final.


Irving Bank Offer Extended
LEAD: Banca Commerciale Italiana said yesterday that it would extend until midnight on June 8 its offer to buy 51 percent of the Irving Bank Corportion's stock at $80 a share.


Eaton Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eaton Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
166,000
556,000
Share earns
.04
.14
Yr net inc
2,067,000
2,013,000
Share earns
.54
.51


Dr. Maurice H. Cowen, Orthopedic Surgeon, 49
LEAD: Dr.
Maurice H. Cowen, an orthopedic surgeon who specialized in sports medicine, died of multiple myeloma Monday at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.
He was 49 years old and lived in Manhattan.





Alan Paton's Admirers Are Left Confused
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Only Child
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Sports of The Times; More History For the Old Barn
LEAD: TALK about power plays.
Never again will the national anthem be taken lightly.
O, say can you see, indeed.


Samna Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Samna Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,796,000
2,359,000
Net inc
330,000
b413,000
Share earns
.13
.21
Shares outst
1,941,000
2,559,000
b-After a gain of $188,000 from a tax benefit.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Presenting the Tonys Last year's Tony Awards presentation won an award itself - an Emmy - for Outstanding Variety Program.
But it also caused hand-wringing at CBS by running 35 minutes beyond its two-hour schedule.


Bank Outlook For Texas
LEAD: Federal banking regulators today painted a gloomy picture of the industry in Texas and the Southwest, saying that 1988 would be ''a record bad year, the worse year since the Great Depression.''


Legal or Not, Drugs Kill
LEAD: The body of the young man looks beautiful.
A funeral suit covers the bullet wounds.
A choir raises a gospel lament and the preacher exhorts decent folks to fight the drug-gang warfare that has claimed the boy's life.
Then suddenly, the mourners dive for cover.
From a passing car, gang rivals of the dead boy restate their vengeance with new fusillades from automatic weapons.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are aware of our losses, and these losses have been quite heavy.''  - Gen.
Aleksei D. Lizichev of the Soviet Union, on Afghanistan.  [ A14:3. ]


Reviews/Music; Latin-Flavored Solo Piano
LEAD: Dick Hyman's versatility as pianist, composer and arranger keeps him so busy creating film scores (for Woody Allen's films and, most recently, for ''Moonstruck''), performing at festivals and concerts or with his Perfect Jazz Repertory Quintet, lecturing on ragtime and stride piano or serving as artistic director and in-house pianist for the annual two-week Jazz in July Festival at the 92d Street Y, which begins on July 19, that he might be expected to welcome a night off.


Amerford International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerford International Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
22,657,704
19,247,457
Net inc
250,329
b407,210
Share earns
.19
-
9mo rev
70,057,631
57,893,895
Net inc
733,065
b212,804
Share earns
.57
-


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Oneida Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oneida Ltd
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
88,814,000
74,395,000
Net inc
3,804,000
3,721,000
Share earns
.48
.43
Shares outst
7,902,000
8,567,000
The company said changes in its retirement plan resulted in a reduction in net income of about $500,000 for the latest quarter, while the 1988 federal tax law changes lowering corporate income tax rates had a positive effect on earnings of $180,000.


University Science Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* University Science Partners (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
81,552
-
Net loss
227,430
140,116
Revenue in the latest quarter is from research fees; there was no revenue from research fees in the year-ago period.


Robeson Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Robeson Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 26
1988
1987
Sales
7,221,288
9,069,120
Net loss
1,803,576
2,058,467
Yr sales
42,293,794
51,038,527
Net loss
5,784,529
2,902,786


US Truck Lines Inc of Delaware reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US Truck Lines Inc of Delaware (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
23,947,143
29,107,181
Net loss
1,620,128
849,230


Profits Up at 4 Japanese Companies
LEAD: The Sony Corporation, Fujitsu Ltd., the NEC Corporation and the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation today reported sharply higher earnings for the fiscal year ended March 31.


Reviews/Music; The Art Songs of Europe
LEAD: Arden Shelton, a soprano, offered a cleverly chosen and sensitively sung program as a benefit concert for the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund on Saturday afternoon at Weill Recital Hall.
In her first half, she deftly covered about three centuries of Italian, French and German art songs, most of them lovelorn plaints, ending on a brighter note with Strauss's ''Heimliche Auffordering.


Celtics, Not Lights, Fail at the Garden
LEAD: There have been some strange happenings at the Boston Garden these last eight days to go with the power failure Tuesday.


Reviews/Music; Church Organ Inaugurated
LEAD: The Church of the Transfiguration, also known as ''the Little Church Around the Corner,'' at 1 East 29th Street, has just installed a new three-manual organ, made by Charles B. Fisk, and on Sunday afternoon John Gordon Morris gave an inaugural recital that put the instrument through its paces.


Dataflex reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataflex (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,742,000
4,385,000
Net inc
194,000
248,000
Share earns
.09
.11
Yr rev
23,245,000
15,169,000
Net inc
334,000
720,000
Share earns
.16
.38


Boomerang Bounces Back
LEAD: GREAT news for fans of the 1950's.
Deluged by requests from a nostalgic public, the Formica Corporation has decided to reintroduce its famous boomerang pattern, designed by Raymond Loewy and originally named Skylark.


State Senators and Cuomo Differ On the Urgency of Budget Deficit
LEAD: Governor Cuomo is taking an unjustifiably dim view of the state's finances that would needlessly cost the state millions of dollars, the chief financial analyst of the Republican-led State Senate said today.


Review/Dance; Violence and Theatrics From Armitage Ballet
LEAD: Karole Armitage's choreographic sensibility often seems akin to Expressionism.
Yet she is also preoccupied with classical ballet and popular culture.
Such disparate interests ought to produce stimulating dances.
Yet, despite their eye-catching moments, few of her works are satisfying as totalities.


Mother of Brawley Gets Writ for Failure to Honor Subpoena
LEAD: A day after she defied a grand jury subpoena, the mother of Tawana Brawley, Glenda Brawley, was served with an order yesterday to explain why she failed to appear.


Bonds and Notes Up in Slow Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and longer-term notes moved higher in sluggish trading yesterday on signs the Federal Reserve Board may have tightened credit conditions another notch.


Cyanamid to Start $84 Million Cleanup
LEAD: The American Cyanamid Company has agreed to clean up its Superfund site in Bridgewater for $84 million, company and state officials said today.


Protecting Depositors, Not Bank Owners, Is F.D.I.C.'s Business
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reviews/Music; Blues With Dash of Humor
LEAD: Zora Young, a blues singer from Chicago, put on a casual show at Tramps on Friday night.
That worked for her and against her: her backup band, led by Eddie Lusk, spent a dull hour grinding through some blues and novelty numbers.
But when she came out and wandered amid the tables, singing - and complaining about how her feet hurt -she made the audience feel as if it were sitting in on a show she was putting on just for friends.


A Portrait of an Artist's Quiet Courage
LEAD: The early sculptures of Joan Sovern are large works with soft, sensual curves, in bronze, terra cotta and marble.
The later works, smaller assemblages of stones or slate affixed to bases, are angular, stark and markedly different.


Corrections
LEAD: An article by The Associated Press in some copies on Tuesday about a tenure dispute at the Harvard Business School misstated the university's procedure for tenure decisions.


Marcos in Hawaiian Hospital After Suffering Chest Pains
LEAD: The former Philippine President, Ferdinand E. Marcos, is in intensive care in a hospital here after suffering chest pains, a hospital official said today.


Transtechnology Corp reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transtechnology Corp (NYSE)
Year to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
209,302,000
212,328,000
Net inc
b11,998,000
10,636,000
Share earns
2.27
2.28
Shares outst
5,284,000
4,673,000
b-After a $1,010,000 gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Soviet No Longer Sees Ads as Capitalist Curse
LEAD: ''Advertising is a means of swindling the people by foisting upon them goods frequently useless and of dubious quality,'' the Soviet Encylopedia said in the late 1940's. ''Advertising involves the popularization of goods with the aim of selling them,'' the current edition says.


Nassau Prosecutor To Switch to G.O.P.
LEAD: The Nassau County District Attorney, Denis E. Dillon, who is the county's top elected Democrat and a strong vote-getter, said yesterday that he was becoming a Republican because of the County Democratic Party's support for abortion rights.


Wright Calls Republican Criticism of House Leadership 'Carping'
LEAD: Speaker Jim Wright today rebutted severe Republican criticism of his Democratic leadership in the House of Representatives, saying, ''I try to be fair.
I try to be bipartisan.''


BUSH LASHES BACK ON ISSUE OF ETHICS
LEAD: Frustrated by the Democrats' efforts to tar him with the ethical problems of the Reagan Administration, Vice President Bush tried to make the issue boomerang on them today.


A Dry Perch for the Nature Lover
LEAD: OPERATING on the design premise ''it's nice not to have to worry about a wet bottom,'' two former Outward Bound instructors turned their attention to chairs.


Farley Seeks U.S. Clearance To Purchase 15% of Pepperell
LEAD: William F. Farley, a Chicago industrialist, has asked for Government antitrust clearance to buy at least 15 percent of West Point-Pepperell Inc., the big Georgia-based textile producer said yesterday.


Boston Blackout Brings Disbelief
LEAD: Strained and stressed by an afternoon of thunderstorms and a steamy, emotional night inside brightly lighted Boston Garden, an ancient transformer malfunctioned Tuesday night, making the rink go black and rendering a Stanley Cup game nonexistent.


Music Drama Found Far From the Met
LEAD: The scene: Public School 205A in the Bronx.


American Pacesetter reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Pacesetter
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
46,989,000
19,160,000
Net inc
1,371,000
619,000
Share earns
.94
.42
The company is listed on the Pacific Stock Exchange.


Reviews/Music; 6 Computer Compositions
LEAD: Larry Polansky and John Bischoff, composers from the San Francisco area, offered six of their recent computer works at the Experimental Intermedia Foundation on Friday evening.
Their approaches to computer composition could not be more different.


The Calling of Medicine Demands Commitment
LEAD: To the Editor:


ACCORD IS REACHED FOR STATE TO SHUT SHOREHAM A-PLANT
LEAD: The Long Island Lighting Company agreed in principle early today to sell the $5.3 billion Shoreham nuclear power plant for $1 to New York State, which will end more than 20 years of controversy over Shoreham by closing it.


Albany's Deficit Can't Be Denied
LEAD: In California, Massachusetts and now New York, Federal tax reform has unhinged budget planning.
Having failed to predict the full impact of a change in treatment of capital gains, state officials are suddenly scrambling to meet large revenue shortfalls.
While election year politics make it tempting to defer the issue, New


Leiter Had Minor Concerns
LEAD: He stood in front of his locker stall Tuesday night and insisted that the common fears of being a rookie had not begun to weigh heavily on him.
No, Al Leiter told the gathered audience, he never believed he might be sent to the minors if he threw poorly again.


Moscow Parliament Revolts: Tax on Business Is Opposed
LEAD: The Soviet legislature, normally a docile forum that ratifies the Communist Party's will by unanimous show of hands, today found itself with an unexpected tax revolt on its hands.


Home Resales Rose in April
LEAD: Sales of existing homes rose 4.5 percent in April, the biggest advance since November 1986, the National Association of Realtors said today.


Orient-Express Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orient-Express Hotels (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,435,000
8,844,000
Net loss
b4,545,000
c1,233,000
Share earns
-
.13
b-After net from discontinued operations of $1,500,000.
c-Net income and includes a $7.8 million pretax gain on asset sales.


Child's-Eye View From Scandinavia
LEAD: ''NOTICE the absence of duck and bunny motifs,'' said Sandra Edwards, curator of ''Scandinavian Child,'' a small exhibition highlighting designs from Norway, Sweden and Finland at the International Design Center in Long Island City, Queens.


Weisfield's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weisfield's Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
12,629,000
10,871,000
Net inc
201,000
40,000
Share earns
.18
.04


Fleetwood Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fleetwood Enterprises Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 24
1988
1987
Sales
374,064,000
349,033,000
Net inc
14,967,000
12,502,000
Share earns
.65
.53
Yr sales
1,405,974,000
1,259,322,000
Net inc
48,217,000
39,721,000
Share earns
2.08
1.70


Hollywood Opens Its Summer Onslaught
LEAD: Led by ''Crocodile Dundee II'' and ''Rambo III,'' Hollywood's summer attack troops are storming the box offices this weekend.


Sports People; Return to New Jersey
LEAD: Julie Krone, the leading female jockey in racing history, will leave New York next week and ride at Monmouth Park in Oceanport, N.J., this summer.
Krone has won only two races at the Belmont Park meeting that began May 11 and called the current New York riding colony the toughest in history.


In Summer's Heat, Pets Need Special Attention
LEAD: Dogs and cats have important places in millions of American families, and when summer brings hot weather and vacation travel, pets need special attention.


Portage Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Portage Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,463,000
4,621,000
Net loss
219,000
b47,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


American Standard Files for Offering
LEAD: American Standard Inc., which is 95 percent owned by the ASI Acquisition Company, has filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for about $1.12 billion of debt securities to be offered through the First Boston Corporation.


Jacksonville Journal; Town Whose Hub Is the Ferris Wheel
LEAD: Lee Sullivan Jr. has heard them all by now. ''People come up and say, 'I'll bet you go 'round and 'round with your employees,' '' he said. ''Or, 'Your business sure must have its ups and downs.' ''


Investigating the Speaker, Credibly
LEAD: Finally, Speaker Jim Wright's expressed willingness to cooperate with any House Ethics Committee inquiry seems to insure that charges of impropriety against him will receive serious attention.
The committee has a clear duty to examine those charges and do so openly, in ways the public can judge to be credible.


Automatix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automatix Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,800,000
3,588,000
Net loss
2,901,000
889,000


Tesoro-Pentane
LEAD: The Tesoro Petroleum Corporation said that its board of directors had rejected a takeover offer from Pentane Partners L.P., calling it deficient and not in the shareholders' interest.
Under the proposal, Tesoro's common shareholders other than Pentane would exchange their shares, totaling 66.9 percent of Tesoro, for 34.6 percent of the surviving corporation plus $6 a share, Tesoro said.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are living here with no shade, no fresh water, no shelter.
This is my honor to pass this life in this time in this position.''  - Commander Lalmohammed of the Afghan guerrillas.  [ A11:6. ]


Big Turtle Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Big Turtle Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,007,000
578,000
Net loss
163,000
84,000


PC Quote Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PC Quote Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,760,373
1,264,228
Net inc
6,105
b182,514
b-Net loss


An Advil Ad Is Prohibited
LEAD: A Federal appellate court yesterday upheld a lower court decision that effectively prevents the maker of Advil from running advertising comparing the drug to Tylenol.
The United States Court of


New Calfed Chairman Was No. 2 at Hanover
LEAD: John R. Torell 3d, who resigned unexpectedly in March as president of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, yesterday was named chairman and chief executive of Calfed Inc., the nation's fourth-largest savings and loan, effective Aug. 1.


Environmental Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Diagnostics
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
581,022
522,210
Net loss
625,763
914,466


Oil Prices Move Higher; Cocoa Plunges on a Rumor
LEAD: Oil futures prices advanced yesterday as technical factors spurred a late flurry of heavy buying.


ECONOMIC GROWTH IN FIRST QUARTER MOVED UP TO 3.9%
LEAD: The nation's economy grew far more rapidly in the first three months of the year than had been calculated a month ago, the Government said today.


Dining Out Guide: Connecticut
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
Bertrand Excellent (Dec. 6, 1987), 253 Greenwich Avenue, Greenwich (203-661-4459) - A Guastavino vaulted ceiling of brick and tile, Roman arches and a sky-lighted atrium are dramatic architectural features of this restaurant in a neo-classical building.


Offer Made to Take Redken Private
LEAD: The founder of Redken Laboratories Inc., a maker of skin and hair products, proposed to take the company private for $34 a share, or about $47.6 million for the shares she does not already own.
Redken's stock rose $7.25, or 27 percent, to close at $34.25 today in over-the-counter trading.
The stock had risen by $2.75 on


GNI Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GNI Group
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,748,315
-
Net inc
b419,776
c183,923
Share earns
.13
-
9mo rev
4,126,255
-
Net inc
b827,312
c682,884
Share earns
.26
-
b-Includes a gain from discontinued operations of $222,467 for both the quarter and 9 months, and tax credits of $66,532 for the quarter and $175,006 for the 9 months.


Dollar Advances Slightly As Gold Edges Downward
LEAD: The dollar drifted aimlessly in light dealings yesterday and finished the day marginally higher against several major currencies.


Automobile Airbags, at Last
LEAD: Special cheers for the Chrysler Corporation for deciding to equip all its new cars with driver-side airbags by 1990.
Chrysler's announcement, a dramatic end to a long struggle, guarantees economies of mass production for the lifesaving devices and eliminates the need for dealers to sell them as options.


Contrasting Visions From U.S. and Moscow
LEAD: Moscow residents express far more optimism than Americans do about the prospects for the summit meeting between Mikhail S. Gorbachev and President Reagan, according to polls taken in both countries.


Rostenkowski to Oppose Measure Providing Health Care at Home
LEAD: Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, has decided to formally oppose legislation that would provide long-term health care for ill people confined to their homes.
His decision gravely threatens the bill's prospects.


A Call to Cut Check Use
LEAD: The vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board said today that United States banks should charge more for using checks so more Americans will switch to electronic funds transfers.


Hesston Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hesston Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
35,266,000
21,859,000
Net loss
3,673,000
13,493,000


The Law; Shortage of Judges Clogs the Courts
LEAD: Among the problems the Reagan Administration will leave to its successor is a shortage of judges in Federal District Courts throughout the country.


JLG Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* JLG Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
21,320,405
15,842,014
Net inc
1,776,152
660,648
Share earns
.52
.19
9mo sales
56,223,769
38,376,232
Net inc
3,455,446
830,648
Share earns
1.01
.24


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amstar Corp., a producer of sugar, portable electric power tools and electronic and other equipment for military markets, said it had retained Merrill Lynch &amp; Company to advise it on a possible sale of Amstar or one or more of its businesses or on the recapitalization of the company.
Amstar is owned by management and affiliates of Merrill Lynch.


Leeco Diagnostics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leeco Diagnostics Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,884,993
1,197,316
Net inc
39,528
b10,237
Share earns
.02
-
9mo sales
5,054,143
3,489,895
Net inc
239,256
b136,615
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss


Voices From Moscow: What They Say About Their System
LEAD:
*4*AGE
TOTAL
18-29
30-44
45-64
65+
*6*One-party system in U.S.S.R. promotes development of democracy
Agree
46%
50%
53%
60%
51%
Disagree
34
32
25
13
28
*6*Elections to regional Soviet should be conducted under a
*4*Multi-candidate system


Franklin Group to Offer International Bond Fund
LEAD: The Franklin Group of Funds announced yesterday that it would offer an international bond fund, the Franklin Global Opportunity Income Fund.


Review/Art; Ancient Chinese Arts In New Met Galleries
LEAD: Tomorrow's opening of the Charlotte C. and John C. Weber Galleries at the Metropolitan Museum of Art is a cause for celebration.
Here, finally, is a place to chart the development of Chinese art from its inception to the triumph of Chinese painting.
Here, finally, is a place where people can see the Chinese gift for sculpture and consider the mystery of why, at a certain point, it was virtually thrown away, never to be fully exploited again.


Embargo on Apples
LEAD: The European Community has stopped importing apples from the United States and some other countries, a European Community spokeswoman said.
The 12-nation trading bloc imposed import quotas on apples this year, and North America reached its limit of 17,600 metric tons in late April, Ella Krucoff, the spokeswoman, said Wednesday in an interview in Washington.


Paul Harris Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paul Harris Stores Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
36,835,000
40,958,000
Net loss
4,738,000
b2,131,000
Share earns
-
.23
b-Net income and after a gain of $844,000 from an accounting change.


House Approves $1.1 Trillion Budget for 1989
LEAD: The House today passed a $1.1 trillion Federal budget for the fiscal year 1989 after negotiators from the House and Senate solved a monthlong dispute over domestic appropriations.


Selected Outdoor Touring by Foot, Bus and Boat
LEAD: In addition to more than a dozen walking tours led by city-history buffs and nature walks conducted by the Parks Department's Urban Park Rangers, there will be a variety of other outdoor tours this weekend, ranging from a 32-mile marathon walk and a sailboat cruise of the Brooklyn waterfront to a voyage past several Hudson River lighthouses.


Honda Profits Post 63.4% Rise
LEAD: The Honda Motor Company said today that its profit rose 63.4 percent in its latest quarter as revenue climbed 3.4 percent.


Anne Windfohr Wed to John L. Marion
LEAD: Anne Burnett Windfohr, chairman of the Burnett Oil Company in Fort Worth, and John L. Marion, the chairman and the chief auctioneer of Sotheby's North America, were married in New York yesterday.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the ceremony in the chapel at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly


Put a New Swing on the Wall Street Pendulum
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cardis Submits Chapter 11 Filing
LEAD: The Cardis Corporation, parent of the auto-repair chain Tuneup Masters Inc., has filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code in Santa Ana, Calif.


Finding the Fun: Ways to Have Memorial Days To Remember
LEAD: After a cool, soggy spring, one can only hope that the next season on our hemisphere's agenda will be more meteorologically agreeable - for, with the arrival of the Memorial Day weekend, the time of barbecues and beaches, Sousa and suntans has begun.


Money Fund Assets Fall
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 429 money market mutual funds decreased by $1.79 billion, to $273.31 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 118 institutional funds dropped $1.89 billion, to $73.52 billion.
The assets of the 214 general purpose funds decreased $163.6 million, to $84.07 billion.


Complaint on Wright Is Filed
LEAD: A formal complaint was filed with the House ethics committee today asking for an investigation to determine if the House Speaker, Jim Wright, violated House ethics rules.


Walker Energy Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walker Energy Partners (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,110,000
2,419,000
Net loss
919,000
669,000


Suchard's Merger Bid Rejected by Rowntree
LEAD: Rowntree P.L.C., the venerable British candy company, today rejected a bid of $:2.31 billion, or about $4.3 billion, by Jacobs Suchard A.G., the Swiss chocolatier ''It is the board's unanimous view that the Suchard offer fails to reflect the true value of Rowntree,'' a Rowntree spokeswoman said.


Municipal Development reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Municipal Development
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,470,562
1,223,009
Net loss
861,990
397,187
6mo rev
4,530,264
2,166,783
Net loss
1,349,399
259,896
Revenue represents fee income.


Oilers Sweep Bruins to Win 4th Stanley Cup
LEAD: The Edmonton Oilers' locker room, for the second season in a row, vibrated with rock music as its inhabitants sprayed champagne in all directions.
And like the good teammates they are, the players took turns grasping the Stanley Cup they had so expediently defended.


Books of The Times; A Shaw Still Witty but Full of Repellent Opinions
LEAD:  Bernard Shaw  Collected Letters 1926-1950  Edited by Dan H. Laurence  Illustrated. 946 pages.
Viking. $45.


Moscow Says Its Force In War Was 100,300
LEAD: The Soviet Union had 100,300 troops in Afghanistan at the start of its military withdrawal earlier this month, a senior army official announced today.


New Date Set On Irving Bid
LEAD: The Bank of New York Company said yesterday that it would extend by one week, to next Friday, its offer to buy the stock of the Irving Bank Corporation.
The offer had been scheduled to expire at midnight tonight.


Mobile Communications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mobile Communications Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
26,402,000
21,587,000
Net loss
1,370,000
b1,719,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


Auto Racing; Another Andretti Revs It Up
LEAD: John Andretti and his cousin Michael used to stand outside the fence at turn one at a dirt-track in rural Pennsylvania to see who could catch the clumps of dirt their fathers churned up behind their racing cars.


The Talk of Jersey City; Despite New Faces, Old-Style Politics
LEAD: This city is old brownstone and new high-rise, old-line politics and new residents and, always, opinions.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  The nation's economy grew far more rapidly in the first three months of the year than had been calculated a month ago, the Government said.
The report that the G.N.P. had increased 3.9 percent reinforced some economists' fears that inflation was picking up momentum.
They predicted that the Federal Reserve Board might be forced to increase interest rates, which the Republicans hope to avoid in an election year.


LOSS IS $2.5 BILLION
LEAD: New York State and the Long Island Lighting Company reached an agreement in principle today to end more than two decades of controversy over the Shoreham nuclear power station, a symbol of the country's troubled nuclear industry, by closing the $5.3 billion plant.


Major Realty Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Major Realty Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,295,998
670,444
Net loss
b702,004
825,048
b-After a tax benefit of $361,000.


Review/Circus; Where Magic Is Pure and Fantasy Real
LEAD: Everything comes together beautifully in Le Cirque du Soleil, an enchanting circus troupe from Montreal that lives up to its name as a circus of the sun.
More than a little poetic sunlight filled the night air Wednesday evening at Battery Park City, where a blue and yellow tent had been pitched just off West Street at Battery Place for the circus's New


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Art Rooney Sr., the 87-year-old chairman of the Pittsburgh Steelers, the National Football League team he founded in 1933, underwent emergency surgery yesterday to remove a blood clot from his left arm. . . .
Byron Nelson, the Hall of Fame golfer, was in good condition yesterday in a hospital in Columbus, Ohio, where he had been admitted for a disturbance of his heart rhythm.


Review/Film; Pakistanis' New Lives In a Threatening Land
LEAD: At the beginning of ''Dragon Chow,'' the camera finds Shezad (Bhasker) on a dark street in Hamburg, West Germany, and follows him home.
It's a great credit to the direction by Jan Schutte, whose first feature this sad, graceful and eloquent film is, that ''Dragon Chow'' generates immediate interest in this gentle soul and the question of where he may be going.


Sports People; Closer Scrutiny
LEAD: The Yankees and the police consider it a closed case.
But according to a published report, a private investigator has been hired by Billy Martin's lawyer and agent to look into the incident at a topless bar in Arlington, Tex., where the Yankee manager suffered injuries after a game against the Rangers on May 6.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council  Meets at 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Com-Tek Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Com-Tek Resources Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,460
266,469
Net loss
186,482
92,297
6mo rev
287,684
491,228
Net loss
344,387
212,684


Olympics; Door Open for North Korea
LEAD: The door for North Korea to enter the Olympics will stay open until the last minute, and an offer to stage some events in the North is still on the table, South Korea's top Olympic official said today.


Colorocs Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colorocs Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
98,782
1,541,248
Net loss
564,844
b438,723
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income and after a charge of $150,000 from foreign income taxes.


Golf; Jacobsen, Mahaffey Tied in Memorial
LEAD: Peter Jacobsen, who has not won on the PGA Tour since 1984, said he had three choices when he learned last year that he was suffering from a ruptured spinal disk.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Conqueror of 42d Street Kaye Ballard: ''Working 42d Street at Last,'' the Kaufman Theater, 534 West 42d Street (563-1684 or 564-8038).
The singer, actress, comedian and impressionist is still one of the most exuberant descendants of a post-vaudeville tradition in which a single entertainer does it all.


Our Towns; Move the Suburb At Least 3 Feet To the Right
LEAD: Anyone who understands the suburbs knows the whole idea is to get yourself a house on a grassy lot, have the place surveyed, throw up a fence as big as the the zoning board will allow, get a couple of frosties out of the 'fridge and then spend the rest of your life keeping the world's fools on the other side of that monster fence.


Political Memo; Bush Camp Longs for Signs Of More Support by Reagan
LEAD: Ronald Reagan has bequeathed to his Vice President two large gifts for this election year: peace and prosperity.
But George Bush's Presidential candidacy is being hurt by smaller, stickier things the Administration is involved in, and some of his supporters are starting to ask how much the White House really cares about electing Mr.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Ray Anderson Ray Anderson, Village Vanguard, Seventh Avenue South, near 11th Street (255-4037).
Brash, young and ready to tear the club apart, Mr.
Anderson, a trombonist, is all set to have fun.
Besides being a virtuoso, he's a bit of an entertainer, roaming the stage, pointing his trombone all over the place, and talking to the audience.


Southwest Realty Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest Realty Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,542,000
3,103,000
Net inc
605,000
b904,000
Share earns
.17
-
b-Net loss


Schwab Names New President
LEAD: The Charles Schwab Corporation said today that David S. Pottruck had been named president and chief operating officer of Charles Schwab &amp; Company, the brokerage subsidiary.
Mr.
Pottruck, 39 years old, will continue as executive vice president of the parent company.


Review/Organ; Lionel Rogg in a Recital
LEAD: Only organists today maintain the once universal tradition that performers ought to compose a bit: just imagine Itzhak Perlman, Kiri Te Kanawa or Murray Perahia coming to Lincoln Center with sonatas or arias of their own facture.
But it was no surprise at all Monday evening at the Church of St.
John the Evangelist when Lionel Rogg included on the program his own intelligently conceived variations on an old Geneva tune for the 92d


Commencement Crossing
LEAD: A procession of graduates from the Graduate School of the City University of New York crossing 43d Street at the Avenue of the Americas as they made their way to Town Hall for commencement exercises. (NYT/Sara Krulwich)


Sports People; Rangers Drop Kemp
LEAD: After Steve Kemp refused an assignment to their Oklahoma City triple-A team yesterday, the Texas Rangers placed the 11-year veteran on irrevocable waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.


Review/Theater; Judith Ivey in a Pre-Feminist Domestic Drama
LEAD: William Hanley's 1962 play, ''Mrs.
Dally Has a Lover,'' is the sort of talky ''kitchen sink'' drama that gives actors a chance to bite down hard on roles that offer rich opportunities for finely detailed characterization.
That's probably the main reason why the talented Judith Ivey chose to star in a revival of an earnest period piece that hasn't been seen in New York since it played on Broadway in 1965 with Arlene Francis in the title role.


Visas Extended to Help Keep Foreign Nurses
LEAD: Bowing to appeals for help amid a critical nationwide nursing shortage, the Federal immigration agency yesterday granted a one-year extension to foreign nurses facing deportation at the end of their temporary work visas.


Holiday Events Throughout the Region; Westchester
LEAD: From the soaring Dragon Coaster at Rye's Playland to the rolling woodland trails at the Rockefeller State Park Preserve, Westchester is offering many ways to spend Memorial Day weekend in the county.
A fair and a musical revue, art exhibitions, sheep-shearing demonstrations and a grand parade are among the activities.


On Keeping the Statues New York Has and Adding One More; Remember Irving Berlin
LEAD: To the Editor:


Toyota's U.S. Plant
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Company, the world's third-largest auto maker, opened its first United States assembly plant, with production of a white 1989 Camry sedan.
The 3.7-million-square-foot plant, situated on Kentucky farmland about 20 miles north of Lexington, is the fourth United States assembly plant built by a Japanese auto maker.


Langley Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Langley Corp
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,295,200
3,869,400
Net inc
148,300
191,900
Share earns
.11
.14
6mo rev
6,544,400
6,036,800
Net inc
295,600
297,300
Share earns
.22
.22


22 YEARS TOWARD SHOREHAM
LEAD: The Long Island Lighting Company's efforts to build a nuclear-power plant at Shoreham have covered more than 20 years and cost more than $5 billion.
April 1966: Lilco announces plans to build a 500-megawatt nuclear power plant in Shoreham on the North Shore, 55 miles east of Manhattan.
May 1968: Lilco applies to the Federal Atomic Energy Commission for a construction permit.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE


TV Weekend; A Vietnam Veteran's Mission
LEAD: In the inspirational tradition of movies like ''Pride of the Yankees'' and everything Frank Capra ever directed, ''To Heal a Nation'' is being presented this Memorial Day weekend on NBC, Sunday at 9 P.M.
This is the story of Jan C. Scruggs, the Vietnam veteran who had a vision of a national memorial that would ''symbolize the experience'' of Americans who fought in the war.


S &amp; K Famous Brands reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* S &amp; K Famous Brands (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
11,317,000
9,253,000
Net inc
364,000
b628,000
Share earns
.18
.30
b-After a gain of $401,000 from an accounting change.


The Proof in the Trash
LEAD: To the Editor:


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: The Memorial Day holiday will be observed on Monday.
Following are holiday schedules.
New York  Government offices: Closed.
Post offices: Special delivery and Ex-press Mail delivery only; main office is open in Manhattan at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed  Schools: Closed.
Parking: Sunday parking rules are in effect.


For TV Mammoths, Chasing a Mouse in Moscow
LEAD: Summit conferences rarely produce major news, and the meetings themselves take place behind closed doors.
But in the weeks since the announcement of President Reagan's visit to the Soviet Union and his meeting with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the networks have sent their news anchors, along with hundreds of reporters, cameramen and technicians, to cover the event.


Interphase Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interphase Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,852,614
3,236,171
Net inc
451,071
354,301
Share earns
.17
.13
6mo rev
8,460,831
6,241,980
Net inc
582,448
665,622
Share earns
.21
.24


Vote on Arms Pact Delayed By Dispute on Interpretation
LEAD: The Senate today settled its last major dispute on the new treaty eliminating medium- and shorter-range missiles, only to become embroiled late in the evening in a new political snag.


Los Angeles Is Getting Automated Trolley Line
LEAD: A quarter of a century after Los Angeles ripped out its trolley tracks to make way for an ever increasing number of automobiles, officials have decided to build the nation's first automatic, driverless trolley line to try to get people out of their cars.


Metropolitan Museum Shows Retailing Bent
LEAD: In 1871, a year before it welcomed New Yorkers to its rented 14th Street quarters for its first display of paintings, the Metropolitan Museum of Art was busy selling etched copies of 10 masterpieces in the collection to art lovers in the United States and Europe.


Washington Talk: Interior Department; Would Freedom Help the National Park Service?
LEAD: Their contention is that the National Park Service has been treated like an ideological soccer ball, kicked around by political appointees of both Democratic and Republican administrations in the last 20 years.
So, some members of Congress, conservationists and former park officials have begun pressing to turn the service into an independent agency.


Holiday-RV Superstores reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Holiday-RV Superstores
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,995,515
7,880,711
Net inc
333,117
257,793
Share earns
.05
.05
6mo sales
18,363,344
14,145,959
Net inc
578,298
430,477
Share earns
.08
.09
Shares outst
7,140,000
5,000,000


Reviews/Art; Antonio Segui's Mischievous Look at an Antihero
LEAD: This is the season for a light-footed art.
An art of that kind has long been practiced by the Argentine painter Antonio Segui.
Born in Cordoba, Argentina, in 1934, Mr.
Segui moved to France in 1963 and has lived for the last 35 years in the Parisian suburb of Arcueil, formerly the home of the composer Erik


Triton Group Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triton Group Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
104,070,000
100,023,000
Net inc
b2,125,000
c4,783,000
Share earns
.15
.41
b-After a tax credit of $605,000.
c-After a gain of $1,603,000 from discontinued operations and a tax credit of $2,444,000.


Fidelity Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity Medical Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
189,024
51,694
Net loss
664,505
619,486
6mo rev
397,558
114,194
Net loss
1,102,137
1,264,774


Bids Up for Oil Leases
LEAD: The Interior Department said today that sales of oil leases in the Chukchi Sea off northwestern Alaska drew a record number of bids.
The deparment said that 653 bids, totaling $478.2 million, were submitted on Monday and Tuesday.
The Interior Secretary, Donald P. Hodel, said the bids reflected confidence that oil would be found, despite no previous leasing in the area and high exploration and development costs.


Bad Brains
LEAD: Bad Brains, a reggae and hardcore rock group, is to appear tonight at the Ritz, 11th Street between Third and Fourth Avenues (254-2800).
Tickets are $13.50; the show is at 12:30.


Executive Telecommunicaions reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Executive Telecommunicaions
Qtr to Feb 28
1988
1987
Revenue
262,947
19,320
Net inc
226,947
b157,288
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Sai Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sai Group Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,203,000
1,403,000
Net inc
62,000
60,000
Shares outst
15,255,253
14,796,990


Baseball; Evans Has a Blast on His 41st Birthday
LEAD: Darrell Evans celebrated his 41st birthday with a home run tonight and Frank Tanana won his eighth game as the Detroit Tigers defeated the Milwaukee Brewers, 4-3.


House Democrats Map Policy On Defense Against Missiles
LEAD: House Democrats united today behind a policy that condemns the Reagan Administration's drive to deploy weapons in space but endorses continued work on defenses against nuclear missiles ''at a reasonable and stable pace.''


City and Commercial Acquires Donley Firm
LEAD: Donley Communications, a 14-year-old financial public relations firm, has been acquired by London-based City and Commercial Communications for $2.3 million.
The British concern is one of its country's larger financial communications groups.


Bestway Rental reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bestway Rental
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,837,000
-
Net inc
76,000
b566,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
4,810,000
-
Net inc
208,800
b1,457,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss and includes losses from discontinued operations of $303,000 and $758,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Japan Asks End To Builder Ban
LEAD: Japanese construction executives today called for the United States to lift its ban on Japanese bids for American public works projects now that a construction dispute has been formally settled.


Tofutti Brands Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tofutti Brands Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Sales
2,414,000
2,170,000
Net inc
32,000
b19,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
5,439,000
5,473,000
b-Net loss and after an income tax benefit of $14,000.


Managua Rejects Contra Offer to Disarm
LEAD: The Sandinista Government rejected a proposal by the contras today under which the guerrillas would give up their weapons in exchange for sweeping political changes in Nicaragua.


Review/Dance; 5 Decades of Themes and Movement
LEAD: Jane Dudley is probably best known today as an early Martha Graham dancer and a member of the Dudley Bales Maslow modern-dance trio.
She now lives and teaches in London, and London's gain is clearly New York's loss.
For a program of new and old dance by Miss Dudley, which opened on Wednesday and runs only through tonight at Marymount Manhattan Theater (221 East 71st


The Law; At the Bar
LEAD: He was the managing partner at a major Wall Street law firm, accustomed to making hard decisions daily for a multimillion-dollar enterprise.
But when he began to talk to a marketing consultant he lost all his aplomb.
Suddenly, the lawyer was acting like an accessory to a crime -a crime against his profession.


Dukakis Assails Reagan on Noriega Issue
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis asserted today that the Reagan Administration's inability to persuade Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to cede power in Panama was another example of failed leadership in the White House.


Stalin's 12% Rating, and Other Truths
LEAD: As interesting as any finding in the Moscow public opinion poll reported in today's Times is the fact of the poll itself.
Think of it: A Soviet institute asks tough political and personal questions on behalf of Western clients and gets some forthright answers, for publication.
Quite some evidence of


Bank of Montreal (California) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Montreal (California)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
22,517,000
113,134,000
Share earns
.10
1.11
Shares outst
104,572,996
90,016,982
6mo net inc
175,568,000
266,972,000
Share earns
1.49
2.82
Shares outst
103,827,148
85,821,512


Shaer Shoe Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shaer Shoe Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,298,626
6,670,276
Net inc
138,396
530,733
Share earns
.14
.52
6mo sales
11,369,995
10,676,653
Net inc
372,346
748,732
Share earns
.37
.73


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Discovery in The Fifth
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has discovered an old ally in its long battle against Government regulation: the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution.


Panel Allocates More Funds To 4 Presidential Candidates
LEAD: The Federal Election Commission has distributed $1.7 million in Federal matching funds to Presidential candidates, bringing to $56.2 million the total the Government has given out in the primary campaign this year.


Sports People; Jockeying for Position
LEAD: According to the chief steward at Pimlico, Pat Day was within the bounds of race riding by a jockey during his Preakness trip aboard Forty Niner that featured a lengthy duel with Winning Colors, the filly who won the Kentucky Derby.
Winning Colors finished third in the Preakness to Risen Star, the winner.


Alex Chilton
LEAD: Alex Chilton, the pop singer, is appearing at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street (219-3055), through Sunday.
Sets are at 9 and 11:30; admission is $12.


Abrams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abrams Industries
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
16,165,759
11,909,543
Net inc
482,278
570,943
Share earns
.27
.32
Yr sales
49,752,853
46,773,124
Net inc
1,102,459
969,326
Share earns
.62
.54


Sage Drilling Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sage Drilling Co Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,173,000
1,425,000
Net loss
b180,000
c199,000
9mo rev
4,147,000
3,157,000
Net loss
b573,000
c581,000
b-After tax credits of $100,000 for the quarter and $317,000 for the 9 months.


Prices Fall On U.S. Notes And Bonds
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes fell and short-term interest rates moved sharply higher yesterday as market participants reacted negatively to a strong economic report and additional evidence the Federal Reserve Board has again tightened monetary policy.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Genuine Bistro Fare Some of the most authentic French bistro food in New York is turning up in a most unbistrolike setting.
Bistro d'Adrienne is the homespun, inexpensive counterpart to the luxurious restaurant called Adrienne, both in the new Hotel Maxim's de Paris.


Noriega Charges U.S. Invented Crisis
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega accused the Reagan Administration today of inventing a crisis for colonial ends and making him a ''humiliating proposal'' he could not accept while maintaining ''the dignity and sovereignty of Panama.''


O'Connor Doesn't Want Job
LEAD: Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the Supreme Court, mentioned as a possible Republican candidate for Vice President, said today that she was not interested. ''I most assuredly am not considering any other position in or out of government and do not expect to do so in the future,'' Justice O'Connor, who is 58 years old, said in a statement released by the Court.


Codenoll Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Codenoll Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,601,464
1,420,279
Net loss
454,892
458,518


House Defeats G.O.P. Bid To Amend Law on Contra Aid
LEAD: A surprise attempt by House Republicans to amend a 1983 law banning the use of the C.I.A.'s contingency fund to finance future covert military aid to the Nicaraguans contra rebels failed today.


3Com Losing Its President
LEAD: The 3Com Corporation, a maker of computer networks based in Santa Clara, Calif., said today that William N. Carrico would resign as president and chief operating officer.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  The Belushi Story Three years and eight months after he first committed himself to the project, the producer Edward S. Feldman has seen the cameras begin rolling on ''Wired,'' based on Bob Woodward's best-selling account of the life and drug-induced death of John Belushi.


Sports People; Broncos Tempt Rogers
LEAD: The agent for George Rogers, the free-agent running back who has been offered a contract by the Denver Broncos, said he would meet with Broncos management today.


Russ Togs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Russ Togs Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
68,367,000
73,553,000
Net inc
1,496,000
3,107,000
Share earns
.20
.40


Convergent Solutions Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Convergent Solutions Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
933,873
1,032,224
Net inc
195,204
345,544
Shares outst
4,422,700
2,420,925
Share earns
.04
.14
6mo rev
1,779,926
1,649,860
Net inc
365,804
496,714
Share earns
.08
.21
Shares outst
4,422,700
2,407,334


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A2-11


Ups and Downs of Conducting the Poll: Suspicions Above, Suspicions Below
LEAD: The first obstacle in polling public opinion in Moscow proved to be the Soviet pollsters, who resisted asking sensitive questions about Soviet leaders and official policies.


Littlefield, Adams &amp; Co reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Littlefield, Adams &amp; Co (AMEX)
Year to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,213,000
17,569,000
Net loss
b2,287,000
b2,801,000
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $640,000 for the latest year and $63,000 for the year-earlier period.


Horse Racing Notebook; Gulfstream Awarded 1989 Breeders' Cup
LEAD: Breeders' Cup officials announced yesterday that Gulfstream Park near Miami, not Hialeah, will host the 1989 cup races, yet another blow to Hialeah's stature.


MSA Realty Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MSA Realty Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
293,947
273,297
Share earns
.03
.04
Shares outst
8,527,722
7,300,176


Bridge
LEAD: The Eastern Regional Championships, the focal point of the year for players in New York City, begin today at the Penta Hotel, 33d Street and Seventh Avenue in Manhattan.
This is the schedule:  Today - Women's pairs and men's pairs, 2 P.M. and 8 P.M.; novice pairs and 99er pairs, 8 P.M.
Tomorrow - Novice pairs and 49er pairs, 1 P.M.; flighted Goldman Pairs, 1 P.M.


Nostalgia in the Air as 'Hair' Comes to U.N. to Fight AIDS
LEAD: This week was no time for a world crisis: the General Assembly of the United Nations was fully booked.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Oilers Win Stanley Cup  Edmonton swept the Boston Bruins in four games and won its fourth National Hockey League championship in the past five seasons.
Page A23.
Iran-Contra Case Challenge  A Federal judge questioned whether Congressional immunity made it a ''practical impossibility'' to try three on conspiracy charges.


Nutmeg Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nutmeg Industries (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,029,000
2,626,000
Net inc
154,000
45,000
Share earns
.04
.01


Body of a Reputed Mobster Is Found in a Bag in River
LEAD: The body of a reputed mob leader, John DiGilio, was found today inside a mortician's bag in the Hackensack River in Carlstadt, the state police said.


Holiday Events Throughout the Region; New Jersey
LEAD: Although surf temperatures in New Jersey are still toe-tingling, this holiday weekend is considered something of a dress rehearsal for summer at the shore.


The Law; Terrorist or Insurgent? Diplomacy and the Law
LEAD: It has been said that the world abounds with laws and teems with crimes.
Now two convicted murderers argue that international laws justify whatever crimes they may have committed.


REAGAN SUGGESTS A 5TH CONFERENCE
LEAD: President Reagan has raised the possibility of meeting a fifth time with Mikhail S. Gorbachev if a treaty on reducing strategic arms is ready for signing before he leaves office in January.


Oceaneering International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oceaneering International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
21,807,000
20,243,000
Net loss
7,801,000
4,316,000
Yr rev
116,442,000
103,817,000
Net loss
11,438,000
9,137,000
The company said the latest fourth quarter and year include unusual charges of $3,900,000 related to the sale of four vessels, closure of unprofitable operations, foreign tax assessments, and legal settlements.


Sports of The Times; Spink's Left Hand
LEAD: BOXING people usually just call it ''the left hand'' but they mean the left jab, not the left hook.
Of all the punches, the left hand is tactically the most important.
And when Michael Spinks arrived here more than a month ago to start training for his June 27 heavyweight title showdown with Mike Tyson, his 76-year-old trainer, Eddie


Judge Has Doubt About Charge in Iran-Contra Trial
LEAD: The judge in the Iran-contra case today questioned whether Congressional immunity given Oliver L. North and two of his three co-defendants would make it a ''practical impossibility'' to try them on conspiracy charges.


Wickes Companies reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wickes Companies (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
928,066,000
883,052,000
Net loss
b2,589,000
c120,037,000
Share earns
-
2.49
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $15,531,000.
c-Net income and after net from discontinued operations of $2,974,000, a gain on the disposal of assets of $106,797,000, and a $1,069,000 loss on the retirement of debt.


Adage Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adage Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 2
1988
1987
Revenue
7,184,000
11,040,000
Net loss
1,722,000
1,279,000
Yr rev
38,088,000
42,527,000
Net loss
27,907,000
9,853,000
The company said the latest year includes charges of $21.5 million from the writedown of assets.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Honoring Black Heroes
LEAD: Representative Joseph J. DioGuardi, a Westchester Republican, is battling the Army and Navy over whether a black soldier who fought in World War I and a black sailor who served in World War II should be awarded the Medal of Honor, to correct a ''historic injustice.''


One More Chapter In the Tyson Story
LEAD: The complicated saga of the business of Mike Tyson continues.


Muscovites, in Poll, Are Split On What Their Future Holds
LEAD: After three years of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's leadership, about half of the Muscovites say they have yet to see tangible benefits from his program of economic change, according to a poll of Moscow residents conducted for The New York Times and CBS News.


Dance Festival Explores America's African Roots
LEAD: Danceafrica has become a tradition in New York.
It is a time, each spring, to bring the entire family to the Brooklyn Academy of Music for rousing dance and music by Afro-American dance companies and for the exotic African bazaar held in the museum parking lot.
It has also been a time to explore the African roots of American culture as seen in the performances of innumerable Afro


United's Parent Is Again UAL
LEAD: Once again, the name of the owner of United Airlines Inc. is the UAL Corporation.
Stockholders voted at their annual meeting in Chicago yesterday to change the name of the airline's parent company from the Allegis Corporation back to UAL, which, of course, draws its initials from the airline.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on May 19 about a rise in college applications from black students described black admissions at Harvard and Yale Universities incompletely and, because of an editing error, misstated the number of students offered admission to Harvard.
By April 9, the date on which Ivy


For Nuclear Industry, Harm Is Already Done
LEAD: The significance to the nuclear industry of Shoreham's cancellation is like having a dying horse break a leg.
Nuclear advocates say the abandonment is a waste and an embarrassment, but there is not much damage left to be done to the industry.


Reviews/Art; Entropy With Spirit in a Brooklyn Retrospective
LEAD: The retrospective of the American sculptor Gordon Matta-Clark that has just opened at the Brooklyn Museum of Art is a good and good-looking show, one that conveys a strong sense of this artist's unique accomplishment.
This is no easy task.
Mr.
Matta-Clark died young - of cancer at the age of 35 in 1978 - and his major artworks no longer exist.


Probation Ends For Tennessee
LEAD: The football probation imposed on the University of Tennessee in October 1986 has been terminated, the National Collegiate Athletic Association announced today.


Cybertek Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cybertek Corp
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,759,000
6,407,000
Net inc
101,000
315,000
Share earns
.03
.09
Yr rev
22,382,000
25,875,000
Net inc
281,000
1,796,000
Share earns
.08
.50


French Open; Cash, Leconte Gain Despite Slow Going
LEAD: The slow clay courts of Roland Garros Stadium, sticky with rain, dragged down the usually fleet of foot today, producing several close matches for highly seeded players at the French Open tennis tournament.


PAC's Remain a Pox
LEAD: The most pernicious corruption of government today stems not from bribery, graft and sleazy deals that scream from tabloid headlines, but from conduct we as a people have blessed as lawful: the aggressive solicitation of campaign contributions from private interests who are subject to the laws and regulations made by the aggressive solicitors.


Crescott Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crescott Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,009,000
3,263,000
Net loss
489,000
b375,000
b-After a gain of $638,000 on the disposal of discontinued operations.


Aircoa Hotel Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aircoa Hotel Partners LP (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,422,000
12,509,000
Net loss
105,000
549,000
The company said the year-ago results are for the period from Dec. 5, 1986 to March 31, 1987.


This Censored World
LEAD: ''Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media regardless of frontiers.''


Child World Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Child World Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
119,554,000
104,153,000
Net loss
4,361,000
b92,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
11,501,000
11,500,000
b-Net income and after a cumulative effect of an accounting change of $2,853,000.


Title Defense For Brothers
LEAD: Ron and Jerry Springer of the Brae Burn Country Club in Purchase, N.Y., who last year shot a tournament-record 16-under par 128, will defend their title today in the 17th annual Wilson Cup at the Scarsdale Golf Club in Hartsdale, N.Y.


2 Lanes of Williamsburg Bridge Reopened
LEAD: Cars crossing the Williamsburg bridge yesterday after two partially repaired lanes were reopened for passenger cars only.
Page B1. (NYT/Ruby Washington)


Hamish Hamilton, 87, Publisher For 50 Years in Britain, Is Dead
LEAD: Hamish Hamilton, a prominent British publisher for almost 50 years, died Wednesday in London at the age of 87.


Williams-Sonoma Inc reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Williams-Sonoma Inc (OTC)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Sales
34,667,000
26,324,000
Net inc
43,000
239,000
Share earns
.01
.06
The year-ago first quarter net is restated to include a one-time gain of $176,000, or 4 cents a share, to reflect the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Michaels Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michaels Stores Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Sales
44,066,000
25,695,000
Net inc
272,000
385,000
Share earns
.03
.04


Quadrex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quadrex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,161,000
14,976,000
Net loss
2,077,000
b420,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


Vornado Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vornado Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
16,066,000
15,298,000
Net inc
2,847,000
3,384,000
Share earns
1.15
1.24
Shares outst
2,467,559
2,729,147


Holiday Events Throughout the Region; Hudson Valley
LEAD: In addition to the normal parades and speeches on the Memorial Day weekend, the Hudson Valley offers a wide variety of things to do: flea markets, antique shows, art exhibits, boat rides, a candlelight tour and even a demonstration of blacksmithing.


40 Die in Sri Lanka Fighting
LEAD: Indian troops backed by helicopter gunships attacked Tamil rebel camps in northern Sri Lanka today in an offensive that an Indian official said has killed 30 rebels and 10 soldiers.
The United News of India news agency said 6,000 Indian soldiers.


US Shoe Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US Shoe Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
527,617,000
505,626,000
Net inc
3,095,000
b24,078,000
Share earns
.07
.54
b-After accounting change gains of $16,042,000.


Mesaba Aviation Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mesaba Aviation Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,415,000
6,303,000
Net inc
231,000
295,000
Share earns
.08
.10
Yr rev
29,171,000
21,806,000
Net inc
1,549,000
b213,000
Share earns
.51
-


Springer Sale Inquiry Set
LEAD: The West German stock exchange is investigating whether insider trading occurred regarding the shares of the publishing company Axel Springer Verlag A.G., a spokesman for the West Berlin Bourse said today.


Auctions
LEAD:  A Tang Dynasty court lady, a richly glazed pottery study of a serene aristocrat seated on a bamboo stool, may rewrite the $660,000 record at auction for Tang art when it comes up for sale next week at Sotheby's.
The gracefully modeled eighth-century tomb figure, owned in recent years by three major collectors of Chinese art, is one of several major Oriental works to be offered at Sotheby's and Christie's next week.


Key Figures in the Shoreham Negotiations
LEAD:  Dr. William J. Catacosinos


Tribute to Malcolm X
LEAD: In commemoration of Malcolm X's birthdate, which was May 19, 1925, the Ujamaa Black Theater has been performing ''A Tribute To Malcolm X,'' a musical written by Titus Walker.
The show, which is at the Lincoln Square Theater, at 250 West 65th Street, is to have its last two performances tonight at 8 P.M.


Youth Beats Teacher With Bat
LEAD: A junior high school teacher was beaten unconscious with a baseball bat and seriously injured yesterday when an intruder chased and repeatedly struck him during a softball game in a Bronx schoolyard, the authorities said.


HANOI CUTS FORCE IN LAOS BY HALF
LEAD: The Vietnamese have withdrawn 20,000 to 25,000 soldiers from Laos since the beginning of this year, according to Western officials here.


Maryland Bank To Drop TMIC Suit
LEAD: The First Bank of Maryland said it would drop its lawsuit against the TMIC Insurance Company, a large insolvent mortgage insurer that was taken over by regulators in 1986.


Holiday Events Throughout the Region; Connecticut
LEAD: Memorial Day weekend in tradition-loving Connecticut will be anything but traditional this year.
The holiday will be marked by a three-day celebration of the trolley in East Haven, a hot-air balloon regatta in Bristol, a frog-jumping contest in Cornwall and sports-car racing in Lime Rock.
All this in addition to more conventional events, such as a lobster festival in Mystic and a parade in


Sizeler Property Investors reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sizeler Property Investors (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
972,000
605,000
Share earns
.26
.24
Shares outst
3,733,000
2,507,000


Review/Opera; Graun's 'Montezuma'
LEAD: Carl Heinrich Graun was no Mozart and his ''Montezuma'' is certainly no ''Idomeneo,'' but a new production of Graun's opera seria at the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. periodically reveals pages of unexpected power.
Opening night apparently did not go well, even in the opinion of Gian Carlo Menotti, the festival's founder and artistic director, but the performance I attended on


A Newsletter For Users Of Computers
LEAD: THREE executives who were formerly involved with Compute! magazine at ABC Publications have started a biweekly consumer newsletter that will focus on personal computers made by the International Business Machines Corporation, and compatible models.


Financier's Absence Deepens $130 Million Mystery
LEAD: A 37-year-old Cuban-born financier known in international social circles for his charm, impeccable taste and willingness to pay almost any amount for great art has become a fugitive in what court papers describe as a $130 million swindle.


Barry Harris, Jazz Stalwart, Sings Colleagues' Praises
LEAD: ''New York is supposed to be unique,'' said the pianist and tireless jazz organizer Barry Harris. ''We're going to have 150 people on stage to play and sing Bud Powell's 'Oblivion' and Tadd Dameron's 'Focus.' Where else in the world would that happen?''


A Ghost Lake Speaks of Squandered Gifts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Texaco Up Only to $50 Despite Bid
LEAD: Although Carl C. Icahn said on Wednesday that he was willing to pay $60 a share for all the Texaco stock he does not own, Texaco rose only $3.125 yesterday, to $50 a share.
The relatively mild reaction reflected skepticism either that Texaco's board would respond favorably to Mr.
Icahn's offer or that Mr.


Book Notes
LEAD:  Planning Readers' Year


Opto Mechanik Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Opto Mechanik Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,195,699
4,353,212
Net inc
64,818
222,469
Share earns
.03
.10
9mo rev
18,431,713
14,792,080
Net inc
406,875
478,923
Share earns
.19
.22


Market Place; Various Factors Helping Paribas
LEAD: A JUMP of 13 percent in five trading days would make any company's shareholders happy.
In the case of Compagnie Financiere de Paribas, the French financial group, it is making a lot of shareholders happy.
Paribas says it has 2.6 million shareholders, making it one of the most widely held corporations in the world.


Sports People; Referee Sues ESPN
LEAD: Richard Schnell of Kent, Wash., a referee who was injured when his legs became entangled in television equipment while he was officiating at Nebraska-U.C.L.A. football game, has sued ESPN, the cable sports network, for damages.


Next Problem: No Place to Send Its Tainted Fuel
LEAD: New York State intends to dismantle the Shoreham Nuclear Power Station, but Shoreham will probably still stand well into the next century, experts say, because there is no place to dispose of its radioactive fuel rods and reactor parts.


Delay Is Lifted For Allegheny
LEAD: A Federal appeals court cleared the way for Allegheny International Inc. to hold its annual meeting.
A three-judge panel of the


Samuel Sutphin, Scott Paper Executive, 76
LEAD: Samuel Reid Sutphin, a retired vice president of the Scott Paper Company, died of cancer Tuesday at Methodist Hospital in Indianapolis.
He was 76 years old and maintained residences in Zionsville, Ind., and Manhattan.


D H Holmes, Co., Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* D H Holmes, Co., Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
61,909,000
62,755,000
Net loss
2,021,000
b3,941,000
Share earns
-
1.11
b-Net income and after a gain of $5,457,000 from an accounting change.


House Unit Backs Limit On TV Ads for Children
LEAD: A House committee today approved and sent to the full House a bill that would limit the amount of advertising in children's television programs.


Insta Cool Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Insta Cool Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
60,255
-
Net loss
277,463
185,466
9mo sales
229,474
67,543
Net loss
693,132
439,366
The company had no sales for the year-ago third quarter because it was a start-up enterprise.


An Imaginative Effort In Fallon Work for Lee
LEAD: It is an advertising truism that parity products frequently produce very imaginative advertising - since the only product differences are created by the advertising.


Carme Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carme Inc (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,860,337
2,503,861
Net inc
b296,072
c358,486
Share earns
.11
.13
9mo sales
7,008,329
6,285,830
Net inc
b639,266
c802,035
Share earns
.24
.30
b-Includes tax benefits of $24,500 and $52,500 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Syria Reports Iran Accord on Beirut Troops
LEAD: Syria said today that it had reached agreement with Iran on a deployment of Syrian troops Friday in the southern suburbs of Beirut.
The move is intended to end three weeks of fierce fighting between rival Shiite Moslem militias.


With Afghanistan Guerrillas: Rocket Raid in Heady Times
LEAD: ''Long live Islam!'' Commander Lalmohammed bellowed into his walkie-talkie as the rockets, having finally found the range, crashed directly on the Afghan Army garrison at Dakka. ''Long live the mujahedeen!''


Lesson in the Difficulty of Forecasting
LEAD: Back in December, the economy seemed to be falling off a cliff.
The market crash colored everyone's thinking.
Consumers had pulled back.
Homes were hard to sell.
And recession forecasts were commonplace.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Advertising column of Business Day on Tuesday, about Shirley Young's new position at the General Motors Corporation, misstated her future role with Grey Strategic Marketing.
She will continue to have a limited association with Grey, working with several clients.


On Stage
LEAD:  Brightman Berlin Bound Sarah Brightman, the co-star of ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' will be leaving the show June 4, the evening before the Tony Award ceremony.
A spokesman for the musical said the British actress had a concert commitment with the Berlin Philharmonic orchestra at the end of June.


N.C.A.A. Baseball; Clemson Outlasts Fordham in 19 Innings
LEAD: They played 52 innings just to get here.
The Fordham Rams had grown accustomed to enduring frazzled emotions in three extra-inning games and two regulation ones on the way to a spot in the National Collegiate Athletic Association baseball tournament.
But they could not have been prepared for what happened this afternoon.


Advanced Products &amp; Techologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Products &amp; Techologies
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
504,916
98,265
Net loss
351,129
204,211


Williamsburg Is Reopened For Cars Only
LEAD: Two lanes of the Williamsburg Bridge were reopened to cars yesterday - in time for the Memorial Day weekend traffic crush - even though only about half of the serious corrosion points found by inspectors have been repaired.


Temco Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Temco Service Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
27,348,108
25,506,418
Net loss
53,800
b147,414
Share earns
-
.25
Shares outst
579,849
594,564
6mo rev
54,566,160
50,472,307
Net inc
211,456
330,253
Share earns
.36
.56
Shares outst
582,572
594,564


Lois Pitts Gershon Pon Wins Mug Root Beer
LEAD: Lois Pitts Gershon Pon/GGK has become agency for Pepsi-Cola's Mug Root Beer.
It will be the first soft-drink account in the 32-year career of the agency's chairman, George Lois.


Put a New Swing on teh Wall Street Pendulum; Time for the Investors
LEAD: To the Editor:


Study Says U.S. Doesn't Need Wide On-Site Blast Monitoring
LEAD: The Reagan Administration's position on nuclear testing verification was challenged today by a report issued by the Office of Technology Assessment, a Congressional agency.


Diagnostic Retrieval Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagnostic Retrieval Systems Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,473,000
14,484,000
Net inc
1,162,000
1,448,000
Share earns
.21
.26
Yr rev
61,499,000
53,259,000
Net inc
3,714,000
3,434,000
Share earns
.66
.61


Goldtex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldtex Inc
Qtr to April 24
1988
1987
Sales
4,956,693
7,769,764
Net inc
279,412
324,906
Share earns
.12
.20
Shares outst
2,313,979
1,601,100
9mo sales
20,519,055
22,753,708
Net inc
449,206
1,175,061
Share earns
.20
.73
Shares outst
2,226,888
1,601,100


Guilty Plea In Bank Fraud
LEAD: The Justice Department said today that a Florida real estate developer had agreed to plead guilty to bank fraud charges stemming from the Government's investigation of the Texas banking and savings industries.
It said the developer, Ronald


Lloyd Marx, Director Of 'Amateur Hour,' 72
LEAD: Lloyd Marx, a composer and conductor who was musical director of ''The Original Amateur Hour,'' died at his home in Manhattan yesterday.
He was 72 years old and had had complications from a heart attack in November.


Review/Art; The Integration of Art And Public Architecture
LEAD: Perhaps it is inevitable, at a moment when diverse and conflicting stylistic strategies compete for attention in both the architectural and artistic communities, that the American Craft Museum's exhibition on architectural art takes so ambiguous a stance toward its subject.
The show documents various approaches to the complicated business of integrating sculpture and other forms of art into public spaces.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Bradley Cues Reagan
LEAD: It is not often that a Democrat counsels a Republican to be conservative, but Senator Bill Bradley has such advice for President Reagan at the Moscow summit meeting.


Bio-Vascular Inc reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bio-Vascular Inc
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
279,126
209,630
Net loss
68,341
202,227
6mo sales
577,838
347,540
Net loss
152,226
257,018


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  HOLIDAY BACH FESTIVAL


Bush, in Jersey, Gets Tough on Drugs
LEAD: Vice President Bush said today that he would make adoption of ''drug free'' programs a condition for granting Federal contracts in a Bush administration.
He said he would ask states to do the same for state contracts.


People
LEAD: *
William Heath has been promoted to executive vice president and senior management representative of BBDO New York.


On Keeping the Statues New York Has and Adding One More
LEAD: To the Editor:


Potomac Electric Power Co reports earnings for 12mo April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Potomac Electric Power Co (NYSE)
12mo April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,331,644,000
1,345,033,000
Net inc
201,118,000
b226,159,000
Share earns
2.03
2.29
b-After a gain of $21,680,000 from sale of service territory.


Dr. M. A. Zuckerbraun Wed to Myra K. Miller
LEAD: The marriage of Myra K. Miller, a senior credit analyst at County NatWest Inc. in New York, to Dr.
Matthew A. Zuckerbraun, a portfolio manager at Harris, Greenhouse, Kutzel, investment advisers in New York, took place yesterday at the Faculty House at Columbia University.
Rabbi Alan Miller, assisted by Cantor Morris


Review/Film; Crucifixion And Gore In 'Penitent'
LEAD: ''The Penitent'' is melodramatic enough to culminate in a crucifixion and ludicrous enough so the victim's greatest ordeal on the cross seems to be a runny nose.
At best, this garbled film is a study in unmotivated behavior.


U.S. and Soviet Discuss Drug Enforcement
LEAD: American officials went to the Soviet Union last month to work out a plan to cooperate on drug enforcement, a Federal official said tonight.


U.S. Weighing Options, Including Military, to Oust Panama Chief
LEAD: A key Democratic Senator and a Reagan Administration official said today that they would not rule out military action to oust Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega now that negotiations had failed so far to get the Panamanian leader to step down.


Prelate Assails 'Useless' Aid to Dying
LEAD: Joseph Cardinal Bernardin, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Chicago, yesterday called for a national consensus opposing ''euthanasia or assisted suicide'' for individuals who are sick, infirm, comatose or in pain.


Plant Closing: A Key Cuomo Victory
LEAD: For Governor Cuomo, who had become perhaps the leading public opponent of the Shoreham nuclear power plant, the agreement to close the plant is one of the most important victories of his six years in office.


Pubco Corporation, Debtor-in-Possession reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pubco Corporation, Debtor-in-Possession (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
20,240,000
19,280,000
Net inc
114,000
953,000
Share earns
-
.03


Bennett Gemson, 67, Pediatrician
LEAD: Dr.
Bennett Gemson, a pediatrician who wrote and recorded songs intended to ease childrens' fears, died of a brain tumor yesterday at North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset, L.I.
He was 67 years old and lived in New Hyde Park, L.I.


U.S. Seeks to Bar Tuna Merger Deal
LEAD: The Justice Department said that it plans to file suit to block the H. J. Heinz Company's acquisition of Bumble Bee Seafoods Inc., a merger that would join two of the nation's three leading brands of tuna.
Heinz owns Star-Kist Foods Inc., which markets several brands of canned tuna, including Star-Kist, the nation's largest-selling brand.


S.E.C. Votes to Seek New Powers
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission approved a series of legislative proposals today that would give it the power to regulate stock-index futures and to close the nation's stock and options exchanges in the event of another market crisis.


Decorator Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Decorator Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,652,435
6,380,681
Net loss
110,205
b160,351
Share earns
-
.16
b-Net income and includes a gain of $60,000 from an accounting adjustment.


Strict Curb Urged on Drug Linked to Birth Defects
LEAD: In an extraordinary measure, the Federal Food and Drug Administration has ordered the manufacturer of the anti-acne drug Accutane, which has been linked to severe birth defects, to take strong new measures to prevent its use by pregnant women.


Perils of Polling In Soviet Union
LEAD: The Institute for Sociological Research, a branch of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, has been conducting polls since 1969.
But it is unaccustomed to asking sensitive questions.


Restaurants
LEAD:  Periyali Think of Greek food, as represented in the archipelago of New York, and the cliches abound: twirling gyros of gray lamb and foil-wrapped pita bread at sidewalk stalls; clattering coffee shops where taciturn waiters wear too-tight red vests and perpetual 5 o'clock shadows; stucco-and-plastic-flowered dining rooms specializing in skewered lamb, moussaka and mountains of iceberg lettuce with feta.


Tests Say Dioxin Level High Among Sprayers in Vietnam
LEAD: Blood tests on 147 Air Force veterans who were assigned to spray defoliants like Agent Orange on Vietnam show ''unusually heavy'' levels of exposure to dioxin, the Federal Centers for Disease Control said today.


Moscow Reported to Agree To a Jewish Training Center
LEAD: Soviet leaders have agreed to the creation of the first Jewish religious training institute in the Soviet Union in 50 years, a leading Israeli religious scholar said today.


Public Opinion: Moscow vs. U.S.
LEAD:
Russians
Americans
Who works harder?
View of American respondents
56%
24%
View of Moscow respondents
17%
56%
Who has better housing?
View of American respondents
3%
89
View of Moscow respondents
36%
26%
*3*Which country does better at making sure everyone has a job?


Suspect in Death Of Officer Says She Is Scapegoat
LEAD: The woman indicted in the fatal shooting of a police sergeant during a raid on her apartment last month argued yesterday that the police panicked when they burst into her bedroom and were making her a scapegoat to escape responsibility for the officer's death.


Review/Recital; Pianist's Debut With Scarlatti And Messiaen
LEAD: The first piano sonata of George Walker, a composer now on the faculty of Rutgers University, is a lively, well-conceived essay in what was, at the time of its composition 35 years ago, something like a mainstream idiom of American composition.
It fits comfortably with the music of Copland, Barber and Rorem.


Put a New Swing on the Wall Street Pendulum; Track Program Trading
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ida Erickson Hughes, Teacher, 84
LEAD: Ida Erickson Hughes, a retired elementary school teacher and a charter member of the Larchmont (N.Y.) Shore Club, died of liver cancer Wednesday at the Manor Care Nursing Home in Tucson, Ariz.
She was 84 years old and formerly lived in Larchmont.


Fuel Tank Collapse Traced to Tiny Flaw
LEAD: Ray Mesloh, who conducted an investigation for Ashland Oil, holding a piece of the tank that collapsed Jan. 2 at the Ashland storage depot near Pittsburgh.
Mr.
Mesloh said a dime-sized flaw in the tank contributed to the collapse that dumped more than 700,000 gallons of fuel oil into the Monongahela River.


Amerihealth Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerihealth Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,788,000
10,873,000
Net inc
b423,000
b502,000
Share earns
.06
.09
b-Includes tax credits of $169,000 and $201,000 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


California Energy Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Energy Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,300,000
52,000
Net loss
455,000
205,000


Oncogene Science Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oncogene Science Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,603,331
1,165,290
Net loss
111,189
b24,498
6mo rev
3,050,739
2,150,272
Net loss
235,680
b233,494
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Youth Symphony
LEAD: The New York Youth Symphony is to play the Shostakovich Fifth Symphony, Chopin's Piano Concerto No. 2 and the premiere of Scott Everly's ''Exultation Overture'' at Carnegie Hall on Sunday at 3 P.M.
The soloist in the Chopin will be Karen Beluso, the winner of the New York Youth Symphony Concerto Competition; and the concert is to be conducted by David Alan Miller.


Gooden Suffers His First Loss
LEAD: Rick Reuschel, with his receding hairline and advancing girth, has the look of a placid monk.
And he has the demeanor to match.
So when Howard Johnson's sixth-inning home run had cleared the wall in right field and finished rattling around beneath the scoreboard at Shea Stadium last night, Reuschel remained unflappable, his expression almost serene.


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed distribution of The New York Times in some areas.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


PENTAGON PARING OF 7,300 JOBS SEEN
LEAD: A study ordered by Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci concludes that the Pentagon can eliminate 7,300 jobs from its headquarters around the world.


McCoy Tyner
LEAD: McCoy Tyner, the ground-breaking jazz pianist, is appearing through Sunday at Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street (242-1785).
Sets are at 10, 11:30, and 1.
Admission is $12, minimum is $6.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Science Times on Tuesday about the role of myths in people's lives misstated the relationship of three characters in Greek myth.
Hippolytus venerated Artemis and scorned Aphrodite.


Otis Rush
LEAD: Otis Rush, blues singer and guitarist, is appearing at Tramps, 125 East 15th Street (777-5077) through Sunday.
Admission is $12, and sets are at 9:30 and 12.


Hadco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hadco Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
38,000,000
30,800,000
Net inc
1,800,000
427,000
Share earns
.14
.04
6mo sales
71,800,000
59,000,000
Net inc
2,700,000
606,000
Share earns
.22
.05


Dunkin' Donuts Corp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dunkin' Donuts Corp (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Revenue
27,803,000
25,834,000
Net inc
3,175,000
3,287,000
Share earns
.48
.45
Shares outst
6,570,000
7,462,000
6mo rev
53,245,000
50,544,000
Net inc
6,622,000
6,705,000
Share earns
1.00
.90
Shares outst
6,648,000
7,460,000


New Chief At Exchange
LEAD: The London International Financial Futures Exchange has appointed David Burton as chairman to succeed Brian Williamson.


Honda Motor Co Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Honda Motor Co Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,360,584,000
6,151,392,000
Net inc
263,960,000
161,768,000
Share earns
2.68
1.68
6mo rev
12,676,976,000
11,394,096,000
Net inc
453,408,000
298,936,000
Share earns
4.48
3.07


Paul Bigelow, Theater Consultant, 83
LEAD: Paul Bigelow, a theater consultant and an editor, died of cancer on May 18 at his home in Ocean City, N.J.
He was 83 years old.


Falconbridge Ltd. Ends Tax Dispute
LEAD: Falconbridge Ltd. said it had ended a tax dispute with the Dominican Republic that halted shipments of nickel from that country and helped increase the metal's price to record levels.
The Toronto-based company's unit there, Falconbridge Dominicana, C. por A., which produces 5 percent of the West's output, will resume production within a week after the pact with the Dominican Republic


Scott Paper Chooses Bloom and Weightman
LEAD: The Scott Paper Company has chosen two agencies from the three finalists that were in the running for its business: the Bloom Agency of New York and the Weightman Group of Philadelphia.


Marketing Systems of Amerca reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marketing Systems of Amerca
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,533,000
-
Net inc
21,000
b86,000
b-Net loss


Belfast Journal; Communion, 10 Pence and Terror Along the Wall
LEAD: The specter of the Shankill Butchers, an infamous sectarian murder gang that ravaged Roman Catholic ghettos a decade ago, is rising again on the pitiless streets of North Belfast, where fear and grief are running heavy from fresh homicide raids.


Louis Pomerantz, 68, Art Conservator, Dies
LEAD: Louis Pomerantz, a former conservator at the Art Institute of Chicago, died of cancer on May 19 at his home in Spring Grove, Ill.
He was 68 years old.


American Exploration Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Exploration Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,793,000
4,094,000
Net inc
226,000
b959,000
b-Net loss  Results for the latest quarter include a gain of $1,694,000 from an accounting change.


Company Eases Its Policy on Logging of Redwoods
LEAD: Under pressure from environmentalist groups, the Pacific Lumber Company said today that it would reverse its two-year-old policy of accelerated cutting of trees in virgin redwood forests.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Golf  Two Share L.P.G.A.
Lead: Patty Sheehan and Sherri Steinhauer each shot a five-under-par 67 yesterday to share the first-round lead in the $325,000 L.P.G.A.
Corning Classic.
Sheehan, who won the tournament in 1983, hit a 20-foot eagle putt on her second hole and picked up three birdies on the back nine at the 6,062-yard Corning (N.Y.) Country Club course.


Sales by Kaneb
LEAD: The Kaneb Energy Company said it would sell the oil and gas holdings of Kaneb Energy Partners, in which it is the largest investor, to Amax Oil and Gas Inc., of Houston, for $68.5 million.
Kaneb also said it would sell the partnership's 50 percent interest in a coal degasification project to Sonat Inc., of Birmingham, Ala., for $68.2 million.


Semtech Corp reports earnings for Qtr to May 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Semtech Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to May 1
1988
1987
Revenue
4,989,000
3,522,000
Net inc
b632,000
c156,000
Share earns
.21
.06
Shares outst
2,994,000
2,564,000
b-After a gain of $30,000 from an accounting change.


Boeing Gets 3d Big Order: 30 of Its 757's for United
LEAD: United Airlines Inc. ordered 30 of Boeing's 757 jetliners today and took options for 30 more, giving the company its third billion-dollar-plus order in two weeks.


Quest for a 100-Year-Old Fish
LEAD: TOM EARNHARDT, an avid and accomplished fresh and saltwater fly fisherman, is taking his gear to China in a few days.
One of his planned angling adventures is a float trip of nearly 100 miles down a wild stretch of the Zhang River in quest of various little-known trout and a salmonoid called the taimen, which can reach well over 100 pounds and live for more than a century.


Excerpts From Plan: 'The Need for Reform'
LEAD: Following are excerpts from proposals for changes in Soviet political practice, made Monday by the Central Committee of the Communist Party and distributed in translation today by the official Soviet press agency Tass:


Kids Know Tobacco and Alcohol Are Drugs Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Theater; Lesson in Self-Delusion By Professor Moliere
LEAD: Arnolphe, the protagonist of ''The School for Wives,'' has a genius for self-deception.
He thinks that by grooming his ward, Agnes, to be a simpleton, she will be eternally faithful to him in marriage.
As we know, that marriage will never take place.
Arnolphe's idea of bliss will backfire as soon as


Healthplex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthplex Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,632,613
1,461,682
Net inc
62,971
11,028
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
2,977,500
1,477,500


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the sentencing of two officers of a Princeton University eating club for serving liquor to minors gave an incomplete account of the Feb. 6 incident in which 45 students suffered alcohol-induced medical problems.
The 45 had been drinking at parties sponsored by several different eating clubs.


Pretoria Bombs Hurt 4 On Party Anniversary
LEAD: Two bombs exploded in crowded downtown Pretoria today, wounding four white women, two of them seriously, on the day the governing National Party marked its 40th anniversary in power.


No Payout Yet At BankAmerica
LEAD: The BankAmerica Corporation's chairman and chief executive, A. W. Clausen, said that the bank was not ready to restore its common stock dividend, despite improving earnings. ''We are not yet at a point where we can recommend reinstatement of dividend payments in the near term,'' Mr.
Clausen told shareholders at the company's annual meeting here.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Celtics Even Series
LEAD: Several times tonight at the Boston Garden, the message board flashed ''C'mon Celtics,'' as if it were begging for a victory.


Century Papers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Papers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
32,675,000
29,908,000
Net inc
212,000
247,000
Share earns
.19
.21
Yr sales
132,342,000
122,987,000
Net inc
1,823,000
1,042,000
Share earns
1.56
.89


CSM Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSM Systems Inc
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,944,832
1,286,353
Net inc
28,034
32,873
Share earns
.03
.04


Astradyne Computer Indusries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astradyne Computer Indusries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,539,815
1,456,188
Net loss
3,210
403,457
The company said it would have posted a profit in the latest quarter were it not for a non-recurring cost of about $25,000 for office relocation.


NATO to Ask Italy to Provide Base for 72 U.S. Fighter Jets
LEAD: NATO defense ministers voted today to ask Italy to provide a base for 72 United States F-16 fighters to be forced out of Spain.


Cardinal Distribution Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cardinal Distribution Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Sales
149,901,000
110,133,000
Net inc
b2,618,000
c1,814,000
Share earns
.53
.37
Yr sales
524,636,000
411,195,000
Net inc
b6,566,000
c5,442,000
Share earns
1.33
1.11


Soviet Warns Reagan About Seeing Dissidents
LEAD: In a reflection of the Kremlin's irritation with President Reagan's plans to dramatize human-rights issues during his visit to Moscow, a senior Soviet offical said today that a planned Presidential meeting with Soviet dissidents would be an unwelcome breach of superpower protocol.


Indiana Financial Investors Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Indiana Financial Investors Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Net inc
139,220
93,669
Share earns
.14
.10
9mo net inc
b2,344,568
b162,515
Share earns
2.41
.17
b-Includes gains from tax credits of $749,000 and $17,000 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


Economic Scene; A Canadian Case For Optimism
LEAD: IS the international economic system more stable than it looks?
Even in the age of Aquarius, are government leaders more rational than they seem?
Is there, in short, a case for optimism about our ability to absorb shocks and threats to the system, and, without actually solving any of the major problems we face, at least to survive them?


Key Senator Says Bork's Defeat Improved Process
LEAD: A key Senate Republican who helped defeat the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court last year said in a commencement speech in New York yesterday that the Bork battle had probably produced permanent and healthy changes in the process of confirming nominees to the Court.


Field Publications Agrees To Buy Funk &amp; Wagnalls
LEAD: Field Publications, a division of the Field Corporation, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire all the stock of the encyclopedia publisher Funk &amp; Wagnalls Inc.


Truck Fire Burns Out, Ending 2-Day Ordeal
LEAD: A propane truck being lifted onto a flatbed truck yesterday before being removed from the Seaford-Oyster Bay Expressway in Long Island.
The 2,800-gallon tanker, which caught fire when the truck overturned Tuesday morning, burned itself out at 6:30 A.M.
About 500 families had been evacuated from their homes over fears the truck would explode.


Petrol Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petrol Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
276,929
397,355
Net loss
b43,009
c8,899
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $7,000.
c-Net income


Clark's Search for Hits Never Ends
LEAD: The ball glanced sharply off the glove of the third baseman, then shot high before it dropped softly near the foul line in shallow left field.
Jack Clark, his night at bat reduced to a couple of harmless grounders and a line-drive out to second, seemed satisfied that it was a hit.


Connecticut Prices $75 Million Issue
LEAD: The State of Connecticut yesterday tentatively priced $75 million of special tax-obligation bonds for transportation projects.


Libya Declares End to Chad War
LEAD: Libya's leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, has declared an end to the 20-year-old war in Chad and said he would recognize the current Government of that country, Libyan television reported.


Soviet Moves to Curtail Communist Party's Power
LEAD: The Communist Party Central Committee has approved proposals made public today that would curtail the power of the party and limit the term of party and Government officials, in most cases to 10 years.


Strawbridge &amp; Clothier reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Strawbridge &amp; Clothier (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1988
1987
Sales
182,892,000
168,149,000
Net inc
2,099,000
3,023,000
Share earns
.27
.38


In Shoreham, Both Gloom and Joy
LEAD: The residents of this tiny hamlet on Long Island's North Shore had heard it all before: the urgent reports that the Long Island Lighting Company's nuclear plant here might close.


Genex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1988
1987
Revenue
815,000
270,000
Net loss
1,945,000
1,605,000
Year-ago first quarter results are restated.
The company said the latest quarter includes results for Xydex Corp. from its acquisition in mid-January.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Ameritrust Co., Cleveland, a subsidiary of Ameritrust Corp., appointed James W. Otto executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Vatican's Playwright
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beazer, Shearson Get Summonses
LEAD: Brian Beazer, the British industrialist, and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. faced a new barrier against their $1.7 billion hostile bid for the Koppers Company when a Federal judge in Los Angeles today summoned them to a contempt of court hearing on June 6.
Koppers filed papers Thursday in United States District Court in Los Angeles accusing the Beazer group and Shearson, a unit of the American Express


Golf; Irwin Leads on a Course to His Liking
LEAD: Hale Irwin, who won the 1983 and 1985 Memorial Tournaments at the Muirfield Village Golf Club and finished second in a playoff with Roger Maltbie at the first Memorial in 1976, said today he did not have a love affair with this 7,104-yard course.


Not Quite Radio City, But Backdrop Is Right
LEAD: All the anchors have arrived, and with them, so have the soft drinks, the staples, the copy machines, the clocks for every time zone, the camera operators, the producers, a few hairdressers and a couple of cases of Oreo cookies.


Reds' Milner Returns
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds outfielder Eddie Milner, who was suspended March 30 for admitted drug use, will be eligible to return as part of an agreement reached with the Players Association, the commissioner's office announced yesterday.


Economists Predict Growth
LEAD: Economists for the nation's top businesses said today that they had raised their forecasts for growth in 1988 but that they still expect rising interest rates to push the country into a recession next year.


School Showdown in Jersey City
LEAD: New Jersey's Commissioner of Education, Saul Cooperman, threatens to use a new state law to take over Jersey City's public schools.
The law, together with Mr.
Cooperman's willingness to use it, deserves the attention and support of all states worried about the decline of local schools.


Reuters Buys Part Of Australian A.P.
LEAD: Reuters Holdings P.L.C. said it had acquired a 48.8 percent stake in Australian Associated Press Ltd. for $:30.8 million, or about $57 million.
The agreement gives Reuters and Rupert Murdoch's Australian-based News Corporation equal stakes in Australian Associated Press, Reuters said.
The remaining shares, or 2.4 percent, are owned by two regional Australian newspapers.


Sports of The Times; A Matter Of Deliverance
LEAD: Zeke could hardly speak above a hoarse whisper, so fatigued, so drained, so sorely disappointed was he.


AIDE TO EX-BRONX LEADER TELLS OF WEDTECH PAYMENTS
LEAD: A witness testifying yesterday in the racketeering trial of Representative Mario Biaggi described an elaborate system of payments made by the Wedtech Corporation, by a former law partner of Mr.
Biaggi and by a Bronx Democratic club to a former Bronx Borough President, Stanley Simon.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 12.


Vote Pulls Israeli Labor Party to the Left
LEAD: The Israeli Labor Party held its first open election of candidates for Parliament on Thursday, and when the votes were finally counted early today, the new list showed that the party was taking a swing to the left.


THE TREATY PROVISIONS
LEAD:  MISSILES ELIMINATED  *
Land-based medium-range missiles (range: 621 to 3,418 miles) and launchers are to be eliminated over three years.  *
Land-based shorter-range missiles (range: 311 to 621 miles) and launchers are to be eliminated within 18 months.  *
Under the treaty, the Soviet Union will destroy 1,752 medium- and shorter-range missiles based in its territory and Eastern Europe.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Mavericks Halt Lakers' Momentum
LEAD: After enjoying two games against Dallas that looked like highlight films, the Los Angeles Lakers ran into a wall this evening.
The Mavericks, reeling after two straight lopsided losses in Los Angeles, waged a desperate fight this evening and defeated the Lakers, 106-94.


NATO Will Bear Cost Of Shifting U.S. F-16's
LEAD: The North Atlantic Treaty Organization nations have agreed to share almost all of the $500 million cost of transferring 72 American F-16 fighters from Spain.


Driver Has Right Stuff To Pilot Indy Pace Car
LEAD: Chuck Yeager was strapped in, gunning the throttle, his narrow eyes seeing things that are hidden from most people.


Theater; Laughter Amid the Ruins Of Kitsch and Junk Food
LEAD: ''Splitsville,'' Richard Dresser's nightmarish satire of American junk culture, takes its title from a theme park that is being hastily built across the street from the Florida residence of a young married couple named Roy and Wendy.


George Gardner Hill, Minister, 68
LEAD: The Rev.
George Gardner Hill, a retired Methodist minister who served in churches in Connecticut, New York and Florida, died of prostate cancer May 20 at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford.
He was 68 years old and lived in New Haven.


Centel Acquiring Cellular Phone Unit
LEAD: The Centel Corporation said yesterday that it had reached a definitive agreement to buy United Telespectrum Inc., the cellular telephone and paging division of United Telecommunications Inc., for $763 million.


Forecasts of Dry Weekend Lift Soybeans and Grain
LEAD: Prices of soybean futures posted strong gains on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday in expectation of a dry Memorial Day weekend.
Grain futures advanced slightly.


The Met Plays Tokyo, Where It Has Ardent Fans
LEAD: With the trappings of rock star idolatry and more than a hint of commercialism, the Metropolitan Opera - 52 singers, 72 chorus members, 103 musicians, 50 technicians and 110 tons of scenery, musical instruments and costumes -has come to Japan.


Your Money; Financial Advice For Graduates
LEAD: When Edward W. Barrett was dean of the Columbia Graduate School of Journalism in the 1950's and 60's, he liked to give a special talk just before graduation.
His advice to those about to embark on their careers: ''Start a go-to-hell fund.''


Market Holiday
LEAD: Stock and commodity markets will be closed on Monday in observance of Memorial Day.
Government offices, banks and many businesses will also be closed.


China's Appetite for U.S. TV Shows Is Increasing
LEAD: On Wednesday nights in Shanghai, more than 70 percent of the television audience watches the American police show ''Hunter.'' This summer ''Our House'' and ''Falcon Crest'' will be added to the lives of 80 million Chinese in Shanghai and Beijing as well as Fujian and Guangdong Provinces.


Monte Kay Dies at 63; Founder of Nightclubs
LEAD: Monte Kay, a recording company president and jazz entrepreneur who was a co-founder of Birdland, a nightclub in New York, died Wednesday of heart failure.
He was 63 years old.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Senate Passes Military Bill


Correction
LEAD: An article on Thursday about acid fumes at a hospital in the Bronx misidentified the hospital because of information supplied by The Associated Press.
It was the Bronx Children's Psychiatric Center.


Entertainment Publications Bid
LEAD: Entertainment Publications Inc. said that a management-led group had offered to buy the company for $21 cash a share in a deal that values the printer of entertainment discount coupon books at around $110 million.
In addition to the cash, shareholders would receive preferred stock in the surviving company worth $2 a share and carrying a dividend rate of 16 percent a year, the company said.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, MAY 28, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Labor Dispute Embroils Westin in South Africa
LEAD: The Westin Hotel Company, which decided last month to withdraw from South Africa, was embroiled today in a dispute with the black work force of this city's most prestigious hotel, the Carlton.


DRUG INQUIRY SET ON BIRTH DEFECTS
LEAD: The Commissioner of Food and Drugs said yesterday that his agency had begun to investigate cases in which the anti-acne drug Accutane led to severely deformed babies, in hope of determining whether there was a pattern of improper prescription or misuse.


Polls Show Thrill for Le Pen Is Gone
LEAD: Jean-Marie Le Pen was in a foul mood.
He railed at a local newspaper - ''It's Pravda!'' - for asserting that French gypsies were angered when he showed up at their annual festival, and he denounced local electoral boards for challenging the intention of his National Front to run under the acronym Lepen.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.39
7.49
6.63
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.44
6.42
5.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.83
6.83
6.13
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.04
9.02
8.62
30-YR.


Inquiries Into Crazy Eddie Find False Financial Data
LEAD: The new management of Crazy Eddie Inc. has disclosed that Federal criminal and civil investigations have found that all the company's financial statements before last November are inaccurate.


Marcos Leaves Hospital
LEAD: Ferdinand E. Marcos, the former Philippine President, was released from a hospital Thursday night, two days after being admitted for chest pains.
Mr.
Marcos was placed in an intensive care unit when he entered the hospital Tuesday night.
His personal physician, Dr.
Azucena Ignacio, said the chest pains were caused by arthritis or a rib inflammation.


Semiconductor Demand
LEAD: World semiconductor demand is forecast to rise 30.1 percent in 1988, but growth is expected to slow sharply in 1989, to 3.9 percent, the World Semiconductor Trade Statistics' Japan Council said this week.
The forecast, compiled by the council based on data from semiconductor makers from around the world, shows demand growing to $42.3 billion in 1988.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A map on Wednesday accompanying an article about a propane truck that overturned on Long Island incorrectly identified the area shown.
It was Nassau County.


Fixing Bridge, 4 Are Hurt In 30-Foot Fall
LEAD: One day after the Williamsburg Bridge reopened, four construction workers repairing its beams were injured yesterday, none seriously, when a wooden platform they were standing on collapsed, hurtling them to a work area 30 feet below.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Affiliated Medical Enterprises, Orange, Calf., an investor-owned health-care corporation, announced that it had acquired American Health Group International Inc., Kirkland, Wash., for $100 million.
The acquisition included the purchase of four acute-care hospitals and a home health company.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Kurt Sohn, a free agent who has spent seven seasons as a receiver and punt returner for the Jets, signed a one-year contract with the club yesterday.
The terms of the agreement were not announced.
Last season, Sohn, the Jets' player representative, caught 23 passes for two touchdowns. . . .
David Archer, the starting quarterback for the Atlanta Falcons two years ago, has signed with the Miami Dolphins.


Military Bill Voted as D'Amato Relents
LEAD: The Senate today approved a $299.5 billion military budget measure for next year after Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato dropped his insistence that it include an amendment allowing the death penalty for murders by drug dealers.


Death Penalty Needed to Combat Police Killings
LEAD: To the Editor:


NURSING HOMES FACE PRESSURES THAT IMPERIL CARE FOR ELDERLY
LEAD: Rising costs, an acute shortage of nurses and government limits on spending are combining to cause severe problems at nursing homes across the country, according to industry and government officials.


Chase Wins Securities Case
LEAD: A United States Court of Appeals today upheld the Federal Reserve Board's decision to allow a commercial bank affiliate to engage in underwriting and dealing in commercial paper to a limited extent.


Packing for a Trip Abroad
LEAD: Louis J. Patalano packing harps yesterday as the New York Philharmonic prepared to leave on a 10-day tour of the Soviet Union.
The orchestra will perform in Leningrad and Moscow and end its tour with a joint concert with the State Symphony at the Green Theater in Gorky Park in the capital. (NYT/Fred R.


VW Price Rise
LEAD: Volkswagen United States, a unit of Volkswagenwerk A.G., said it would raise the prices of most of its vehicles by an average of 1.6 percent, or $181 each, effective June 6.
The price of the 16-valve GTI is to increase the most, rising $250, to $13,245.


Dance; Jaffe and McKenzie in 'Don Quixote'
LEAD: Susan Jaffe and Kevin McKenzie took over the roles of Kitri and Basil in American Ballet Theater's production of ''Don Quixote'' on Thursday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
The previously reviewed Ms.
Jaffe replaced the originally announced Leslie Browne, who is recovering from an injury.
Mr.


Heart Recipient, 13, Dies
LEAD: Eric Rutkowski, a 13-year-old Milwaukee boy became the youngest recipient of a Jarvik-7 artificial heart Thursday, but he died hours after the surgery when his lungs filled with fluid.
Eric, a seventh-grade student at Sholes Middle School, died at St.
Luke's Medical Center.
The youngest previous recipient of the artificial heart was Christopher Larson, 15, of Esdaile, Wis.


New Owner for Spurs
LEAD: B. J. (Red) McCombs, the president of the San Antonio Spurs, became the team's majority owner yesterday after two months of negotiations with Angelo Drossos, the chairman.


Shultz Makes a Pledge To Support Soviet Jews
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz paid an emotional visit to the Jewish Community Center here tonight and pledged that the United States would never abandon the cause of Soviet Jews.


Wider Limits For Options
LEAD: The Chicago Board Options Exchange plans to act immediately on an exemption granted earlier this week by the Securities and Exchange Commission that allows institutions to hold larger positions in some options on the Standard &amp; Poor's 100- and 500-stock indexes.


About New York Not Quite Ready For the Ash Bin Of History
LEAD: The scene was the Sanchez cigar store, a hole-in-the-wall place at 265 West 30th Street where a dusty wooden Indian stands inside the window and two workers methodically roll 500 Cuban-style handmades a day.
Bill Terrio, a customer, gripped a handful of aromatic coronas and didn't give a hoot who minded.


Funeral Director Is Charged
LEAD: A funeral home director was charged today with stealing more than $3,900 from the apartment of a welfare recipient whom her funeral home had been hired by the state to bury.
The director, Concetta Cannici, 74 years old, of the DeLucia Memorial funeral home, was released on a written promise she appear in court to answer a charge of third-degree larceny, a police spokesman said.


Dirt Stars Try the Grass
LEAD: Nineteen 3-year-olds, 16 grass horses and the nation's leading milers will be in action this holiday weekend in four major stakes races in New York and New Jersey.


Theater; Revival of 'Last of Red Hot Lovers'
LEAD: Having been a long-running Broadway success and a Hollywood movie, ''Last of the Red Hot Lovers'' would not seem to be an ideal candidate for revival, except perhaps for an all-star summer theater package.
Undaunted, John Driver has staged the 1969 Neil Simon comedy at the American Jewish Theater.


GUIDEPOST: Short-Term Rates
LEAD: Since interest rates have started to rise again, many people have begun purchasing certificates of deposit with shorter maturities.
This strategy assumes that rates will rise still higher in the coming months.
With C.D.'s, customers have a choice of maturities, usually three months, six months or a year.


Excerpts From Speech: 'Contradictions' in East
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the speech today by President Reagan at Finlandia Hall, where the Final Act of the Helsinki accords on human rights was signed in 1975:


USG Claims Proxy Victory
LEAD: The USG Corporation said today that it had won a proxy fight waged by Desert Partners L.P. for six seats on the company's 15-member board of directors.


Officer Charged With Possession Of Illegal Drug
LEAD: An undercover detective who investigated corruption in the 77th Precinct in Brooklyn in 1986 was arrested Thursday night and charged with possessing and intending to sell drugs, the police said yesterday.


Lacrosse; Orangemen Are Aware The Title Isn't Won Yet
LEAD: Roy Simmons Jr., the lacrosse coach at Syracuse, has seen enough David and Goliath stories to feel a little nervous these days.


Dollar Up in Light Trading; Gold Prices Finish Lower
LEAD: The dollar rose against major foreign currencies in light pre-holiday trading yesterday amid concern about higher United States interest rates.


The Superpowers vs. South Africa
LEAD: Here's a proposal for President Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev at the Moscow summit talks: Announce a cooperative approach toward southern Africa.
Start a multinational effort to aid the states that border South Africa.
Squelch the idea that the region is another arena of East-West rivalry.
Expose the root problem - South Africa's destabilization of its neighbors.


Aviation Agency Urges More Boeing 737 Checks
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration is proposing further toughening of inspections for older Boeing 737 airliners like the one whose fuselage ripped open over Hawaii last month.


Guokas a Magic Man
LEAD: The Orlando Magic, the National Basketball Association expansion team, plans to hire Matt Guokas, the former Philadelphia 76ers coach, a newspaper reported yesterday.


Western Gain in Gold Seen
LEAD: Western gold output is likely to rise sharply this year with increases from almost every producer nation except South Africa, the London commodity broker E.D.&amp;F.
Man said today.


The Editorial Notebook; Europe After the Missile Pact
LEAD: The Euromissile treaty that President Reagan hopes to flourish in Moscow next week is a triumph of American diplomacy.
But almost all changes, even those for the better, cause heartburn in the ever-fretful military alliance between the United States and Europe.
As was evident last week at a meeting of defense officials at the Wiston House conference center in England, the new pact will leave European governments with some wrenching problems.


Once Again, New York Fails the Handicapped
LEAD: To the Editor:


Two Oberlin Ensembles
LEAD: The Contemporary Music Ensemble and Wind Ensemble of Oberlin Conservatory, directed by Larry Ra=chleff, came to Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday evening and offered polished, animated performances of four colorfully scored recent works.
Three of them were New York premieres, and two of those were by composers on the Oberlin faculty, Michael Daugherty and Edward


Guido Orlando, 80, Press Agent Who Devised Outlandish Stunts
LEAD: Guido Orlando, a flamboyant press agent, charlatan and bemedaled publicist for dozens of the wish-to-be-famous, died of a heart attack Sunday at the Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center in California.
He was 80 years old and lived in Los Angeles.


Official Who Restored Respect to Philadelphia Police Resigns
LEAD: Police Commissioner Kevin M. Tucker, who is credited with restoring respect and confidence in a Police Department that had been riddled with corruption and inefficiency, is resigning to take a banking position.


Raleigh-to-Paris Flights
LEAD: American Airlines said this week that it had started nonstop flights between Paris and the Raleigh-Durham Airport in North Carolina.
The flights are the first international service from Raleigh and the airport is being renamed the Raleigh-Durham International Airport, American said.


Bush, at Home by the Sea, Takes Combative Stance
LEAD: Just as Scarlett O'Hara once drew strength from the rich soil of Tara, so George Bush took heart today from the tingling salt air of Walker's Point.


Progress Seen in Nicaragua Talks
LEAD: Sandinista and contra leaders said today that their peace talks were making progress.


Royals Waive Balboni
LEAD: The Kansas City Royals announced that they have placed the first baseman Steve Balboni and the outfielder Thad Bosley on waivers for the purpose of giving them their unconditional release.


Deal Ends Uncertainty For Businesses on L.I.
LEAD: The decision to close the Shoreham nuclear-power plant and keep the Long Island Lighting Company an investor-owned utility resolves years of uncertainty that academic and business leaders say have hampered the planning and investment strategies of Long Island businesses. .


About Nuclear Weapons, Ignorance Isn't Bliss
LEAD: To the Editor:


CORRECTION
LEAD: The Jacksonville Journal article yesterday mislocated Jacksonville, Ill., in relation to Springfield, Ill.
It is west, not east, of Springfield.


Bess Myerson Is Accused Of Shoplifting
LEAD: Bess Myerson, the former Miss America and New York City Cultural Affairs Commissioner who faces trial on Federal fraud and conspiracy charges next fall, was arrested in a small Pennsylvania town yesterday on a charge of shoplifting $44.07 in merchandise.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 2-5  The Senate approved the arms treaty eliminating medium- and shorter-range missiles based on land, 93 to 5.
It was the first major American-Soviet arms control pact the Senate has approved since 1972.
Page 1  President Reagan stressed rights in a speech calling on Mikhail Gorbachev to improve the Soviet human rights record.


Icahn Offer Is Rejected By Texaco
LEAD: The board of Texaco Inc. yesterday turned down Carl C. Icahn's takeover proposal, and Mr.
Icahn used that rejection as fodder in his proxy campaign, as the two sides began a battle for the votes of the company's 211,000 shareholders.


SYRIANS FAN OUT IN BEIRUT SUBURBS TO ENFORCE TRUCE
LEAD: To the cheers of residents, several hundred Syrian troops moved into the southern suburbs of Beirut today to enforce an agreement to end 22 days of fighting between rival Shiite Moslem militias.


Federal Energy Official Resigns
LEAD: Another member of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has resigned, leaving the five-member board with two vacancies and only one sitting member with a regular appointment.
Commissioner Anthony


Another Meese Aide Resigns; Department Praised in Letter
LEAD: Charles J. Cooper, who heads the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel, announced today that he was submitting his resignation to enter private practice.


Suit Seeks the Return Of AIDS Victim's Silver
LEAD: In a lawsuit filed in New York State Supreme Court, the photographer Robert Mapplethorpe has charged the New-York Historical Society with ''fraudulent conduct'' in obtaining a five-year loan of a collection of American silver from the art collector Samuel Wagstaff Jr.
The museum rejects the charges.


Grand Prix Track Opens
LEAD: The two American women with the best chance of winning Olympic gold medals in track and field in Seoul, South Korea, will head the field Saturday in the Bud Light Bruce Jenner Classic, the first of 17 events on the Mobil Grand Prix circuit.


Death Penalty Imposed on Illinois Kidnapper
LEAD: A 31-year-old man was sentenced to death today for the kidnapping and murder of a businessman who was buried alive and suffocated before his family could pay a $1 million ransom.


Oilers' Elation Fresh as Ever
LEAD: Hockey's playoff season may have been marked by intrusions bordering on the supernatural, but when the time came for a Stanley Cup champion to emerge, the season reached its natural conclusion.
The Edmonton Oilers, the National Hockey League's most talented team, retained the title with a sweep of the overmatched Boston Bruins.


Heinz-Bumble Bee Merger Delayed
LEAD: The H. J. Heinz Company said it had agreed with Bumble Bee Seafoods Inc. to extend their merger agreement until next Friday while they consider the Justice Department's opposition to the deal.
The Government on Thursday announced plans to try to block the proposed merger of two of the nation's top three canned tuna brands.


Juan Orol, Film Director, 90
LEAD: Juan Orol, a leading director during the golden age of Mexican cinema, died Thursday of complications from diabetes.
He was 90 years old.


After-Tax Income Shows Steepest Drop in 12 Months
LEAD: Americans' disposable personal incomes edged up a tiny one-tenth of 1 percent in April after a large 1.1 percent rise in March.
But on an after-tax basis personal income fell nine-tenths of 1 percent in April, the steepest drop in a year, as tax payments took a big bite out of paychecks.


Price of Lilco Stock Reflects Relief on Wall Street
LEAD: The complex deal that sealed the fate of Shoreham has been generally well received on Wall Street, even though the specific language of the agreement to abandon the $5.3 billion nuclear plant, including its financial details, have yet to be released.


Let's Add to the Rank and File of Congress
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Europe Import Tax
LEAD: The European Community this week imposed special import duties of up to 33.4 percent on Japanese computer printers, saying they were being dumped at unfairly low prices on European markets.
The European Community commission said in a statement that a yearlong investigation had shown that 14 Japanese companies, among them some of the biggest names in the electronics industry, had sold printers in Europe at prices lower than those at home or below the cost of production.


Justice Dept. Official Tangles With Panel Over Civil Rights
LEAD: The Justice Department's civil rights chief has criticized Congress for exempting itself from civil rights laws and has denied that he lied to senators last year about a Republican challenge of voter registrations in Louisiana.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Soviet practice does not - or does not yet - measure up to Soviet commitment.'' - President Reagan, on human rights.  [ 1:4. ]


LILCO'S FIRST MOVE: PLEA TO CONSERVE
LEAD: Shoreham has been the centerpiece of electricity planning on Long Island for more than a decade, and so the decision to cancel the 809-megawatt plant leaves the Long Island Lighting Company with just one way to prevent brownouts in the next few years, persuading its customers to make do with less.


Company Looks for Ready Market In the Growing Korean Operations
LEAD: Besides offering a low price and extra features, Miraclean hopes that sales of its Korean-made dry-cleaning machines will be helped by the large number of Korean families who own and operate dry cleaners in this country.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the Securities and Exchange Commission's vote to seek wider powers incorrectly described its position on a legislative proposal involving margin levels on stock-index futures.
The agency unanimously voted to consider at a later date a revised proposal that would give the Federal Reserve Board the right to review margin levels on stock-index futures.


Ousted Panamanian Favors Latin Role in Noriega Talks
LEAD: The Panamanian President who was deposed by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega said today that the United States should allow Latin American democracies to take the lead in any new negotiations over the general's ouster.


Dry Cleaning: A Foreign Trade Target
LEAD: From the customer's side of the counter, the neighborhood dry cleaner is a prosaic affair, where lost tickets and missing buttons seem far removed from international trade and finance.


Philip H. Wilde Is Married To Ann Elizabeth Michel
LEAD: The marriage of Ann Elizabeth Michel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry L. Michel of New York, to Philip Herbert Wilde, the son of Elizabeth Bassage of Corning, N.Y., and the late Herbert E. Wilde, took place yesterday at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Judge Louise Gruner-Gans of Civil Court in


Non-Cancerous Lesions Are Removed From Koch's Face
LEAD: Five small non-cancerous skin lesions were removed from Mayor Koch's face yesterday morning.
The 63-year-old Mayor said the procedure was painless and he would not need any further treatment.


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed distribution of The New York Times in some areas.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


First Zero of '88 for Mets
LEAD: With two outs in the seventh inning, Darryl Strawberry stepped out of the dugout to pinch-hit.
Minutes later, Kevin McReynolds also emerged.
Gradually, normalcy was restored to the lineup for the Mets.
The laws of probability, though, would remain elusive.


VW Sues 2 In Dollar Plot
LEAD: Volkswagen of America Inc. is suing two former employees, who are married to each other, contending that they bilked VW out of millions of dollars as part of a foreign currency trading scheme that came to light in 1986, a VW spokesman said this week.


Senate's Condition to Treaty
LEAD: Following is the text of the condition attached by the Senate on Thursday to the resolution to approve the Treaty on Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces:


10,000 New Inmates to Be Tested To Gauge Spread of AIDS Virus
LEAD: The blood of 10,000 new inmates from around the United States will be tested this summer as part of an effort to measure the spread of the AIDS virus among prisoners.


Bridge; Playoffs to select national women's team will create scheduling conflicts for some
LEAD: Scheduling conflicts next week will make life difficult for eight women who are leading players from the New York metropolitan region, including six who have won world titles.


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: Memorial Day is Monday.
Following are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Parades: Manhattan parade starts at 11 A.M. at 72d Street and West End Avenue, goes east to Broadway, north to 86th Street, west to Riverside Drive and north to Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument.
Bronx parade at 11 A.M.


Future Cuisine, en Route
LEAD: It is the year 2000, you missed breakfast and now you're stuck in traffic.


Judge John Boyle Wed To Lois Marie Powers
LEAD: Lois Marie Powers and Judge John M. Boyle of State Superior Court in Union, N.J., were married yesterday at St.
Genevieve's Roman Catholic Church in Elizabeth, N.J., by the Rev.
John G. Netta.
The bride, the daughter of Julia D. Powers of Union and the late Thomas E. Powers, is an administrative secretary at the Schering-Plough pharmaceutical company in Kenilworth, N.J.


Rift Ended By Trump And Griffin
LEAD: Donald J. Trump and Merv Griffin said today that they had again come to terms on a plan to divide up the assets of Resorts International Inc., ending a two-week deadlock on secondary issues that had threatened to destroy their deal.


Brierley Continues Bid for Calmat
LEAD: Brierley Investments Ltd., New Zealand's biggest company, is continuing its campaign to persuade the Los Angeles-based cement maker Calmat Company to accept a $90 million bid.
Brierley's deputy chairman, Bruce Hancox, said that there had been considerable negotiations between the two groups.


French Open; Seeded Stopped Mainly By Rain
LEAD: The French Open tennis tournament rolled along predictably today with comfortable victories by the top-seeded players, including Martina Navratilova, Helena Sukova and Stefan Edberg.


Music; A Robert Shaw Conducts All-Brahms Program
LEAD: Robert Shaw is retiring in style as music director of the Atlanta Symphony, leading the orchestra in two Manhattan concerts and then embarking on a European tour, complete with the full Atlanta Symphony Orchestra Chorus.
The first of his New York programs, Wednesday night at Carnegie Hall, showed two related aspects of his musical personality to fine advantage.


IMPROVISING TROMBONIST
LEAD: The Village Vanguard can be a harsh place for young musicans.
The club has terrifyingly high creative standards, two or three sets a night, six nights a week, demanding deep improvisational resources and complete assurance.
Without them, a musician will die a slow, obvious death in front of the baleful pictures on the wall of the great musicians who've played there.


COPING/With Watch Repairs
LEAD: Fine wristwatches, traditional gifts for graduation and Father's Day, can appreciate in value but are generally expensive to maintain and repair.


Media General Wins Vote
LEAD: Media General Inc. said yesterday that it had won a proxy fight with the Hollywood producer Burt Sugarman, who had sought to elect himself and two associates to the company's nine-member board.


Fierstein Keeps On Joking, on Camera and Off
LEAD: The church hall at St.
Anthony's on Houston Street was decorated with blue and white graduation streamers.
People took plates full of gloopy-looking potato salad from the buffet, poured their own coffee from the urn and sat at long, uncomfortable tables that seemed to spell Bingo.
So lacking in glamour, among other things, the scene hardly looked like the 1 A.M.


New Ford Export
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would export the first shipment of Ford Probe sports cars to Japan on Tuesday.
The auto is built for Ford by its Japanese partner, the Mazda Motor Company, at Mazda's plant in Flat Rock, Mich.
The auto, which was introduced in the United States May 12, is sold out through October.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


N.C.A.A. Baseball; Stanford Rallies To Defeat Fordham
LEAD: Facing a sudden and shocking elimination at the hands of two New York teams, the defending champion Stanford Cardinal came from behind tonight to defeat Fordham, 7-5, and stay alive in the Northeast region of the national collegiate tournament.


Shootings Leave a Suburb in Trauma
LEAD: Until a week ago, fear was a foreign emotion in this wealthy suburb north of Chicago.
Children played freely, school doors were always open and violence and murder were what happened to someone else.


At Age 10, Boeing Jet Finds Niche
LEAD: Ten years after its introduction, the Boeing Company's 757 jetliner is finally the right airplane for the times, filling the airlines' growing need for a larger, quieter and more fuel-efficient aircraft.


Suspect Arrested in Beating Of a Teacher in the Bronx
LEAD: A Bronx teen-ager was charged with attempted murder last night in the beating of a high school teacher in a playground Thursday afternoon, the police said.


Albert King
LEAD: Albert King, the blues singer and guitarist, is appearing tonight and tomorrow at the Village Gate, Bleecker and Thompson Streets (475-5120).
Tickets are $12.50; there is a two-drink minimum, and shows start at 9:30 and 11:30.


Books of The Times; General Lee's Horse Discusses the Civil War
LEAD:  Traveller  By Richard Adams  270 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Early Morning Duty
LEAD: A soldier from the Third Infantry Division placing flags on the graves at Arlington National Cemetery yesterday.
Members of the unit have carried out the tradition before the last 40 Memorial Days, placing about 175,000 flags in under three hours, starting at 5 A.M. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


Stars Sign Czechs
LEAD: Dusan Pasek and Igor Liba, hockey stars in Czechoslovakia, have agreed to multiyear contracts with the Minnesota North Stars, said Lou Nanne, the general manager of the North Stars.


PREGNANT AND EXERCISING? KEEP IT UP, REPORT SAYS
LEAD: An advanced new study of vigorous exercise in pregnancy indicates that moderate physical activity does not endanger the fetuses of healthy women who have a normal pregnancy.


Legislator in Alabama Is Accused of Extortion
LEAD: The president of the Alabama chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People has been charged with taking $10,000 to use his influence as a state legislator in an effort to help a convicted murderer win early parole.


Baseball; BLUE JAYS WIN WITH 2 IN NINTH
LEAD: Juan Beniquez and Nelson Liriano hit run-scoring singles in the ninth inning tonight to rally the Toronto Blue Jays over the Chicago White Sox.


Ptolemaic Art
LEAD: A major exhibition of the Ptolemaic period of Egyptian art, from 305 B.C. to 30 B.C., will be shown at the Brooklyn Museum this fall, from Oct. 7 to Jan. 2.
The exhibition, entitled ''Cleopatra's Egypt: Age of the Ptolemies,'' will contain approximately 150 works from over 40 public and private collections in the United States and Europe.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Bird Making No Excuses for His Slump
LEAD: A cabdriver outside Boston Garden said he had heard reports that Larry Bird had undergone tests for mononucleosis.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Five Share Senior Lead: Bob Charles, the defending champion, shot a three-under-par 69 to move into a five-way tie for the lead after the first round of the Sunwest Bank Senior P.G.A.
Tour tournament in Albuquerque, N.M.
Fourteen players were within two shots of the lead before thunder, lightning and rain forced a 59-minute suspension.


Ad Executive Advises Dukakis on Black Issues
LEAD: Frank L. Mingo Jr. is accustomed to charting his own path in a fast-rising advertising career.
He is charting his own path in politics, too, by becoming a rare black professional who is doing volunteer work for Michael S. Dukakis rather than for the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 16.


Catholic Educators Debating Future of Parochial Schools
LEAD: With parochial school enrollment showing no sign of ending a 23-year decline, a growing number of Roman Catholic educators have begun to question the church's long-standing reliance on such schools as the bedrock of religious education.


Elizabeth Pitney Marries Dr. Christopher Seidler
LEAD: The marriage of Elizabeth Ellen Pitney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Pitney of Worcester, Mass., to Dr.
Christopher Whidden Seidler, a son of Mrs.
William D. Seidler of New York and the late Mr.
Seidler, took place yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Blessed Sacrament in Worcester.


Franklin Kauffmann, A Novelist, Dies at 66
LEAD: Franklin Lane Kauffmann, a novelist whose works include the 1964 best seller ''An Honorable Estate,'' died of emphysema in Glen Arm, Md.
He was 66 years old.


Correction; CORRECTION
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Tuesday about Cablevision Industries' acquisition of Wometco Cable TV misstated the role of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The firm served as investment bankers to Wometco.


William Dermott Moran Sr., 78, Ex-S.E.C. Regional Administrator
LEAD: William Dermott Moran Sr., former regional director of the Secrities and Exchange Commission, died of heart failure Thursday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A Company Briefs listing in some editions of Business Day yesterday about Cooper Industries incorrectly identified the company it is acquiring.


Holiday Preview
LEAD: Despite the sunny weather, Charlie and Kelly Ann Mayerhofer found the prospect of going into the water a bit too chilling as they got a headstart on the holiday weekend with an outing to Orchard Beach in the Bronx.
Today is expected to be sunny and mild, with temperatures in the low 80's. (NYT/John


Dermatologists to Warn Of Accutane Danger
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hanoi Move Raises U.S. Hope For Regional Gains at Summit
LEAD: American officials said today that Vietnam's pledge to withdraw 50,000 troops from Cambodia had raised their hopes for progress on a range of regional disputes at the Moscow summit talks.


McGraw-Hill to Sell Stake in Japan Venture
LEAD: McGraw-Hill Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its 49 percent stake in Nikkei/McGraw-Hill Inc., a joint-venture publishing company in Japan, for $283 million.


Doing Less, Claiming More on Public Housing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ray Kennedy, Magazine Writer, 54
LEAD: Ray Kennedy, a prominent writer for more than 20 years at Time and Sports Illustrated magazines, died of a heart attack Thursday at his Manhattan apartment.
He was 54 years old.


Playing for Good Cause
LEAD: Thomas Bird and Michael Bornholdt, prisoners at the Kansas State Penitentiary at Lansing, are aiming to set a record by playing tennis for 125 hours, breaking the mark of 120 hours 9 minutes listed in the Guinness Book of World Records.


Agency Says 2 Toys Recalled Because of Choking Hazard
LEAD: The Sweet Home Shoe House play set and the Ice Cream Doll are being recalled nationwide because small children might choke on their parts, the Consumer Product Safety Commission announced Friday.


Film; Speaking Up For Rights Of Vampires
LEAD: There could be advantages to having a best friend who's a vampire -all-night parties, great black clothes, contact with the afterlife.
There's somthing to be said for the trendy night scene.
Unfortunately, when a beautiful vampire seduces some young blood in ''My Best Friend Is a Vampire,'' he's a wholesome All-American high-school boy.


Dance; A Tap-Flamenco Union
LEAD: ''Espectaculo Flamenco Tap-Dance,'' presented by Casa de Espana on Thursday night at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, certainly was spectacular.
It would have been enough to present either Cristobal Reyes, a member of Cumbre Flamenco of Spain and a gypsy dancer of great fire and originality, or Harold Nicholas, who danced as one of the Nicholas Brothers with his brother, Fayard, in movie musicals of the 1940's.


COMMENCEMENT
LEAD:  City College


Warrant Issued for a Suspect In Slaying of Rap Musician
LEAD: A 17-year-old Bronx youth arrested Thursday for reportedly stealing subway tokens from turnstiles is a suspect in the August 1987 slaying of a rap disk jockey, authorities said yesterday.


Sy Oliver, 77, a Jazz Composer, Arranger and Band Leader, Dies
LEAD: Melvin James (Sy) Oliver, one of America's great jazz composers and arrangers and a man who had a significant impact on American popular music, died of cardiovascular complications Friday morning at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 77 years old and had been suffering from cancer for a year.


Rising Above Self
LEAD: Nixon in China, Reagan in Moscow.
Why is it that to improve relations with Communists we have to have conservative Red-baiters in the White House?


IN TIME FOR SUMMIT MEETING
LEAD: After four months of political infighting and debate, the Senate today gave President Reagan a victory he had been waiting for: an overwhelming vote of approval for the treaty eliminating medium- and shorter-range missiles based on land.


Mattingly Sidelined, but Yanks Roll On
LEAD: Don Mattingly is out for at least a week, perhaps longer, but tonight the Yankees survived nicely without him.
While the Yankee first baseman suffered a strained muscle in his right rib cage that may send him to the disabled list, the team kept its momentum alive with a 5-1 victory over the Seattle Mariners at the


TALKING BALLET AT DACHA ON HUDSON
LEAD: ''They are wonderful dancers,'' Mikhail Baryshnikov says, looking at Altynai Assylmuratova and Faruk Ruzimatov while three dogs cavort on the grass nearby, a fluffy cat basks in a wicker chair and the season's first mosquitoes buzz around.
Despite the Hudson River landscape, it is a very Russian afternoon.


Replacement-Cost Insurance: More Benefits, at a Higher Price
LEAD: As real-estate values rise, many homeowners are taking a new look at their insurance coverage and deciding whether to improve it.
People who bought houses or apartments for $100,000 or less 15 years ago suddenly find that their homes are now valued at three, four and five times the purchase price.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Are Unchanged
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices were essentially unchanged yesterday in a somnolent pre-holiday weekend session.
But bill rates, after posting moderate gains early in the day, closed slightly lower.


Military Survey Faulted Eastern
LEAD: The Air Force announced today that it had considered stripping Eastern Airlines of the right to carry military passengers but had relented because of the carrier's promise to address ''performance deficiences'' found by Air Force inspectors.


Hawaiian Airlines' Stake to Japanese
LEAD: A Japan Air Lines subsidiary has agreed to pay about $20 million to acquire a 20 percent stake in HAL Inc., the parent of Hawaiian Airlines, the largest air carrier in Hawaii.
Pan Pacific Hoteliers Inc. will purchase newly issued stock, which will represent up to 20 percent of HAL's shares outstanding, for $40 a share, HAL's chairman, John H.


Nancy Gleason Is Wed To Mark Francis Rice
LEAD: Nancy Elizabeth Gleason, the daughter of Mrs.
John G. Azary of Modesto, Calif., and Thomas G. Gleason of Manhasset, L.I., was married yesterday to Mark Francis Rice, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Rice of Manhasset and Naples, Fla.
The Rev.
John Denniston performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Manhasset.


Buenos Aires Journal; Rare Restraint in the Land of Steak
LEAD: In a world increasingly accustomed to dire warnings about what not to eat and smoke, Argentina gives the appearance of being one of the last outposts of unfettered indulgence in beef and tobacco.


PRESIDENT CHALLENGES GORBACHEV TO IMPROVE HUMAN RIGHTS RECORD
LEAD: President Reagan challenged Mikhail S. Gorbachev today to improve the Soviet human-rights record by reuniting divided families, increasing emigration, ending suppression of religion and releasing political prisoners.


Writers Guild Approves Pact for Independents
LEAD: Members of the striking Writers Guild of America have voted approval of a model contract with independent television and motion picture producers, an action the union hopes will put pressure on the major studios to yield concessions to the writers.


Damage Waivers May Go the Way of the Edsel
LEAD: In a growing movement, at least 15 states are considering or have enacted legislation to regulate or ban collision-damage waivers for rental cars.
The waivers, which release customers from most liability if the car is damaged, are an extra-cost option on all rental agreements, but they have been widely criticized as overpriced and unfair.


Beating the Price Of Electric Power
LEAD: AT last, Frank and Ellen Magnussen can read in bed without wondering where their next ampere is coming from.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bay Shore  $360,000  6 Lawrence Court  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 48-year-old colonial; family room, 2 fireplaces, c/a, 2-car garage; taxes $4,200.
Bluepoint  $198,000  72 Wilson Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 47-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.


Nonstop Music
LEAD: The Maison Francaise at New York University celebrates its 30th anniversary with nonstop music from 1 to 11 P.M. today.
Many musicians who have performed there over the years will play, with a new soloist or group every half-hour.
Admission is free, and the audience may enter or leave at the breaks in the program.


Leslie Rhett Has Wedding
LEAD: The marriage of Leslie Carrere Rhett, a daughter of Harry Moore Rhett Jr. of Huntsville, Ala., and the late Sharon Barbour Rhett, to Leonard Hearne Armistead 3d, a son of Mrs.
Jack C. Massey of Nashville and the late Mr.
Armistead Jr., took place yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Nativity in Huntsville.


Restoring Windowsills
LEAD: WOODEN windowsills receive a great deal of abuse from weather.
Unless they are carefully maintained, moisture can enter the wood and foster decay.
The only effective repair for badly rotted windowsills is replacement, a tricky job even for experienced carpenters.


BENEVOLENT POSSESSIONS
LEAD:  NEW AND COLLECTED POEMS  By Richard Wilbur.  393 pp.
San Diego:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $27.95.


Surrender
LEAD: To the Editor: Samuel G. Freedman's ''A Surrender, of Sorts, to Vacation'' (Travel, April 10) rang true to my experience.
I am a stockbroker and had the ''fortunate'' experience of flying to Egypt the Friday before last October's market crash.
Abetting my lack of news was the fact that I sailed on a Nile River cruise on Black Monday and did not arrive in Luxor until Thursday evening.


For a Novelist, a Fresh Twist: Playwriting
LEAD: The novelist D. Keith Mano began to write his first play -''Resistance,'' which opens Friday at the Judith Anderson Theater -on a dare from his wife, the actress Laurie Kennedy. ''I know nothing about writing plays,'' says the 46-year-old author of ''War Is Heaven!,'' ''Take Five'' and five other novels.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 29, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
(Warner, $4.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis
among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
1
MISERY, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)
Injured and drugged, an author is held captive by
a psychotic fan.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending May 14  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $259,000  302 West 12th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. prewar condo; 24-hr. doorman, windowed kitchen, fireplace, high-ceilings, hardwood floors; common charge $327, taxes $1,668 (Broker: Kenelba &amp; Robilotti)


Green's Race to Rehabiilitate New York City's Crumbling Educational Infrastructure
LEAD: In his efforts to change New York City's troubled schools, the new Chancellor, Richard R. Green, can still capitalize on political good will in the State Legislature.
But with its session expected to end early in July, he will have to hurry if he seeks solutions for many of the serious problems - from the bloated, unresponsive bureaucracy to filthy, crumbling buildings.


The National Mood
LEAD:  PETULIA  Starring Julie Christie (in photo), George C. Scott, Richard  Chamberlain, Arthur Hill, Joseph Cotten.
Directed by Richard Lester. 1968.
Warner Home Video.  05 minutes. $59.95.
Rated R.


An Evening of Chamber Works by Alfred Schnittke
LEAD: At the Metropolitan Museum of Art last Sunday evening, a whole program was devoted to the chamber music of Alfred Schnittke, widely hailed in recent years as the successor to Shostakovich among Soviet composers.
Four big works spanning two decades were played: a violin and piano piece called ''Quasi una


Carol Maytag Becomes Bride
LEAD: At St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York, Carol Maytag, the daughter of Mrs.
Kerryn King of New York and the late Robert E. Maytag, was married yesterday to Richard Reginald Madeley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Madeley of Salisbury, England.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony.


Remember the Families on Memorial Day
LEAD: WHILE all war memorials list the names of those who died, or who fought in a conflict, I have never heard of a structure for any war commemorating the families of the deceased.
Surely their suffering was almost as great as that of those who gave their lives or saw combat.
I know because I belonged to one of those forgotten families.


Monroe D. North, 77; Ran Fruit of the Loom
LEAD: Monroe D. North, former president of Fruit of the Loom Inc., died Tuesday at the Whitehall Boca Raton Nursing Home in Florida.
He was 77 years old and had lived in Atlantis, Fla.


POSTINGS: Greenbelt-Area Projects; S.I. Mall Generates a Housing Boom
LEAD: Before the Staten Island Mall opened in 1973, the land around it, known as New Springville, supported truck farms and even boasted two private airstrips.
But the advent of the mall's 178 stores sparked a housing construction boom in this mid-island location nestled inside the bend of the Greenbelt park area.


THE WORLD: Central American Syndrome; Whatever the U.S. Decides, Panama Faces More Disarray
LEAD: No matter what happens to President Reagan or to American drug-enforcement policy, Panama is now in a crisis that will not end soon and that carries far-reaching consequences for the United States and the region.


40,000 Left Soviet in 1987
LEAD: About 40,000 people emigrated from the Soviet Union last year and 20,000 received exit visas in the first four months of 1988, the official press agency Tass said today.
It quoted Rudolf Kuznetsov, head of the visa-issuing authority, as saying relatives of about 500,000 Jews, Germans and Armenians who left the Soviet Union after World War II accounted for most of those allowed to leave for family reasons.


In Silk Scarves, T Is for Tiffany
LEAD: TIFFANY'S has long had its jewelry, silver and china.
Now it has scarves.
That may not seem like a natural progression, but the scarves' designer, John Loring, who is also the store's design director, believes it is.


Bowa Let Go By Padres
LEAD: Larry Bowa was dismissed yesterday as manager of the San Diego Padres and replaced by Jack McKeon, the club's vice president of baseball operations.


Elizabeth J. Baer Planning to Wed
LEAD: Elizabeth Jane Baer's engagement to Mark Robert Wilson, a son of Anne Y. Wilson of Nantucket, Mass., and Peter M. Wilson of Green Valley, Ariz., has been made known by her parents, Justice and Mrs.
Harold Baer Jr. of New York and Fire Island Pines, L.I.


Farmers Turn to Hog Raising for a Fee
LEAD: Marvin and Judy Patterson and their three sons are farmers in southern Missouri's craggy Ozarks hills.
Galen Miller runs a farm in central Iowa's fertile rolling plains.
But all of them have much in common.


Two Toys Reported Recalled Because of Choking Hazard
LEAD: The Sweet Home Shoe House play set and the Ice Cream Doll are being recalled nationwide because small children might choke on their parts, the Consumer Product Safety Commission announced Friday.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Gawking With Gorky  Intellectuals have always had a love-hate relationship with big cities, but Maxim Gorky really laid it on thick when he visited New York in 1906.
He is quoted in ''America Through Russian Eyes: 1874-1926,'' edited and translated by Olga Peters Hasty and Susanne Fusso (Yale


MILITARY PLANS 3-STAGE ROCKET TO BE LAUNCHED FROM A B-52
LEAD: The Pentagon plans to build an experimental rocket that would be launched from an airplane to put military satellites into space, Government and industry experts say.


WHY DO N.B.A. CHAMPIONS NOT REPEAT?
LEAD: There are three reasons why N.B.A. champions do not repeat.
One is that when a team becomes the champion, a competitive fire is lit in other very well-equipped and prominent teams who feel that they have just as much ability as this champion.
Second, N.B.A. champions either lack the zeal or the same strong physical ability of the previous season.


Securities Prosecutions Meet Resistance by the Regulated
LEAD: When first blockbuster insider-trading cases were brought almost two years ago, they were hailed as a breakthrough in the effort to stop white-collar crime on Wall Street.
But now some securities lawyers maintain that the Government may be endangering its goals with an overzealous pursuit of such cases.


Basic Skills Are Part of Special Education
LEAD: Jane Goldblatt, in her May 1 letter to the Long Island editor, questions the negative response her letters have received from parents and professionals in the special-education community.
She asks if what she has written is so awful.


21 Hours of Shakespearean Drama
LEAD: WHILE Connecticut's theater in Stratford, the traditional spring and summer home for Shakespeare, suffers a silent season, Stamford is taking up the slack by offering 21 hours' worth of Shakespeare's historical plays.
The plays - seven in all, under the collective title ''The Wars of the Roses'' - are to be performed by the English Shakespeare Company during a single weekend, under the aegis of the Stamford Center for the Arts, at the Palace Theater.


Sorting Out the Graphics Alphabet
LEAD: BRACE yourself for an alphabet attack.
We're going on a tour of computer graphics standards, which are usually described in letter triplets such as M.P.A., C.G.A., E.G.A., V.G.A. and so on.


The Flourishing Spirit of a Long-Hidden Grave
LEAD: MY 11-year-old son, Michael, brought big news with his return from an afternoon of playing with his friends.
As he spooned a helping of mashed potatoes onto his plate, he announced they had found a grave down in the woods.


Afrikaner Identity
LEAD: To the Editor:


With Fish, Hazelnut Oil's Toasted Flavor
LEAD: ALTHOUGH hazelnut oil is usually used in salads, its rich toasted flavor also goes beautifully with fish.
The nutty taste is a perfect foil for red snapper, bass and trout or fish steaks such as halibut, swordfish or tilefish.
It is even better when fresh herbs such as tarragon, thyme or basil are added.


Interned Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


PADRES STOPPED BY CONE
LEAD: At some point either Friday night or very early yesterday morning and therefore either before he went to sleep or before he was dismissed, Larry Bowa made out his last lineup card.
Jack McKeon, seated at what was Bowa's desk as manager of the Padres, found it late yesterday afternoon.


Cold War Recedes
LEAD: President Reagan is on his way to his fourth spectacular summit conference with Mikhail Gorbachev.
It is a stunning completion of a full cycle since the last Presidential visit to the Kremlin, when Richard Nixon and Leonid Brezhnev launched detente in 1972.


Sutcliffe Out
LEAD: STILL bothered by back spasms that have apparently been complicated by a torn muscle in his rib cage, Rick Sutcliffe was placed on the 21-day disabled list by the Chicago Cubs yesterday.
The move was made retroative to May 21 and the Cubs replaced Sutcliffe with another right-hander, Calvin Schiraldi, who came off the 15-day disabled list.


Building Toward the Days of October
LEAD: ASSEMBLING a classic car in his garage should be easy for Mookie Wilson, master mechanic, once he made the basic decision he would probably be a Met all season.
He just had to uncrate the parts for the 1929 Mercedes and start putting them together.


Penske, Filling First Row, Has Designs on Title
LEAD: The race that annually redefines America's love for the automobile, the Indianapolis 500, will have its usual 33 cars on Sunday, its usual crowd of about 400,000 intense fans, and its usual contingent of Roger Penske-owned race cars.


Teachers At Seminar On AIDS
LEAD: ''THE AIDS epidemic,'' Joan Saltzer told a group of 110 teachers here recently, ''means that what we teach them may determine whether they live or die.''


George Michael: He'll Last
LEAD: If asked to nominate the one contemporary pop star most likely to be as successful 10 years from now as today, I'd cast my vote for George Michael.
The 24-year-old English singer, songwriter and producer is currently enjoying his third consecutive No. 1 single, ''One More Try,'' from a debut solo album, ''Faith,'' that has already sold more than 5 million copies.


Campaigning on the Issues Can Lose More Votes Than It Gains
LEAD: To the Editor:


Organist Hits Wrong Note
LEAD: About 25 people wearing Mickey Mouse ears, one in full costume, showed up at the Omaha Royals' baseball game Friday night to hear the organist who hit a sour note with an umpire the night before.


Correction
LEAD: A photograph on page 28 of the Arts and Leisure section on May 15 was misidentified.
It showed Lon Chaney, not Charles Laughton.


The Handsome Designs Of Old Tax Receipts
LEAD: UNCLE Sam is certainly against sin, but the Government does not refrain from taxing sin to raise revenue.
Such taxes and the stamp receipts open a broad range of collecting, which can be extended greatly to include tax stamps issued by states.


WHY DO N.B.A. CHAMPIONS NOT REPEAT?
LEAD: When anyone has reached the pinnacle of their profession, be it athlete or businessman, their thirst for that goal has been quenched.
Meanwhile, in the N.B.A, the players on the remaining teams most likely practice a bit more intensely.
If one thing can be beneficial in not winning, it is learning from your errors.


Headliners; Heavy Heart
LEAD: Andrzej Piotr Prajzner, a Polish seaman, jumped ship in Canada two months ago only to land in jail.
Mr.
Prajzner, who wound up behind bars in Everett, Wash., after crossing the border and seeking political asylum in the United States, was released on bail pending appeal last week.
The 27-year-old fishing boat cook said it was ''wonderful'' to be ''finally free.


A MANIA FOR LISTS
LEAD:  HOUSES OF IVORY  By Hart Wegner.  241 pp. New York:  Soho Press. $15.95.


The South Will Fly Again
LEAD: LUPE CAVAZOS HAS A PROBLEM with a P-82 Twin Mustang.
Cavazos is director of maintenance for the Confederate Air Force, an organization in Harlingen, Tex., whose stated purpose is to preserve the combat aircraft of World War II.
There are 140 planes in the C.A.F. fleet, known as the Ghost Squadron, nearly 70 different kinds, most of them American.


ABOUT BOOKS
LEAD: SIGNIFICANT literary or literary-related events will take place around the state in June.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL/3-21


No Reason to Believe That Astrology Is True; 'Heavenly Compulsion'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lalonde Will Face His First Challenge
LEAD: Don Lalonde of Canada will defend his World Boxing Council light-heavyweight title for the first time Sunday against Leslie Stewart of Trinidad.


OUR MUSCLE-BOUND NAVY
LEAD: I found interesting Mr.
Morris's suggestion that we limit the number of carriers the Navy has.
If there had been another carrier available, the F-111's probably would not have been used in Libya.
However, the Air Force spent a lot of money on the F-111 program (an aircraft that had a lot of teething problems when first deployed) and the Air


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Retail Space; Manhattan Rents Slide as Empty Storefronts Multiply
LEAD: AFTER almost a decade of heady growth, store rents in many Manhattan neighborhoods are beginning to decline as landlords sitting with large blocks of space grow nervous.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  A Phone Line For Information On Malaria


Propane Inspection: Spot Checks on Highway
LEAD: Trucks carrying propane are supposed to conform to strict Federal and state regulations, but enforcement is generally left to spot road checks and inspections by the gas companies themselves.


OUR MUSCLE-BOUND NAVY
LEAD: Charles Morris laments the aircraft carrier's vulnerability to small antiship missiles, such as the French-made Exocet and its larger Soviet counterparts.
He ignores the fact that the U.S.S.
Stark (pint-sized and lightly armored, compared to a carrier) absorbed two Exocets and lived to fight another day.


POSTINGS: Islip Conversion; Gloria Was Here! Now Come Gardeners
LEAD: Burkewood Gardens, a 223-unit garden apartment complex in Islip, L.I., was rundown even before Hurricane Gloria struck in 1985.
The 1960's-vintage complex was directly in the path of the storm, and many of the trees on its 12-acre grounds were uprooted.
The result ''was Long Island's version of the Sahara,'' said Arnie Lepelstat, who with Gary Brody and Kelvin


21 Hours of Shakespearean Drama
LEAD: WHILE the theater in Stratford, the state's traditional spring and summer home for Shakespeare, suffers a silent season, Stamford is taking up the slack by offering 21 hours' worth of the Shakespeare's historical plays.


The Tune Is 'Hands Across the Hudson' As 2 Rival Neighbors Try for Harmony
LEAD: More than a river divides New York from New Jersey.
The Empire and Garden States have often competed, quarreled and quibbled over a range of issues from Federal grants to garbage, the current topic in serious dispute.
Now, however, some House members say they want to extend their hands across the Hudson.


Syrian Troops Seize South Beirut In Move to End Battles by Shiites
LEAD: Several thousand Syrian troops took control of the rest of Beirut's southern suburbs today in the second phase of their deployment to end a street war between rival Moslem Shiite militias.


Lisa Panken Is Wed To Michael Skinner
LEAD: Lisa Panken, a daughter of Esther Panken of Valley Stream, L.I., and the late Dudley Panken, was married yesterday to Michael Skinner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Skinner of Plymouth, Mich., and Mobile, Ala.
The Rev.
Alan Thompson, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Raintrees restaurant in Brooklyn.


DRUGS IN COLLEGES: TO TEST OR NOT TO TEST; N.C.A.A. Plan Is Deterrent
LEAD: THE untimely deaths of Len Bias and Don Rogers two years ago focused our attention on the tragic role that substance abuse plays in the lives of performing athletes.
The tremendous pressures placed upon them to perform to expectations that are often unrealistic have created circumstances in which athletes frequently turn to drug use either to escape from these pressures or to enhance performance.


Prom on Boat (Yay!) Take a Bus (Boo!)
LEAD: NEARLY everyone in the senior class at Ridgefield High School thought it was a fine idea when the senior prom committee decided to hold this year's prom aboard a cruise ship on the Connecticut River.


Luring 56 Million Ailurophiles
LEAD: THE camera pans slowly through a softly lit living room.
From atop a grand piano, a gray-striped tabby cat mews in response to a car horn, then pads down the keyboard, setting off a soundtrack of Chopin.
He runs to a windowsill to greet the family - who arrive in a Volvo.


A Fresh Air Friend Brightens the Summer
LEAD: AS Grace Razukas tells it, her son, Peter, and his Fresh Air Fund friend, Darryl Connor, used to spend summer evenings catching lightning bugs in jars.
According to Peter, however, they caught them in their hands.


Driver to Defend New England Title
LEAD: It took a long time for David Loring to learn that he didn't really have to be a racing driver.
But with that lesson behind him, the 37-year-old New Englander stands on the brink of his greatest racing success.


Woman Robs 6-Year-Old Boy At a Supermarket on L.I.
LEAD: A 6-year-old boy, holding a fistful of nickels he had just gathered from a soda bottle return machine, was knocked to the ground yesterday morning by a woman who then stole his $3 in change and fled, the Nassau County police said.


October Wedding For Alison Pavia
LEAD: Alison Ruth Simone Pavia, the daughter of George M. Pavia of New York, Water Mill, L.I., and Cannes, France, and the late Ellen Salomon Pavia, plans to be married in October to Franz Werner Paasche, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Gottfried Paasche of Toronto.
Their engagement has been announced by the future bride's father and her stepmother, Dr.


OLDER MIGRANTS' YEARS OF TOIL IN SUN END IN COLD TWILIGHT
LEAD: In a $3-a-night flophouse, as younger men share a quart bottle of malt liquor, Alberto Gonzalez is asked what he has to show for a half-century of bone-aching labor on America's farms.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Turner Leads Corning: Sherri Turner, the winner of last week's Ladies Professional Golf Association Championship, shot a three-under-par 69 yesterday at Corning, N.Y., to take the third-round lead in the $325,000 Corning Classic.


Skycrapers Shouldn't Look Down on Humanity
LEAD: ''We feel that postmodern ism is over.
For projects which are going to be ready in five years, we are now considering new architectural appointments.'' So I was told by a major United States developer recently.
He said it as a matter of course, with the naturalness of a clothing manufacturer who tells you that he does not want to be stuck with a line of blue coats when red is in.


Towns Fill Dumps Too Fast For Plants
LEAD: CONNECTICUT is facing a garbage paradox.
Although the state has one of the most ambitious trash-to-energy programs in the nation, landfills are filling so fast, officials say, they will be topped off before incinerators for more than half the towns are ready.


What's Carl Icahn Up To?
LEAD: Last Wednesday, Carl C. Icahn made a $60-a-share bid for Texaco's outstanding stock, but the company's management is fighting him.
Mr.
Icahn, who holds 14.8 percent of Texaco's stock, will have to raise $12.4 billion to purchase the remaining shares.
Although he has put $100 million in escrow as a guarantee that he will raise the money, some still doubt that he can.


Recycling Isn't as Easy As It Sounds
LEAD: I have to respond to Brenda Corbin's and Jane Feder's responses  [ Letters to the Long Island Editor, April 17 ]  to Steven A. Meyerowitz's article ''Garbage In, Garbage Out''  [ Opinion Page, March 31 ] .
While all their suggestions sound easy and wonderful, the practicality of recycling is not always as simple as it seems.


Jersey Man Is Charged in Killing Of Woman Who Had Aided Him
LEAD: A 19-year-old man has been charged with killing a mother of four who had befriended and sheltered him and whose body was found today on the side of a road, authorities said.


ANTI-SUICIDE FIGHT PRAISED IN JERSEY
LEAD: A two-year effort to understand and prevent adolescent suicide has concluded that school-based programs in which mental health professionals and educators work side by side can significantly reduce the number of teen-age deaths.


ROUSSEAU, HOLLYWOOD AND THE UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
LEAD:  THE NEW CONFESSIONS  By William Boyd.  476 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.95.


Town Turnaround
LEAD: To the Editor:


How the Newcomer - a Girl! - Lost Her Status of 'Intruder'
LEAD: I HATED my sister. She was an intruder.


A 2-Year, 2-Wheeled Tour Of the Corporate Landscape
LEAD: Apple Computer executives keep popcorn machines in their headquarters lobbies and meet in rooms named after television soap operas.
Owens-Corning Fiberglas executives hand out Fiberglas business cards.


Yvette Hellman, a Lawyer, and Gary D. Ansel Wed
LEAD: Yvette Dawn Hellman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Hellman of New York, was married last evening to Gary David Ansel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Darrell Ansel of Minnetonka, Minn.
Rabbi David Posner performed the ceremony at the Plaza hotel in New York Mrs.
Ansel, who will become an associate in the New York law firm of Shereff Friedman Hoffman &amp; Goodman on June 13, was formerly an associate at Cravath Swaine &amp; Moore.


Grand Canyon
LEAD: To the Editor: As a veteran of three 18-day trips through the Grand Canyon on dories, I was pleased to see Franz Lidz's article (Travel, March 27).
I hope it keeps others who share his need for artificial means of stimulation out of the canyon.
Those of us who will never find this ''infinity of dry red rock'' boring will be left to enjoy the incomparable beauty of the voyage.


Realism Enters Student Publishing
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the recent Supreme Court decision affirming schools' rights to censor student newspapers might have an overall negative impact, one unintended positive feature is that student writers will now get a more realistic view of how the publishing world works.


Restoring Windowsills
LEAD: WOODEN windowsills receive a great deal of abuse from weather.
Unless they are carefully maintained, moisture can enter the wood and foster decay.
The only effective repair for badly rotted windowsills is replacement, a tricky job even for experienced carpenters.


Social Events; Parties That Help Others
LEAD:  Veterans' Salute  May 31 - The Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company will hold its annual awards dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria with a salute to Joseph Papp; Michael Fuchs, the chairman of Home Box Office; and Michel Roux, the president of Carillon Importers Ltd.
Cocktails at 6:30 followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment by the comedian Robert Klein will benefit the company's theatrical programs at veterans' hospitals and shelters for the homeless.


Soviet Hints at a Role in Massacre of Poles
LEAD: Radio Moscow hinted today that the Soviet Union was moving toward recognizing that its security police killed about 12,000 captured Polish officers and noncommissioned officers in a massacre that is the subject of one of the great mysteries of World War II.


ONE OFFICIAL AT JUSTICE IS DEFINITELY NOT READY TO STEP DOWN
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d has begun laying the groundwork for what aides say will be a vigorous offensive aimed at clearing his name and repairing any damage that his problems have caused his party, specifically the Presidential candidacy of Vice President Bush.
At the same time, officials have denied suggestions that the department's effectiveness has been impaired by Mr.


Package Tours
LEAD: To the Editor: My wife and I went on a ''Bard and Bolshoi Holiday,'' but there wasn't any Bard, there wasn't any Bolshoi, and there ought to be a law . . . .


WETENSCHAP IS WAT WETENSCHAPPERS DOEN
LEAD:  FLANAGAN'S VERSION  A Spectator's Guide to Science  on the Eve of the 21st Century.
By Dennis Flanagan.  272 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Role Models for Minority Businesses
LEAD: ARTHUR H. XAVIER, a former international power-plant manager, now owns Uniglobe Xavier Travel Corporation, a corporate travel agency in one of White Plains's newest office buildings, at 50 Main Street.
Mr.
Xavier's business was well capitalized. ''Working overseas for many years, I made a very good salary and I was able to save a considerable amount of it,'' Mr.


Interpretations of Stravinsky Pianola Rolls
LEAD: The pianola is a curious mechanical instrument that figures briefly in the history of musical reproduction and also in the story of Igor Stravinsky's career.
But before Rex Lawson's recital of Stravinsky pianola rolls Saturday evening at Alice Tully Hall can be described intelligibly, some explication is required.





Jean Santoro Weds
LEAD: Jean Marie Santoro, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank M. Santoro of Oakdale, L.I., was married yesterday to Anthony C. Marotta, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles C. Marotta of Baldwin, L.I.
The Rev.
William Daly performed the ceremony at St.
John Nepomucene Roman Catholic Church in Bohemia, L.I.
Mr.
Marotta is a special agent with the Federal Drug Enforcement Agency in Miami.


Paulo Moura, From Brazil
LEAD: Paulo Moura, the Brazilian clarinetist and saxophonist, had a tough time presenting himself at S.O.B's on Wednesday night.
His back-up band was as unrehearsed as anything that has been on the stage at S.O.B.'s -keys and rhythms seemed to clash every four bars.


What Pritzker Winners Tell Us About the Prize
LEAD: When Gordon Bunshaft and Oscar Neimeyer were named the joint recipients of the Pritzker Prize in Chicago last week, the event marked the end of the first decade of existence for the prize, at this moment the most celebrated architecture award there is.
The decision of the Pritzker family of Chicago and its Hyatt Foundation to offer $100,000 each year to a notable architect gave the prize immediate credibility upon its initiation in 1979, not to mention cachet.


Jennifer R. Just, a Producer, Plans to Marry F. C. Darling
LEAD: Jennifer Ramsey Just and F. Corey Darling plan to marry Sept. 10.
The parents of the bride-to-be, Ward Swift Just of Paris and Vineyard Haven, Mass., and Mrs.
Robert Turrell Bower of Washington and Quoque, L.I., have announced the engagement.
Mr.
Darling is the son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Frank C. Darling of Orchard Park, N


Along the Road of the Seven Bridges
LEAD: SUMMER visitors often find Florence's high temperatures and humidity enervating.
The city's beauty more than makes up for the discomfort but travelers who need a break from the sweltering streets and crowded museums might consider renting a car and heading for the hills that surround the ancient city.


HOW TO LOSE FRIENDS AND INFLUENCE
LEAD:  FOR THE RECORD  From Wall Street to Washington.
By Donald T. Regan.
Illustrated. 397 pp.
San Diego:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $21.95.


Informal Dining in Westport
LEAD: ONE of the newer eateries in Westport, 3 Bay Street (subtitled ''an American Grille''), is the kind of drop-in place that can be very appealing in a small community.
A friendly staff and a simple, attractive menu make for an informal alternative to fancier, special-occasion dining.


The Trench Warriors
LEAD: WHEN Irving Bank's management sought shareholder support for a friendly merger with Banca Commerciale Italiana, its proxy adviser, D. F. King &amp; Company, persuaded Irving to mail out blue ballots.
The color, King executives suggested, would help create a ''royal'' image.
Bank of New York, which was asking Irving shareholders to support its hostile bid for Irving, countered with gold ballots - a color often chosen to appeal to investors' greed.


Katherine Flemer To Wed Next Fall
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mrs.
John W. Flemer of Kingston, N.J., and Vieques, P.R., of the engagement of her daughter Katherine Winn Flemer to William Peter Barrack, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Barrack Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
The couple plan to marry in October.
Miss Flemer, a daughter also of the late Dr.


A Savage Painting Raises Troubling Questions
LEAD: One of the uglier and more farcical artistic developments in recent memory has been unfolding in Chicago, where political intervention in a private competition has underlined and perhaps deepened racial divisions within the city and raised issues of First Amendment rights.
It has also called attention to the appropriateness of iconoclasm when it is not directed against a person or an institution firmly in power.


When a Strategy Falls Flat, Switch to Another
LEAD: IN the sophisticated, complex chess of today, not even the most aggressive opening moves can guarantee that you will achieve an attack.
One must, therefore, be ready to switch to alternative strategies.


A Word on the Thesis Of an Exhibition
LEAD: If a critic makes argument against the thesis of an exhibition, that is undeniably his or her right.
If, however, this argument is based on a misunderstanding of that thesis, I trust the curator has the right, indeed the obligation, to set the record straight.
Therefore I, as curator, should like to do so for ''Personal Places: American Landscapes, 1905-1930'' recently held at the Sarah Lawrence College Art


Cedeno Arrested
LEAD: HE'S out of the major leagues now, but apparently Cesar Cedeno is not out of trouble.
The former outfielder with the Houston Astros was arrested Friday in Webster, Tex., on charges of assault, causing bodily injury and resisting arrest after the police said he attacked a woman they identified as Pam


WHAT'S BECOME OF CHILE
LEAD:  CURFEW  By Jose Donoso.
Translated by Alfred MacAdam.  310 pp.
New York:  Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $18.95.


A Recording a Recording a Recording
LEAD: More and more, the voice at the other end of the telephone line is mechanical.
Automatic devices dial numbers, play recorded messages, receive orders and take surveys.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  LAKEWOOD REMEMBERS  An Army helicopter will drop a wreath on Lake Carasaljo in Lakewood tomorrow as the town honors four servicemen killed in Vietnam, as well as all American war dead.


Tulsa on Course
LEAD: THE golf coach at Tulsa, Dale McNamara, earned an unusual distinction yesterday in Las Cruces, N.M.
Her team and her daughter won National Collegiate Athletic Association women's golf titles.
Melissa McNamara shot a four-under-par 70 and captured the individual title with a 72-hole total of 287 as she led Tulsa to its second National Collegiate Athletic Association women's golf crown.


Sports Officials Want To Throw The Abuse Outta Here!
LEAD: THEY work in a highly charged environment, stadiums and arenas that are cauldrons of emotion, capable of boiling over in an angry outburst whenever the whistle blows or a voice bellows, ''Out!'' And when the judgment and integrity of the officials - the men in blue or gray or black and white zebra-striped shirts - is questioned, it is often done in a manner so vile that it would be considered uncivilized behavior anywhere but on a playing field.


At the Summit: Realism, Not Rabbits
LEAD: It's tempting to imagine that President Reagan's meeting with Mikhail Gorbachev this week will be a watershed, the moment when the ultimate American hawk and the ultimate Russian reformer end the cold war.
But if that tense and dangerous competition is to end, it will require many summit conferences, and basic changes inside both countries.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Kennebunkport, Me.; Historic Inn To Be Rebuilt
LEAD: THE owners of the Shawmut Inn will soon begin a $20 million project to renovate and expand on to the historic inn beside the Atlantic Ocean.


Two Journeys
LEAD: President Reagan's arrival in Moscow today marks the end of a long ideological journey.
He has gone from a sense of anxiety over the Russians to a new confidence in possibilities for negotiation.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, too, has made a remarkable passage, from anti-American Communist boss to pragmatic leader willing to make compromises that will help him change his country's course.


No Reason to Believe That Astrology Is True
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Odd Couple
LEAD: The meeting in Moscow is being put down in some quarters as pure symbolism, without hard news.
But what symbolism!


What a Difference A Digit Makes
LEAD: IT happens at least once a week, sometimes once a day or more.
The phone rings.
I answer it.
The person on the other end asks me to send a taxi to such and such an address.


Intended Wit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Is This the Second Russian Revolution?
LEAD: John Kenneth Galbraith has joined with Stanislav Menshikov, a Soviet journalist and economist, to write a book, ''Capitalism, Communism and Coexistence.'' The book, which was published last week, examines the strengths and weaknesses of the Soviet and American economies.
Mr.
Galbraith, Paul M. Warburg professor of economics emeritus at Harvard University, and Mr.


No Reason to Believe That Astrology Is True; Stellar Myth
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The Government has accepted every single point on the contras' list.
I consider this to be a very historic moment.''  - Paul Reichler, of the  Sandinista negotiating team.  [ 3:4. ]


Jackson Says Rivals Are Following His Lead
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson faces losing the Democratic Presidential nomination, but he insists he's ''winning every day.''


An Exhibition Of Glenn Gould Memorabilia Sheds A Little Light on A Musical Enigma
LEAD: In the 19th century there was Emma Albani from Quebec, whose 1882 performance in ''Lohengrin'' in Berlin delighted Kaiser Wilhelm I. Since World War II, there have been Lois Marshall, Maureen Forrester and Jon Vickers, singers of international stature.
But there has never been a Canadian who seized the attention of the world more than Glenn Gould, the musical iconoclast whose appearances as an international concert pianist between 1955 and 1964 enthralled audiences and critics in New York, London and Moscow as much as in his native


WHY DO N.B.A. CHAMPIONS NOT REPEAT?
LEAD: Because it is in the best interest of CBS and the N.B.A. to have the Celtics and Lakers alternate.
Whose turn is it this year, anyway?
CHRISTOPHER T. MANN  New York


The Struggle in Punjab: Some Respite, No Resolution
LEAD: The successful operation by Indian security forces this month against Sikh militants inside the Golden Temple, the shrine in the Punjabi city of Amritsar that is the holiest of the Sikh faith, has presented Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi with new problems and new opportunities in tackling extremism.
It has given Mr.


'Brawl' in Burma Takes an Anti-Government Turn
LEAD: An argument over a gambling debt in a tea house here last March escalated into a week of rioting by Burmese students and other Rangoon residents, with estimates of fatalities ranging from two to 200.


Bronx-Ardsley Bond Fulfills Two Dreams
LEAD: WHEN 12-year-old Angelo Romero leaves Public School 75 in the Morrisania section of the Bronx every day, he says he sometimes runs to his apartment because he is afraid of the drug dealers on the busy streets of his neighborhood.
Although he likes New York City, he says he would rather live where there are fewer police cars and the air is cleaner.


Financial Planning and the Handicapped
LEAD: A COUPLE in the Midwest recently faced a difficult time when a playground accident left their 4-year-old child severely disabled.
Compounding the trauma of the accident was the need to review the family's finances to make sure that the child's expenses would be covered.


IN HUNGARY, FLEXIBILITY AS DOCTRINE
LEAD: The Hungarians have often been quick to take advantage of changes blowing in from the East.
They proved that again last weekend when a new generation of Hungarian Communist leaders succeeded in seizing power.


Surrogate Births for Pay Opposed by State Panel
LEAD: Surrogate motherhood contracts should be declared void and unenforceable in New York and payments to surrogates and brokers should be made illegal, a state panel has recommended.


M. F. MacDonald To Be Wed in Fall To Allison J. Hart
LEAD: Allison Jeanne Hart and Michael Francis MacDonald, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John MacDonald of Westport, Conn., and Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., plan to marry in November, the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth N. Hart of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and Wakefield, R.I., have announced.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a problem with moss growing on the bricks on my patio.
I've tried using weed killer.
It works, but only temporarily, and it poses a threat to the surrounding shrubs.
Can you suggest anything else?


Lancaster County Comes to Pelham
LEAD: NORMALLY, it is New York that goes to Lancaster County - to savor the food, buy the crafts, marvel at the anachronistic Amish and so on.
In an unusual reversal, this hive of Pennsylvania tourism has come to Westchester by way of ''The Pennsylvania Germans: Decorative Arts,'' at the Pelham Art Center in Pelham.


REAL FEARS AND FEAR-MONGERING
LEAD:  MEETING THE COMMUNIST THREAT  Truman to Reagan.
By Thomas G. Paterson.  317 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press.


Ann Argabright Weds Thomas Adam Seclow
LEAD: Ann Elizabeth Argabright, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Argabright of Bryn Mawr, Pa., and Thomas Adam Seclow, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Seclow of Westport, Conn., were married last evening at the bride's home in Orinda, Calif.
Rabbi Charles Familant performed the ceremony.


Flights Over Grand Canyon Are Being Further Restricted
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration has announced tighter restrictions on sightseeing flights over the Grand Canyon to reduce noise levels and improve safety.


Giving Support To Mothers at Home
LEAD: The article entitled ''Giving the Proper Credit for Child Care'' (Opinion page, April 24) calls attention, properly, to the lack of credit given to child care givers.
Far more serious, I feel, is the lack of credit and support given to today's full-time mothers.


LeFrak Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


REAGAN'S EVOLUTION: A CHANGE OF HEART AS WELL AS TATICS?
LEAD: President Reagan arrives in Moscow today at the end of a long ideological journey.
In the last seven years, he and his Administration have moved from virulent sloganeering to sober diplomacy, crossing a rough landscape now strewn with the ruins of myths about the Soviet Union.
They have gone from a sense of anxiety about America's capacity to confront the


SOVIET ARMENIANS LET IN IMPROPERLY, U.S. OFFICIALS SAY
LEAD: State Department lawyers have concluded that the United States is improperly accepting thousands of Armenians as refugees without any finding that they have been persecuted in the Soviet Union.


Review/Music; A Zwilich Homage To Handel
LEAD: Ellen Taaffe Zwilich's ''Concerto Grosso 1985,'' which opened the New York Philharmonic's final subscription concert of the 1987-88 season on Friday afternoon in Avery Fisher Hall, was written to honor the 300th anniversary of Handel's birth, but its hat tips also to Stravinsky and the Neo-Classical tradition he fostered.


A Good Day Gathering Mushrooms
LEAD: ''THERE are old mushroom hunters, and bold mushroom hunters but there are no old and bold mushroom hunters,'' goes the old saying, by way of explaining that mushroom gathering can be a safe and lifelong sport when practiced with proper caution.
That caution is to learn from an expert and don't eat anything unless you are absolutely sure that it is not poisonous.


More Resisting Transfers to New York
LEAD: AS the gap between housing costs in different cities widens, corporate relocation officials are meeting stiffer resistance to transfers from employees who fear the move will leave them paying more money for less house.


When It's One Absolute Right Against Another
LEAD: WHEN Ginger and David R. Twitchell's 2-year-old son, Robyn, had a fever two years ago, they called in Christian Science spiritual healers, who visited the boy and prayed for his recovery.
But five days later, after going into convulsions, vomiting and losing consciousness, Robyn died of a bowel obstruction.


Two Goons, One Gangster
LEAD:  ORPHANS  Starring Albert Finney (in photo, left), Matthew Modine (in photo),  Kevin Anderson, John Kellogg, Anthony Heald.
Directed by Alan J.  Pakula. 1987.
Lorimar Home Video.  115 minutes. $79.95.


Susan Seidelman's Recipe for 'Cookie'
LEAD: As Susan Seidelman calmly sips her cafe au lait in a SoHo patisserie, she resembles a college student who has just cut a class rather than a director who has finished filming her latest caper.


ON THE WEST BANK, A PEACE NON-RALLY
LEAD: Peace Now held its first demonstration in three years on the West Bank today, and even its leaders acknowledged that the event showed how far the peace movement has drifted from Israel's mainstream.


Line Counts in Focus
LEAD: Along the border between science and commerce strange things happen.
Crossing that shifting line, valid scientific concepts sometimes lose their character and change into promotional catchwords.
A recent case of this kind occurred in video and involves what is known as the horizontal line count.


Review/Dance; Sydney Company's Version Of Mann's 'Death in Venice'
LEAD: Graeme Murphy's ''After Venice'' for the Sydney Dance Company raises the question of how literature should be used as a source for ballets.
In theory, source materials should be just that: inspirations for flights of choreographic fancy, rather than models to be slavishly followed.


Elizabeth L. McGovern To Marry in September
LEAD: Elizabeth Laird McGovern and Philip MacLaren Johnstone plan to marry in September, the parents of the future bride, James W. McGovern of New York and Mrs.
William B. Cutler of Stonington, Conn., have announced.


Upholding a Glen Cove Tradition
LEAD: FOR more than 26 years, Restaurant Zanghi in Glen Cove has pleased Long Island palates.
Under Nino Zanghi, now 80 years old, the restaurant came into prominence as a superior northern Italian establishment.
Mr.
Zanghi, officially retired, still grows choice vegetables for the restaurant and has been known to don his kitchen whites in emergencies.


HIGH ON THE ONE ABOVE
LEAD:  MASTER OF THE RETURN  By Tova Reich.  240 pp.
San Diego:  A Helen &amp; Kurt Wolff Book/  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $19.95.


Correction
LEAD: An article on May 1 about Brighton, England, misstated the route of the miniature Volk's Electric Railway.
It runs between the Palace Pier and the Marina at Black Rock.


Textile Exhibition Flooded
LEAD: A textile exhibition entitled ''The Miracle of Ancient Peru,'' at the Edward H. Merrin Gallery (724 Fifth Avenue, at 57th Street), has been removed because of flooding on the gallery walls.
The show, organized by Jack Lenor Larsen, a textile designer and president of the American Craft Council, is to be re-installed in early fall, Mr.


India Bans the Political and Military Use of Shrines
LEAD: The Indian Government has banned the use of shrines for political and armed purposes and stiffened penalties for the possession and use of illegal weapons, as part of its strategy to fight extremism in the Punjab region.


A. E. I. Thomson, Antiques Trader, Wed to Lisa Reilly
LEAD: The marriage of Lisa Ann Reilly, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Brendan Reilly of Windsor, Conn., and Dennis, Mass., to Allan Eric Iain Thomson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric Thomson of Hornchurch, Essex, England, took place yesterday at St.
Gabriel's Roman Catholic Church in Windsor.
The Rev.
William E.


Delicate Fleece From Alaska's Musk Ox
LEAD: IT has been called the golden fleece of the Arctic, as soft as cashmere, as warm as alpaca.
The material, Qiviut, spun from the winter underwool of domesticated musk oxen, is produced only in minuscule amounts and exclusively in Alaska.
There, it is fashioned into light, lacy garments by a cooperative of native


Freud's Father
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: The Long Island Guide last Sunday gave an incorrect telephone number for the Sea Cliff Chamber Players' Long Island Mozart Festival.
Its number is 671-6263.


India's Tentative Turnaround
LEAD: THREE years ago, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi introduced a sweeping program of economic changes more in tune with Ronald Reagan's supply side gospel than the decades of socialist orthodoxy he had inherited in India.
He slashed regulations, import barriers and taxes and demanded that Indian industry modernize and learn to compete, to hasten the nation's march into the 21st century.


Michele Rudolph Weds Marc Davy Vandenhoeck
LEAD: At the Chapel in the Woods in Mars, Pa., Joan Michele Rudolph, a daughter of Mrs.
Rome Rudolph of Gibsonia, Pa., and the late Mr.
Rudolph, was married yesterday to Marc Davy Vandenhoeck, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jean-Paul Vandenhoeck of New York and Guilford, Conn.
The Rev.
AlisonLynne Barfoot performed the


San Francisco
LEAD: To the Editor: I feel that travelers should be warned about the SamTrans 7B bus from San Francisco International Airport, which was mentioned by Betsy Wade in Practical Traveler on March 13.


PERESTROIKA BEFORE AND AFTER: TWO VIEWS  In light of Mikhail Gorbachev's policy of glasnost, The Book Review asked a Soviet scholar, as well as an American specialist, to discuss Ed Hewett's book on the Soviet economic system.
LEAD:  REFORMING THE SOVIET ECONOMY  Equality Versus Efficiency.
By Ed A. Hewett.
Tables. 404 pp.
Washington:  The Brookings Institution.
Cloth, $36.95.
Paper, $16.95.


Good as Gold
LEAD: For the second year in a row, the Hastings High School Madrigal Choir has brought home the gold.


Reflections on Martha Graham's Revolution
LEAD: ''She allowed only verbs and adverbs in her notebook.'' So said Dorothy Bird of Martha


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  CLASSIC CAR SHOW


Lois Moore Cross Becomes the Bride Of Gregory T. Willis in Connecticut
LEAD: St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Lois Moore Cross, a daughter of John Walter Cross 3d of Greenwich and the late Gracia H. Cross, to Gregory Tilford Willis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Willis Jr. of Greenwich.
The Rev.
Sidney Wood


Immigration
LEAD: To the Editor: I would like to suggest that Newark Airport should seriously consider improving and expanding the immigration procedure for incoming overseas flights.
If a full jumbo jet arrives from Europe, many non-U.S. citizens have to wait up to an hour or more to clear immigration.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a problem with moss growing on the bricks on my patio.
I've tried using weed killer.
It works, but only temporarily, and it poses a threat to the surrounding shrubs.
Can you suggest anything else?


The Night My Mother Became a Soldier
LEAD: IN 1944, the small industrial town where I lived, Mansfield, Ohio, was totally unified toward the war effort.
Whether the idea came from the government or someone local, I do not recall, but, in any event, Mansfield rallied those of us left behind and donated enough funds to purchase a landing craft.


Attila Zobor Married To Kerry Lynne Green
LEAD: Grace Reformed Church in Washington was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Kerry Lynne Green, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Garland Young Green of Perrysburg, Ohio, to Attila Miklos Zobor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Miklos Zobor of Budapest.


Ana Aslan, Rumanian Specialist On the Aging Process, Dies in 90's
LEAD: Ana Aslan, a controversial gerontologist whose clinic in Rumania attracted thousands of people from around the world in search of renewed youth, died May 20 in Bucharest, according to reports from that city and Paris.
She was in her early 90's.


A Fresh Air Fund Retreat for Urban Families
LEAD: On the wooden steps of a cabin porch, Denise J. Ford and her four children sat and pondered some items they had collected in a scavenger hunt: a piece of white birch bark, a cup of pond water, a pine cone and a yellow dandelion.


Yugoslav Takes Medley
LEAD: Anna Petricevic of Yugoslavia, the 15-year-old daughter of an Olympic champion, won the women's 200-meter individual medley today in 2 minutes 16.90 seconds as the three-day Sundown Swim to Seoul began.


Setting the Standards For Literary Masterpieces
LEAD: GREAT books are lately a matter of politics.


MADE FOR EACH OTHER
LEAD:  HERB 'N' LORNA  A Love Story.
By Eric Kraft.
Illustrated. 310 pp.
New York:  Crown Publishers. $17.95.


Unicef Urges Immunization
LEAD: The number of child deaths in Africa could be cut dramatically if leaders would take a personal interest in promoting immunization programs, according to the United Nations Children's Fund. ''If the immunization program is handled under the personal leadership of the heads of state and governments of Africa, the health of children can be so improved that the 1980 child death rates will be halved by the year 2000,'' Unicef's director, James Grant, said at a news conference here Friday.


A Logo Lives
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stars for a Jones Beach Musical Summer
LEAD: Bob Dylan, Steve Winwood and James Taylor are among the performers who are to appear this summer in the sixth season of music at the Jones Beach Theater at Wantagh, L.I.


Judith Bernstein Is Wed in Boston
LEAD: The marriage of Judith Ellen Bernstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ben Bernstein of Minneapolis, to William Garretson Atkinson 3d, a son of Martha Logan Atkinson of Norwich, Conn., and Mr.
Atkinson Jr. of Gales Ferry, Conn., took place last evening in Boston.
Rabbi Albert S. Axelrad officiated at the Boston Harbor Hotel.


In Zaire, Rundown Resort Looks to Gorilla Tours
LEAD: Belgian colonists found this paradise of terraced hills and sparkling lakes so enticing that when the Nazis overran Europe in 1939 and began talking of a 1,000-year Reich, some of the colonists began talking about building a Belgium-in-exile here in what they called ''the Switzerland of Africa.''


Evert Loses in French Open
LEAD: Chris Evert in match against Arantxa Sanchez of Spain.
Evert, playing with an injured foot, lost, 6-3, 7-6.
Page 2. (AP)


Thinking Big at the Guggenheim
LEAD: New York was slightly confounded last January when Thomas Krens, a farm-team player who heads the Williams College Museum of Art, was named to the prestigious post of director of the Guggenheim Museum. ''Tom who?'' was the puzzled query at Pleiades, Da Sylvano, the Canal Bar and other art eateries around town.


Useful Lives for Obsolete Factories
LEAD: IN the old Manchester factories where workers once toiled to produce the rolls of material that gave the town its nickname as ''The Silk City,'' swimmers now do laps in a pool.
In Stamford, where rolls of wallpaper once were produced, diners now eat duck liver pate.
In Deep River, residents relax in cozy apartments, carved out of a building where piano keyboards once were assembled.


DATA BANK: May 29, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
I Q'88
IV Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,668.7
$3,880.8
$3,735.2
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
3.9
4.8
4.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
I Q'88
IV Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$146.4
$144.2
$136.6


The Pleasures Of the Parkways
LEAD: I often travel on the parkways from Heckscher Park to the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx, and I must disagree with Kenneth Marion  [ ''Parkways, Once Pretty, Now Pathetic,'' Opinion Page, April 17 ] .
While it is, indeed, a crowded and messy world compared with the 50's, the parkways remain a highlight of modern life.


A Chamber Festival That Continues to Dare
LEAD: THE state's oldest, longest and most venturesome chamber music festival is getting ready for action again.


Farm Subsidies Stifle Agriculture
LEAD: FOR more than 50 years, American agriculture has been the nation's largest recipient of political intervention and economic aid.
Agriculture has been subjected to an almost constant effort by the Federal Government to set prices, control producers and allocate capital.
So far, the clearest lesson of farm policy is that members of Congress have no incentive to correct their mistakes.


Affordable Housing: A Planner's Reply
LEAD: I must respond to Charles Mancini's comments  [ Letters to the Long Island Editor, April 24 ]  because they are partial to the builder and do not reflect an understanding of the East End of Long Island, which was the focus of my interview  [ ''A Planner Balances Quantity and Quality,'' March 20 ] .
First, East


Bush Tries To Rub Off The Patina
LEAD: With some Republicans worrying aloud whether George Bush is out of touch with the concerns and the argot of average Americans, the Vice President has been eagerly trying to show that he can, in fact, relate to the common man.


N.C.A.A. Baseball; REDMEN ELIMINATED ON 2 STRAIGHT LOSSES
LEAD: They were close enough to Omaha to see the place.


Ms. Robins, an Author, Weds Daniel Caccavo
LEAD: The marriage of Madeleine Eve Robins, the daughter of Seymour Robins of Sheffield, Mass., and the late Barbara George Robins, to Daniel James Caccavo, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Emil Caccavo of Roslyn Heights, L.I., took place yesterday at the home of the bride's father.
Terry Koldys, a justice of the peace in Great Barrington,


WHY I'M STAYING IN THE SENATE
LEAD: My good friend Senator Daniel J. Evans explained why he is leaving the Senate (''Why I'm Quitting the Senate,'' April 17).
I would like to explain why I am staying.


TALKING: Assessments; The Way To Fight City Hall
LEAD: A HOMEOWNER in Riverhead, L.I., was appalled last year to discover that the local tax assessor had decided his new waterfront villa was worth $1.3 million.
This translated into an annual property tax bill of $22,000.


Fish Plant Helping Cape May Economy
LEAD: A HIGH-RISK business venture, begun here with $2 million in Government money, appears headed for success after only seven months of operation.


In Defense Of Hockey
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


U.S.-SOVIET TALKS FAIL TO COMPLETE NEW ARMS ACCORD
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union have failed to complete one and possibly two of the three modest new arms control agreements that American officials hoped would be signed at the Moscow summit meeting, senior Administration officials said today.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Did the Postseason Hurt the N.H.L.?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  CHARLES LAUGHTON: A Difficult Actor.
By Simon Callow. (Grove, $18.95.) Henry VIII, Captain Bligh, Quasimodo, Inspector Javert, Tiberius Claudius - the common denominator, of course, is Charles Laughton, one of the more respected midcentury stage and screen actors on both sides of the Atlantic.
In a biography that focuses almost exclusively on the modes and motivations behind Laughton's acting technique, Simon Callow, an English actor and author, theorizes that Laughton's success with such roles ''consisted of driving himself relentlessly to reveal unpalatable aspects of his personality.


Putting Housing Stock to Best Use
LEAD: INTENSIVE use of the existing housing stock is an important strategy for Westchester in combating its housing crisis.
The basic dimensions of the problem are well known.
The average sale price of single-family homes has soared to more than $357,000 and average condominium units sell for more than $170,000.


Jennifer Gant Marries Daniel Massey Tovell
LEAD: Jennifer Elizabeth Gant, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald C. Gant of New Hartford, N.Y., was married yesterday to Daniel Massey Tovell, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold M. M. Tovell of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Wilferd Hansel, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony aboard the sightseeing vessel Rip Van Winkle on the Hudson River off Kingston, N.Y.


Excerpts From Reagan Interview by Soviet Journalists on Summit Hopes
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the interview of President Reagan, conducted at the White House by Soviet journalists before the President left Washington.
It was broadcast in the Soviet Union today.
The text was released today by the White House, which translated the questions from Russian.


Progress Seen as Nicaragua Talks End
LEAD: The latest round of peace talks between the Sandinista Government and the contra rebels ended tonight after significant progress had been made in the negotiations.


STREETSCAPES: Public School 72; A Big, Solid Centenarian That Still Exudes Potential
LEAD: SCHOOL buildings had been put up in the village of Harlem as early as the 1840's.
But by the 1870's the arrival of the elevated lines on Second and Third Avenues encouraged tenement and rowhouse construction, and in 1879 the Board of Education filed plans for a school stretching along the entire blockfront on the west side of Lexington Avenue from 105th to 106th Streets, the first such in the city.


Horse Racing; European Horse First in Red Smith
LEAD: Pay the Butler, who had won just two of 17 starts against weaker competition in France and Germany, ran down Equalize to win the Red Smith Handicap by a neck yesterday at Belmont Park and provide one bettor with the largest pick-six payoff in New York racing history.


Rabbis for Russia
LEAD: In a salutary step, the Soviet Union has agreed in principle to the opening of a rabbinical school, the first in 50 years, under the direction of a distinguished Israeli rabbi, Adin Steinsaltz.
That the Russians let this be announced in Jerusalem the other day was doubtless a bit of pre-summit public relations, but the step is welcome nonetheless.


'Music Man' Hits the Right Notes
LEAD: IN true musical comedy fantasy, Meredith Willson's ''Music Man,'' now at the Westbury Music Fair, takes a mean-spirited, fast-talking, womanizing con artist and transforms him through the power of love.
The musical is on a 14-city tour and, like many of Westbury's big touring shows, is first-class all the way.


Limits of the Possible
LEAD: CARDIAC INTENSIVE-CARE UNITS ARE paradoxes.
They are filled with the tools to delay dying but they keep the language of death at a distance.
As an intern, I worked in such a place: a small, brightly lit area, partitioned into eight cubicles and filled with an overwhelming array of electronic equipment.


Fortune's Hostages: There But for Grace
LEAD: AHEAD of me on the Avenue of the Americas, a woman in her 70's, frail and holding herself up with a walker, her face lifted to the cold Manhattan rain, pleaded, ''Somebody help me, ple-e-ase.
I'm hungry.''


Brazilian Rallies Fearful Landowners
LEAD: For the best part of three years, as Ronaldo Caiado traveled the length and breadth of Brazil fanning the fears of farmers that their land could be expropriated, he came to personify right-wing resistance to social change under Brazil's new civilian Government.


Stewart Fails Again but A's Beat Red Sox, 5-3
LEAD: Odell Jones, who had not started a game in the major leagues since 1981, pitched a perfect game for seven and one-third innings and came within two outs of a no-hitter tonight as the Milwaukee Brewers beat the Cleveland Indians, 2-0.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Mount Vernon, N.Y.  $257,500  55 Harding Parkway  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 58-year-old Tudor; living room with fireplace, oak floors, walk-in cedar closets, .12 acre; taxes $2,800.
Peekskill, N.Y.  $191,000  1736 Congress Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old split level; cathedral ceilings, country kitchen, deck, cul-de-sac, .25 acre; taxes $3,224.


Lacrosse; Syracuse Faces Cornell in Final
LEAD: The final score was Syracuse 11, Penn 10.
Afterward, Chris Flynn, Penn's indefatigable midfielder, said: ''This was the best game of the season.
We gave it our all and they beat us with three seconds left to play.
What else is there to say?''


Dr. Ellen Schlefer Marries M. B. Bicks
LEAD: Dr.
Ellen King Schlefer was married yesterday to Michael Barnes Bicks, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Bicks of New York, at the home of her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Mark P. Schlefer, in Washington.
Judge Louis H. Pollak of the United States District Court in Philadelphia performed the ceremony.


U.C.L.A. Protesters Disrupt Voting for Student President
LEAD: Students at the University of California at Los Angeles overturned ballot boxes, upended polling booths and exchanged blows with workers Thursday to protest the disqualification of a Hispanic candidate for student body president.


E.P.A. Finds More Areas Fail To Meet Clean Air Standards
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency has designated more than 100 additional counties that must be counted as part of larger urban areas that fail to meet Federal standards for clean air.
The counties are generally in suburban areas farthest from cities.


Freud's Vienna
LEAD: To the Editor: I was interested in the article ''Freud's Vienna Begins at Berggasse 19'' (Travel, March 27).
I was reminded of the visit my husband and I and our three children made 20 years ago to Freud's home in Vienna.


Mavericks Finally Feel Right at Home
LEAD: After suffering two embarrassing losses in Los Angeles, the Mavericks recovered a measure of respect Friday night with an impressive 106-94 victory over the Lakers.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: TAKE Edward Hayes's brown crocodile shoes.
Well, actually you can't take them, because he won't part with them.
It's not that he wears them; he hasn't had them on in years.
But there they are, in a prominent place in his bedroom, where he can look at them and reflect.


Steering a Daughter Past the Bureaucrats
LEAD: MY husband and I bought our last car locally, without comparison shopping, because the dealer assured us he could transfer the plates himself at the Department of Motor Vehicles.
We would not have to set foot in the place.
He was as good as his word, and we breathed a sigh of relief.


Review/Cabaret; Baby Boomers' Life Stories Played Out in Musical Game
LEAD: ''The Wonder Years,'' an innocuous little revue that attempts to satirize the collective experience of the baby-boom generation, reduces more than three decades of cultural history to a cheery musical game of Trivial Pursuit.


Previous Reagan-Gorbachev Summits
LEAD:  GENEVA Nov. 19-21, 1985


Celtics Favored By Officials?
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


'If He Loses This Fight, No More Commercials'
LEAD: OUT in the seventh-floor auditorium of the Manhattan Center on West 34th Street, the extras had been standing around, waiting for Mike Tyson, wondering why nothing was happening.
The world heavyweight champion had interrupted training in Atlantic City for his June 27 heavyweight title showdown there with Michael Spinks to come up to do a Pepsi commercial.


GORBACHEV HAS COME A LONG WAY, TOO
LEAD: President Reagan's trip to Moscow, the first by an American President in 13 1/2 years, is the latest in a series of milestones that have marked Mr.
Gorbachev's passage from the orthodox, anti-American outlook of a provincial Communist Party boss to the non-ideological pragmatism that has shaped his policies since he became Soviet leader in March 1985.


Balancing Growth and Open Space
LEAD: IN 1761, the London artist Thomas Pownal visited the New World and sketched ''A View of the Falls on the Passaick  [ sic ]  in the Province of New Jersey.'' He showed a pristine wilderness, one with vast pine trees climbing up the sides of a ravine bisected by an cataract ending in a churning river.


Reagan Aides Call Human Rights 'Agenda Item No. 1' at the Summit
LEAD: On the eve of his arrival in Moscow, President Reagan told the Soviet people tonight that he had never expected to see their country while in the White House and was looking forward to his summit visit.


SHOREHAM SAGA COMES TO A BITTER END
LEAD: The issue that was to spell doom for the Long Island Lighting Company's $5.3 billion Shoreham nuclear power plant was first raised when Lilco sought a construction permit for the project more than two decades ago: Could Long Island be evacuated in case of a nuclear accident?


Opera Tunes Up With Business
LEAD: THE Connecticut Grand Opera season has ended, but its leaders are busy with meetings promoting the company.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Tooth Ferry Gets the Brushoff IT'S one thing to have a boat tied up in your backyard.
It's another to have a 125-foot fishing trawler floating next to your house, especially a 125-foot fishing trawler in major need of repair.


Road Work to Resume Following Holiday Halt
LEAD: CONSTRUCTION and maintenance work on New Jersey roads will be resumed Tuesday after the holiday hiatus, except on the Garden State Parkway.
There, all lanes will remain open until Wednesday.


Leopard Kills Child After Escaping Cage
LEAD: A leopard fatally mauled a 2-year-old child whose father used the animal in his rock 'n' roll nightclub act and had fought a bill to restrict ownership of dangerous exotic animals, the police say.


Restoring Windowsills
LEAD: WOODEN windowsills receive a great deal of abuse from weather.
Unless they are carefully maintained, moisture can enter the wood and foster decay.
The only effective repair for badly rotted windowsills is replacement, a tricky job even for experienced carpenters.


IF YOU'RE THINKING OF LIVING IN: Orange
LEAD: ORANGE has a low profile, and that is just what many residents like about it.
The assets of this southern Connecticut town lie in a profusion of well-tended homes and gardens and old working farms sprawled across the hilltops.
Three of its schools have won awards for excellence from the United States Department of Education in the last few years.


Somerville: Peace Sites a Goal
LEAD: TWO years ago, the Borough Council here adopted a resolution proposed by then Mayor Emanuel R. Luftglass to have Borough Hall become the first government building in the world designated as a symbolic site for global peace.


Correction
LEAD: A chart accompanying an article on health care for the elderly in The Week in Review last Sunday misstated a projection for the population of the United States in 2010.
The correct figure is 283,238,000.


SAINTHOOD FOR 117 OUTRAGES VIETNAM
LEAD: The canonization in June of 117 Vietnamese and foreign Roman Catholic martyrs persecuted by 17th- and 18th-century Vietnamese rulers, has provoked angry protests from Hanoi, worsening already unstable relations between the Vatican and Vietnam.


Deciding How Much Power a Principal Needs
LEAD: HOW much leadership can a school principal be expected to provide when he is not allowed to shape his teaching staff, let alone tell a custodian to mop a floor?


Polly Johnson Marries Mark A. Neely, Actor
LEAD: Mary Stuart Johnson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wayne Johnson Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Mark Andrew Neely, a son of Gaby Neely of Palo Alto, Calif., and the late C. Webb Neely.
The Rev.
Avery Manchester, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the First Church of Round Hill.


Apt Setting For O'Neill Sea Plays
LEAD: In this centennial year of Eugene O'Neill's birth, a small San Francisco theater company is mounting four of his earliest one-act plays in a way that would surely have appealed to the playwright.
Until June 17, the Glencairn Cycle of ''sea plays'' -comprising ''Moon of the Caribees,'' ''In the Zone,'' ''Bound East for Cardiff'' and ''The Long Voyage Home'' - is being staged with every authentic nuance that could be wished, aboard a 19th-century Pacific Coast lumber schooner moored off Fisherman's


G.O.P. Chief Plans to Broaden Base
LEAD: ASSEMBLYMAN John C. Cochrane, the new Suffolk Republican chairman, is frank about the limits of his power now that a Democrat is County Executive and the County Legislature is divided and rebellious.


A Greek Temple That Inspired Steel Sculptures
LEAD: When we look at Anthony Caro's new sculptures, whether in the roof garden on top of the Metropolitan Museum or in the Andre Emmerich Gallery at 4l East 57th Street, it is a good idea to remember that close on 2,500 years ago, and far away, a great temple was raised for the worship of Zeus and the twinned ideals of peace and reconciliation.


Lauren's 72d St. Redo: But Is It Restoration?
LEAD: IS the flagship store of Polo Ralph Lauren on Madison Avenue a fantasyland creation or a deftly restored building that brings its 1890's heritage back to life?


Papaya Salad, the Thai Cooler
LEAD: IN Thailand, where the heat of the day is matched only by the chili-heat index of the food, people have a unique way of cooling off.
It is called papaya salad.


Growth Outpaces All the Forecasts
LEAD: Economic growth is exceeding expectations.
The gross national product expanded at an annual rate of 3.9 percent in the first quarter, a sharp revision from the 2.3 percent initial figure that was reported a month ago.
The Administration had forecast that the economy would expand 2.4 percent in 1988.


AMERICA'S BLIND EYE
LEAD: GEN.
MANUEL ANTONIO NORIEGA does not often wear the uniform of the Panama Defense Forces.
When he appears in public these days, he prefers to dress in pastel leisure suits or white guayabera shirts, the better to obscure his soldier's origins and show off his collection of gold chains, rings and watches.


In Government, a Renaissance in Record-Keeping
LEAD: GOVERNMENT'S growing involvement in historic preservation is the driving force behind most new job opportunities in history.


Television Turns Tribunal: Waldheim on Trial
LEAD: ''All rise!''


Nicole Sinek Wed to Leo Arnaboldi 3d
LEAD: Nicole Irene Sinek, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Herbert Sinek of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Leo Peter Arnaboldi 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnaboldi Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Preston B. Hannibal, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Bedford Historical Hall in Bedford Village, N


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''Remember, when we came out with the 2.4 percent, how all you guys in the press called it a rosy forecast?'' - Beryl W. Sprinkel, the Administration's top economist, on the 3.9 percent rise in G.N.P.


40 Years of Aid to Fellow Performers
LEAD: The year was 1948.
Judy Gershwin was singing rhapsodies with the Xavier Cugat Orchestra.
Sandra Berle was helping her son Milton build a baggy wardrobe.
Maria Cole was helping the career of her husband, Nat.


The Art of Making A Classical Career
LEAD: Although he has still only rarely appeared live in New York - more concerts are expected this coming season - the violinist Nigel Kennedy has attracted considerable attention, and the reasons say a good deal about careers in present-day classical music.


A New Age of Television Tastelessness?
LEAD: In the debris of western civilization it may not be much, although probably it should have its own trash bag.
Don Imus has been appearing in a television commercial for his radio talk show. ''The issue for George Bush is not the Iran-contra affair,'' he says in the commercial, ''but why he married his mom.


A Village of Cypress and Vines
LEAD: ON the green hills that encircle Florence, like a giant Romantic frame for the trim Renaissance architecture of the city below, there lies an ethereal village called Settignano, which has left an indelible mark on the art and literature of the Western world.


Susan Ladd Plans September Bridal
LEAD: Susan Walker Ladd's engagement to William Prescott Rogers 3d, the son of Mrs.
William P. Rogers Jr. of Dedham, Mass., and the late Dr.
Rogers, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Delano W. Ladd Jr. of Greenwich and Madison, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.


In Vermont, Dogs Follow Their Noses to Porcupines
LEAD: Something about a porcupine is irresistible to dogs in Vermont.
Almost all of them simply have to chase and attack one at least once in their life.


Freud's Vienna
LEAD: To the Editor: One important bit of Viennese Freudiana that Paul Hofmann did not mention in his excellent article ''Freud's Vienna Begins at Berggasse 19'' is the small Freud monument in the Sigmund Freud Park.


Musical Honors
LEAD: NEITHER lowering skies nor coinciding New York State School Music Association student auditions kept the Caramoor Center for Music and Arts from celebrating student achievement last weekend.
Six high school music groups and two student soloists performed Saturday in the Spanish Courtyard, while artwork from 26 schools was on exhibit in the Tennis


A Material Girl for All Seasons - and Reasons
LEAD: I heard a succinct description of Madonna's appeal once outside a record store:


Martha E. Hunt Weds Clinton Francis Bogart
LEAD: Martha Elizabeth Hunt and Clinton Francis Bogart were married yesterday at St.
Paul's United Methodist Church in Houston by the Rev.
James Welch.


In Soviet Hospitals, Folk Cures and Love
LEAD: To the Editor:


Advanced U.S. Cruiser Enters Persian Gulf
LEAD: The United States Navy has introduced to the Persian Gulf one of its billion-dollar Aegis cruisers, among its most sophisticated warships.


Penalty Is to Quit Smoking
LEAD: A judge has ordered a woman to stop smoking, saying that she cannot afford it because she has five children and no job.


Day Care, Child Care, Word Care
LEAD: CHILD CARE,'' writes Lisbeth B. Schorr in ''Within Our Reach: Breaking the Cycle of Disadvantage,'' a new book being lapped up by politicians eager to show an interest in families without actually having to kiss babies, ''. . . must go beyond custodial care to provide intellectual stimulation'' and then on to ''nurturance, hugs, approval, and responsiveness.


ANGOLAN SETTLEMENT MOVES HIGHER ON U.S.-SOVIET AGENDA
LEAD: Shortly before the Portuguese flag came down in 1975 when Angola was granted independence, three Cuban ships filled with soldiers and arms arrived to help a Marxist guerrilla army beat its rivals in civil war.
Thirteen years later Cubans are still in Angola, defending the Marxist Government against attacks by many of the same guerrilla rivals, supplied by South Africa and the United States.


Former Levitt Estate Is a Showcase
LEAD: WHAT kind of home would the man who built Levittown build for himself?


INTO THE HEART OF THE CONTINENT
LEAD:  AN AMERICAN MEMORY  By Eric Larsen.  227 pp.
North Carolina:  Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill. $12.95.


A Brother Basks in Reflected Honor
LEAD: I GRADUATED from college 25 years ago this week.
It was a simpler time, when a young man (if not yet a woman) could aspire to live better than his parents, when the word ''Vietnam'' lacked emotional content and when ''civil rights'' was only a noble goal, uncomplicated by the politics of empowerment.


Mattingly Sidelined At Least 2 Weeks
LEAD: The mild aftershocks of the Don Mattingly injury were still rippling through the clubhouse late Friday night.
The Yankees had gotten by for one night, but now they were looking at the possibility of life - at least on a short-term basis - without baseball's best player.


Bethesda Fountain, Where the Action Is
LEAD: Back in the 1960's, Bethesda Fountain in Central Park was center stage for the latest in flower-power fashions.
Through the purple haze of smoke, one could take in a panoply of tie-dyed shirts, Sergeant Pepper coats, fringed piano shawls and long electroshock hair styles.
For many designers, the place was a bonanza.


Cara Bachenheimer Wed in Connecticut
LEAD: Cara Conway Bachenheimer and Neal Joseph Reynolds were married yesterday at St.
Michael the Archangel Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan, assisted by the Rev.
William George, performed the ceremony.


Klecko on the Road
LEAD: JOE KLECKO, the former Jet Pro Bowl nose tackle, made his annual pilgrimage to Indianapolis to visit his friend A. J. Foyt before today's Indy 500 .
This time, Klecko also is in Indianapolis looking for a place to live.
He is now a Colt.


Elizabeth Eckel Weds
LEAD: At St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in New Haven, Elizabeth N. Eckel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Ernest Eckel of Newburgh, N.Y., was married yesterday to William G. Butterly 3d, the son of Eleanor M. Butterly of Milford, Conn., and the late Mr.
Butterly Jr.
The Rev.
John McGuire officiated.


VOTE FOR THE PSYCHE OF YOUR CHOICE
LEAD:  CHARACTER  America's Search for Leadership.
By Gail Sheehy.  303 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company.


Tennis; Sanchez Eliminates Injured Evert
LEAD: For 13 years, springtime in Paris was Chris Evert's season.
She won the French Open seven times and never did worse than the semifinal round in the other years.
She said she loved the tournament, and this year she brought her parents and her fiance.


Tracey G. Moore Marries Kevin Howard Matthews
LEAD: The marriage of Tracey Gail Moore, the daughter of Lillian Moore Branch of Hackensack, N.J., and Kevin Howard Matthews, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard A. Matthews of the Bronx, took place yesterday at Trinity Episcopal Church in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
The Rev.
Harold A. Young performed the ceremony.


House Members Stake Out Positions On Ethics Charges Against Speaker
LEAD: Charges of ethics violations against Speaker Jim Wright have set off a bitter exchange in the House of Representatives.


Namibians See Soviet Talks as Way Back Home
LEAD: In coming days, when evening settles over the plank cabins and thatched huts in the hills here, Namibian exiles will gather around their shortwave radios, straining to follow crackling and fading reports from the Moscow summit talks.


When Lens Shopping, The Length Counts
LEAD: CAMERA and lens manufacturers make a big fuss in advertising about the range of their zoom lenses.
No sooner has one ''wide-angle-to-tele'' lens appeared than another, even wider and longer, is announced.
The question is, should one buy a lens, or the camera to which it is attached, simply because of the breadth of its focal lengths?


Debate on Divestment Splits U.S. Olympic Groups
LEAD: A philosophical dispute has developed between the United States Olympic Committee and its fund-raising arm, the Olympic Foundation, over the foundation's indirect investments in South Africa.
This has led to a conflict among members of the two bodies over what type of moral statement, if any, their investment strategies should make about South Africa's policy of apartheid.


With Fish, Hazelnut Oil's Toasted Flavor
LEAD: ALTHOUGH hazelnut oil is usually used in salads, its rich toasted flavor also goes beautifully with fish.
The nutty taste is a perfect foil for red snapper, bass and trout or fish steaks such as halibut, swordfish or tilefish.
It is even better when fresh herbs such as tarragon, thyme or basil are added.


Flopsy, Mopsy at the Morgan
LEAD: ''My dear Noel,'' the letter began. ''I don't know what to write to you today, so I shall tell you a story about four little rabbits whose names were Flopsy, Mopsy, Cottontail, and Peter.'' Written in 1893, it was from Beatrix Potter to Noel Moore, the 5-year-old son of her former governess.
Miss Potter, then 27, illustrated it with drawings now familiar to generations of children around the world as ''The Tale of Peter Rabbit.


Choosing Plants For Fall Bloom
LEAD: NOW is the time to think about fall.


WATER WOES: OTHER VIEWS
LEAD: FOR an experienced science teacher who should know how to develop and research factually correct scientific and technical data, Julian Kane's ''Water Woes: End the Chaos'' was inaccurate and misleading.
As an educator, his position appears to be narrow.


MADE FOR EACH OTHER
LEAD:  OSCAR &amp; LUCINDA  By Peter Carey.  433 pp.
New York:  Harper &amp; Row. $18.95.


Fare Thee Well
LEAD: ENTERTAINING GUESTS OVER A summer weekend is an undeniable pleasure, and often a considerable effort.
Those hosts who tackle the challenge with grace and good will always have a strategy.
Some insist on the simplest of meals.
Others are sure to have at least one lunch or dinner at a local restaurant.


Bruins Witness Bizarre Playoffs
LEAD: The National Hockey League, an organization usually able to maintain a low profile with little effort, heaved a sigh of relief Thursday night as the Edmonton Oilers completed a sweep of the Boston Bruins to capture a fourth Stanley Cup and effectively put to rest a tumultuous season.


Bush and Dukakis Are Engaging in Early Battle Over the Jewish Vote
LEAD: Neither Vice President Bush nor Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis has yet been nominated for President, but their campaigns are reaching out for Jewish voters they expect to influence key states in November.


Expos Continue The Extra Effort
LEAD: The Montreal Expos thrive on working overtime. ''These guys think they can't be beaten in extra innings,'' Manager Buck Rodgers said after his team had defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers, 3-2, in 10 innings today.


Miss Rozelle To Wed Oct. 8
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Pete Rozelle of Harrison, N.Y., have announced the engagement of Mr.
Rozelle's daughter, Anne Marie Rozelle, to Douglas K. Bratton, the son of Iris K. Bratton of Concord, N.C., and the late Carl H. Bratton.
The wedding is to be Oct. 8.


MAMET'S HOUSE OF WORD GAMES
LEAD: The most persuasive praise yet given a David Mamet play came not from the Pulitzer committee, which awarded ''Glengarry Glen Ross'' its drama prize for 1984, but from a group of popsicle salesmen.
In December of 1986, a dead month in the popsicle trade, they read the play aloud at the behest of a manager who hoped to head off terminal boredom at company headquarters in a sprawling industrial park south of Los


A Weekend in Burgundy Of Golf and Fine Dining
LEAD: LIKE Londoners or New Yorkers, Parisians sometimes long to flee the noise, traffic and sheer intensity of life in their city.
One of the unremarked delights of Paris is how easy it is to leave.
Barring a revolution or a metro strike, it's possible to get from the Place de la Concorde to a wheat field in less than an hour.


Jane M. Daly Married To Richard M. Potocki
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York, Jane Marie Daly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Daly of Floral Park, Queens, was married yesterday to Richard Michael Potocki, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Potocki of Hilton Head Island, S.C.
The Rev.
Regis Duffy performed the ceremony.


Gray Areas
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Hope and Glory  Starring Sebastian Rice-Edwards,  Geraldine Muir, Sarah Miles, David  Hayman, Sammi Davis, Derrick  O'Connor, Susan Wooldridge, Jean- Marc Barr, Ian Bannen.
Directed by  John Boorman. 1987.
Nelson Entertainment.  112 minutes. $89.98.
Rated PG-13.
Some sexually suggestive episodes.


Over $60,000 Is Raised to Repair Memorial
LEAD: More than $60,000 has been raised to repair scratches made by vandals on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, it was announced today.


On England's Saintly Border
LEAD: THE cry of seagulls and the slow beat of the mute swans' wings as they rise from the River Tweed symbolize the haunting, isolated beauty of Berwick-upon-Tweed.
The river dictates the lie of the town.
It comes in a wide sweep to meet the sea, enfolding the town in a near complete embrace of water.


A Meatpacker Cartel Up Ahead?
LEAD: IN little more than a year, Conagra Inc., the giant food products and grain company, has stormed to the top of the beef industry.
Buying one large meat processor and a half interest in another, Conagra has suddenly become one of three companies that dominate the business.


Q and A
LEAD:  Broken Drain Pipe


POSTINGS: 2 Harlem Renovations; Values Going Up
LEAD: Jacob Sebag, who is renovating two adjacent East 105th Street shells, can chart the rise in East Harlem property values from his own experience.
His buildings are both four stories with brownstone facades.
But Mr.
Sebag, along with a partner, Enrique A. Ochoa, bought one of them, at 229, in 1985 for only $50,000; the other, at 231, the partners purchased early in 1987 for $185,000.


Debt Payout Key Factor In Accord On Lilco
LEAD: SEEKING to line up support for a negotiated settlement to keep the Shoreham nuclear plant closed, state officials have argued that restoring the Long Island Lighting Company to an investment-grade utility would save tens of millions of dollars a year, chiefly by enabling Lilco to refinance much of its $3.6 billion in debt.


The Fine Art of Managing Corporate Memories
LEAD: IN 1979, Philip Cantelon, president of History Associates, was doing research for a book at the National Archives, when he overheard a Texas state official complaining that he could not find someone to write a cartographic history of part of the state's coastline.
Mr.
Cantelon offered to take on the project, and the rest is, well, history.


WATER WOES: OTHER VIEWS
LEAD: IN his recent article on the Opinion Page, Julian Kane gave his version of ''Water Woes'' and his remedy to ''End the Chaos.'' His solution to water woes and chaos is to create one superagency to replace the individual suppliers.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Cleveland; Rejuvenating A Landmark
LEAD: A $280 million redevelopment plan is intended to bring new life to the landmark 52-story Terminal Tower building, since 1930 one of this city's most prominent structures.


Klan Group Pushes Access to TV in Missouri
LEAD: A monthlong battle over free speech on cable television here has wound up in a deadlock, with no one fully satisfied by the result, including the white supremacist who vows to press his efforts to use television to recruit converts to his brand of racial division.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  PHOENIX RISES AGAIN  Westchester is to have its own Phoenix Theater Company, named after the Phoenix Theater in Manhattan that closed in 1982 after 29 years of Off Broadway productions.
A professional troupe of 12 Equity actors from New York, with the blessing of T. Edward Hambleton and Norris Houghton, founders of the original Phoenix and board members of the Westchester group, will open what is hoped to be the first of many summer seasons at the Masters School in Dobbs Ferry, from July 15 through Aug.


WHY DO N.B.A. CHAMPIONS NOT REPEAT?
LEAD: N.B.A. champions do not repeat because of the resiliency and grudge-bent determination of their archrivals.
Of the five champions since 1969 who have reached the N.B.A. finals in their following seasons, four were rematched against their runnerup foes from the previous seasons.
The only exception being last year's Celtics team which was dethroned by the Lakers, their longtime rivals, rather than the Rockets whom the


Civil Disobedience And Its Penalties
LEAD: It is shocking that Nassau County District Attorney Denis Dillon does not recognize that blocking a person's way to prevent access to a building is a form of violence and should be prosecuted  [ ''Dillon's Abortion Stand Roils Party,'' May 15 ] .


Trenton Acts to Ease Medical Bills of Elderly
LEAD: THE Legislature moved two bills last week addressing the health problems of the elderly.
It also received a negative report card on a program designed to help Medicare patients avoid extra physician fees.


Room With a Nurse: Cuba's 'Health Tourism'
LEAD: Not long ago, Olga Bencosme's doctor discovered a large stone in her left kidney and recommended that she have it pulverized by laser beams.
Since there is no equipment for such a procedure in the Dominican Republic, the doctor suggested that Mrs.
Bencosme go to the United States, West Germany or Cuba.


Nicaragua President to Visit New York for Talks at U.N.
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua will visit New York City in early June to attend a United Nations conference on disarmament, Information Minister Manuel Espinosa said today.


How Shoreham Pact Evolved: Urgent Phone Calls, Town House Meetings
LEAD: The talks that ended the 22-year impasse over the Shoreham nuclear power plant - negotiations that succeeded where a host of others had stalled -began with a newspaper article more than nine months ago.


Ailing Irwin Retains Lead
LEAD: At 3 o'clock this morning, Hale Irwin was jolted awake by the pain of a stomach attack that would leave him weak and ill through the entire third round of the 13th annual Memorial Tournament today.


The Sexy Image Is Out of Place In Business
LEAD: AMERICAN women are under siege.
And some of us have met this enemy before in . . .
Was it 1950? 1964?
The exact years seem to blur, but the image is clear and the ominous signs are appearing once more.
Unless you have been on the moon or in hibernation for the last six months, you know that short skirts are back.


For Immigration, A Drive-In Office
LEAD: WITH florists, dry cleaners, liquor stores, even a pawnshop, operating drive-in establishments in Houston, why not an immigration drive-in?


UNDER THE BEDS OF THE REDS
LEAD:  THE KGB  Police and Politics in the Soviet Union.
By Amy W. Knight.
Tables. 348 pp.
Winchester, Mass.:  Allen &amp; Unwin/Unwin Hyman. $34.95.


Remember When Toscanini Forgot?
LEAD: Performing musicians do not like to talk about memory slips, even those of successful rivals.
Artists are not superstitious, but why tempt fate?
You do not walk under ladders unless you really want to be hit by falling pianos.
And yet everyone who plays an instrument or sings or conducts knows and fears these mysterious moments of blackout.


Reviews/Music; A Robert Shaw Farewell: Beethoven and Stravinsky
LEAD: Robert Shaw was one of this country's most renowned choral directors when he accepted the directorship of the Atlanta Symphony, his first symphonic post, in 1967.
In his 21 years there, he has put the orchestra on America's symphonic map - largely, although not entirely, by establishing a magnificent choral adjunct and recording a healthy sampling of the literature for choir and orchestra.


Kelly Ann Eschenlohr Wed
LEAD: At Christ Episcopal Church in Short Hills, N.J., Kelly Ann Eschenlohr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Eschenlohr of Short Hills and Stowe, Vt., was married yesterday to Jon Brian Hostetler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent Hostetler of Grand Junction, Colo.
The Rev.
David B. Earnest performed the ceremony.


French Photojournalist Freed by Afghanistan
LEAD: A French freelance photojournalist, captured 14 months ago and imprisoned after entering Afghanistan with Moslem guerrillas, was freed today, a French official reported.


On Defining Motives At Landmark Sites
LEAD: One point in the May 15 Opinion Page article by Karolyn Wrightson, executive director of the Westchester Historical Society, needs to be clarified  [ ''Designating Landmarks: Beware Hidden Agendas'' ] .
She refers to some people mouthing historical preservation ''not to discover their Indian heritage but to keep open space and protect their property values from the development.


Plan to Raise Starting Pay Of Teachers
LEAD: A PROPOSAL by Governor Kean to raise minimum teachers' salaries to $22,000 for the 1988-89 school year may be in trouble.


Headliners; Heavy Drinking
LEAD: When it comes time to select new members, some of the undergraduate eating clubs at Princeton University have a drinking ritual that they do not take lightly.
After 45 underage students drank themselves sick at Princeton this spring, a New Jersey judge decided not to take the matter lightly either.


A GUIDE TO THE DANCES OF SUMMER
LEAD: The following is a selective list of summer dance festivals and events.
It is national in scope but concentrates on the Northeast.
New York City  AMERICAN BALLROOM THEATER Under the artistic direction of Pierre Dulaine and Yvonne Marceau, this company of five championship ballroom couples will perform in the premiere of ''Hernando's Hideaway,'' staged by Tina Paul, with dances by Graciela Daniele and Elizabeth Aldrich (June 22-25).


The Apartment Gypsies of Manhattan
LEAD: THE volatility of living in New York City on a shoestring visited Clara Jimenz early.
Having just graduated from Barnard College and being determined to live on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, Ms.
Jimenz moved last summer into a co-op with a 38-year-old nurse who was renting out her bedroom for $500 a month and sleeping in the living room.


Health, Too, Is Part Of Planning a Trip
LEAD: AS transportation becomes faster and the places open to visitors become more numerous, exotic and challenging, the possibilities of getting sick, falling victim to an accident or even dying before you can get medical help will rise too.


Action at Massachusetts U. Raises Censorship Cry
LEAD: Amid cries of censorship, the Afro-American studies department at the University of Massachusetts here has forced out a prominent black professor for criticizing the black novelist James Baldwin.


Subsidized Wheat To Soviet Union
LEAD: THE Soviet Union knows a capitalist bargain when it sees one.
As a consequence, it is buying more American wheat in 1987-88 than it has bought in 15 years.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a problem with moss growing on the bricks on my patio.
I've tried using weed killer.
It works, but only temporarily, and it poses a threat to the surrounding shrubs.
Can you suggest anything else?


Dr. Martha E. Moss Weds Dr. David C. DiBenedetto
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
Martha Ellen Moss, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert M. Moss of Huntington, Conn., to Dr.
David Charles DiBenedetto, a son of Mrs.
Joseph DiBenedetto of Belmont, Mass., and the late Mr.
DiBenedetto, took place yesterday at the Glen Magna historic site in Danvers, Mass.
The Rev.


Bold Images Capture the World of the Plains Indians
LEAD: Rooted in the ancient cave drawings of the Great Plains, the pictography of the Arapaho, Cheyenne and Sioux survives today in 19th-century ledger books, beaded shirts, quill-embellished artifacts and a hand-chiseled tomahawk.
A selection of these figurative, color-splashed tribal graphics in a variety of materials - most are drawings - has been assembled in an exhibition on the art of American Indian picture writing at the Alexander Gallery, 996 Madison Avenue, at 77th


Interest Groups, By Any Other Name
LEAD: As a citizen of, I trust, reasonably responsible concern, I am disturbed by what I read about interest groups.
And especially, as one who votes Democratic with some certainty, by what I hear of the grave subordination of past and present Democratic candidates to their influence.


DEATH WITHOUT MUZAK
LEAD:  LIFE ON EARTH  By Sheila Ballantyne.  174 pp.
New York:  The Linden Press/  Simon &amp; Schuster. $16.95.


Ex-Prisoners of War Applying for Medals
LEAD: SINCE the end of March, when the Pentagon announced it was ready to begin issuing medals to former prisoners of war, more than 900 applications have been received from New Jersey veterans.


The Export Edge
LEAD: To the Editor:


With Fish, Hazelnut Oil's Toasted Flavor
LEAD: ALTHOUGH hazelnut oil is usually used in salads, its rich toasted flavor also goes beautifully with fish.
The nutty taste is a perfect foil for red snapper, bass and trout or fish steaks such as halibut, swordfish or tilefish.
It is even better when fresh herbs such as tarragon, thyme or basil are added.


William W. Flanagan; Professor, 69
LEAD: The Rev.
William W. Flanagan, an assistant professor of economics at Fordham University since 1960 and dean of the School of General Studies from 1969 to 1973, died of a heart attack Thursday at Loyola Hall, the Jesuit residence on the Bronx campus.
He was 69 years old.


BEST SELLERS: May 29, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
ZOYA, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $19.95.) One
woman's story, from St. Petersburg during the
Russian Revolution to contemporary New York.
2
2
12
THE ICARUS AGENDA, by Robert Ludlum.


Comparison Made Easy By Computers
LEAD: COMPUTERS have long had some impact on bridge in a variety of ways, but the most important effect is relatively new: Clubs with computers can offer their members a popular improvement on traditional match-point scoring in which an overtrick can be worth as much as a slam.


ART 'In the Presence of the Past': Bridgeport Exhibition
LEAD: IT looks as if the Museum of Art, Science and Industry in Bridgeport is finally coming out of its shell.


Alone, Actress Plays the Entire Cast
LEAD: As a solo theatrical performer, Mary Louise Hickey has never shared the stage with props, scenery, costumes or other actors.
Instead, she draws upon her dramatic training and on the imagination of her audience.


A Sudden Tumble Into a New World
LEAD: FOR a variety of reasons, including climate, East Germany does not enjoy a reputation as a vacation paradise.
But by accident it became my Club Med for two weeks - Med as in Medical, not Mediterranean.
Except for the accident itself the sojourn was a pleasant experience.
The idea of becoming ill or sustaining a serious injury in a foreign country is daunting for travelers.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Andover  $166,900  2 Scenic Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 16-year-old contemporary; wall-to-wall carpeting, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $1,688.
Belleville  $125,000  112 Mill Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, two-year-old condominium town house; 4-zone heating, garage; monthly maintenance $127, taxes $3,069.


Inside
LEAD:  Nicaraguan Talks Continue


Lois E. Harrison, A Designer, Weds William K. Mintz
LEAD: Lois Eleanor Harrison and William Kendall Mintz were married last evening at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens, by Cantor Richard Berman.


An Expectant Air Hits Muscovites, Who Also Face Struggles at Home
LEAD: President Reagan arrives in Moscow on Sunday to find a city dressed up in new foliage and fresh whitewash, a people curious and expectant but distracted by the political struggles going on in their country.


WAR AT SEA
LEAD: WITH ITS NEEDLE-NOSED bow and its wide-flared deck, the 123-foot-long New Zealand is a menacing craft, both on land, where it's responsible for the biggest ruckus in the 137-year history of the America's Cup, and on water, where it's the fastest single-hulled racing yacht ever built.


Notebook; A Revived Salazar Fits Right In as Symbol of Tigers' Style
LEAD: Luis Salazar is so much Sparky Anderson's kind of player, it's no wonder that it was love at first sight.
Well, maybe not exactly first sight, but it was love, and Salazar is one of the reasons Anderson is at it again.


U.S. Rent Aid for Rural Poor
LEAD: A limited number of low-income rural families in 13 states will be eligible for housing vouchers to help pay their rent, the Department of Housing and Urban Development says.


F. W. Lafferty Jr. And Hilary Eddy Married in Jersey
LEAD: At Christ Episcopal Church in Short Hills, N.J., Hilary Clark Eddy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Eddy of Short Hills, was married yesterday to Frederick Wayne Lafferty Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lafferty of Baltimore.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
David B. Earnest and the Rev.
Richard G.


Ella Davila Wed to T. G. Auchincloss Jr.
LEAD: Ella Felicia Davila, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rogerio Davila Jr. of Memphis, was married yesterday to Thomas Gore Auchincloss Jr., a son of Mr.
Auchincloss of Eagle Bridge, N.Y., and Mrs.
Francis A. Shields of Glen Cove, L.I.
The Rev.
Edwin Lynn, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Castle Hill estate in Ipswich,


Hungary Assails Rumania on Village Razings
LEAD: Hungary has charged that a vast program in Rumania to consolidate villages is intended to erase the Hungarian heritage in areas of Transylvania that were severed from Hungary after World War I. The Hungarian Foreign Ministry, which has not made a formal statement on the matter to the Rumanian Government, has given foreign reporters translations of articles from Hungary's Government-controlled press.


Headliners; Heavy Traffic
LEAD: Something led customs agents to suspect that Rigoberto Regalado Lara, the Honduran Ambassador to Panama, was not on a diplomatic mission when he arrived in Miami earlier this month.
They took a look through Mr.
Regalado's luggage and reported that they found 26 pounds of cocaine.
Honduras, whose military is headed by Mr.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  IN HITLER'S GERMANY: Everyday Life in the Third Reich, by Bernt Engelmann.
Translated by Krishna Winston. (Schocken, $8.95.) Not all Germans acquiesced to Nazi rule, Bernt Engelmann discovered in his interviews.
Many citizens actively supported Hitler; some bravely resisted.
Last year in The Times, John Gross called this book ''an unusual blend of memoir and oral history.


Filipinos Fill The Visa Line To Get to U.S.
LEAD: Late one recent night, after a week of surveillance, the Manila police rounded up 55 suspicious people who had been sleeping under the tropical baliti trees outside the United States Embassy.


Stephanie Crane Is Wed
LEAD: Stephanie Ball Crane, the daughter of Mrs.
Robert J. Catto of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Paul T. Crane, and Kenneth James O'Hara, a son of Barbara O'Hara of Norwalk, Conn., and Kieran J. O'Hara of Fairfield, Conn., were married yesterday at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Somers, N.Y., by the Rev.


Traffic Problems With Moose
LEAD: WHY does a moose cross the road?


NONFICTION
LEAD:  LIFE WITHOUT FATHER: Influences of an Unknown Man.
By William Wartman. (Franklin Watts, $17.95.) William Wartman focuses in this book on his search for an understanding of his father, who died when the author was a child, and on his own role as a father to his son.
As his 30th birthday approached, in 1978, Mr.


IN THE '88 CAMPAIGN, THE BABY-BOOM VOTERS ARE CURIOUSLY QUIET
LEAD: Where have all the baby boomers gone?


DioGuardi Opens His Re-election Campaign
LEAD: A CONFIDENT Representative Joseph J. DioGuardi made it official last week, announcing that he was seeking re-election to Congress, the ''new career'' that the former accountant said ''feels comfortable to me.''


Fiddlehead Ferns
LEAD: To the Editor: For two years in a row, The New York Times has published items which tell of gathering wild fern fiddleheads for food in spring.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  SHOOTING FROM THE LIP: Essays, Columns, Quips, and Gripes in the Grand Tradition of Dyspeptic Sports Writing.
By Mike Lupica. (Bonus, $15.95.) Mike Lupica, whose sports columns appear regularly in The Daily News and Esquire, is a master miniaturist.
He has perfected the art of using a single mood or moment to dramatize an entire season or career.


Man Charged in Wife's Death
LEAD: A 50-year-old roofing contractor was ordered held on $100,000 bail yesterday in connection with the slaying of his wife in their Queens home earlier this month, and authorities reported that he is under investigation in the death of a previous wife last November.


K.G.B. Prevents 5 Catholics From Trying to Meet Reagan
LEAD: The Soviet security police dragged five Ukrainian Catholics from a Moscow-bound train today, frustrating their hopes of meeting President Reagan, a leading Christian dissident said.


JOYNER-KERSEE TIES RECORD
LEAD: Jackie Joyner-Kersee, who set a world record in heptathlon two years ago and became the co-holder of the world record in the long jump last year, ran the 100-meter hurdles in 12.61 seconds to equal the American record her training partner, Gail Devers, set last week.


Courtney McNeil Is Bride Of Peter Thomas Hatswell
LEAD: Courtney Bliss McNeil, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Robin McNeil of Weston, Mass., was married there yesterday to Peter Thomas Hatswell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon Hatswell of Adelaide, Australia.
The Rev.
David Van Dusen performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.


COMPLEX SIGNPOSTS IN A CHANGING NATION
LEAD: As Mikhail S. Gorbachev pushes the Soviet Union toward a new definition of Communism, a visitor encounters visible reminders that much of Soviet society has yet to emerge from the legacy of its old revolution.
There is evidence of change in the open markets reaping private profit, the cavalier treatment of a former leader in a piece of pop art, the novelty of American-style pizza in


Pistons Take 2-1 Lead In Series
LEAD: In the Detroit Pistons' scheme of things, Joe Dumars's role first and foremost is to play defense.
He's the stopper Coach Chuck Daly calls upon to try to shut down the hot scorers, be it Michael Jordan or a small forward.


Fresh Air Fund to Give 7,500 Children a Change
LEAD: BACK in the early 1960's, the bus ride from New York City's Port Authority Terminal to Hamilton Square in Mercer County took about an hour and a half, but still enough time for 6-year-old Nancy Gines to come up with a new name.


2 Jersey Men Ordered To Jail in Snake Case
LEAD: A former firefighter and a snake trainer have been sentenced to 90 days in jail each for putting three rattlesnakes in a woman's apartment.


County Pressed on Overcrowded Jail Complex
LEAD: ON the short list of prison pleasures, day rooms -the recreational areas available for socializing, watching television and playing cards - rank very high.
But in Westchester, overcrowding at the county's correctional complex in Valhalla has forced authorities to use day rooms to house an overflowing population.


Zola Budd's Parental Visit
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


TODAY'S SUMMIT SCHEDULE
LEAD: Times are local.
Helsinki is seven hours ahead of Eastern daylight time; Moscow is eight hours ahead.  10:50 A.M.: President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, leave Government guest house in Helsinki en route to airport, where they will say goodbye to President Mauno Koivisto and his wife, Taimi, and to the United States Embassy staff.


WHY DO N.B.A. CHAMPIONS NOT REPEAT?
LEAD: Since 1980, out of a possible 16 different teams who could have reached the finals, only four did so.
And of those, two - the Celtics and the Lakers - reached the finals a combined total of 11 times.
Losing a sixth or seventh game of a close, final series by a few points after winning the previous year is no indication that the team was inferior, or that this year's winner is the new ''dominant force.


Before the Revolution - and After
LEAD: There were plenty of real stars on hand, including Clint Eastwood, Robert Redford and Jean-Paul Belmondo.
The sometimes dangerously huge crowds pushed and shoved to catch sight of even the mini-celebrity (a would-be star) who appeared at the Redford gala in a topless and nearly bottomless evening dress.


Review/Rock; The Monsters of Rock Open a 23-City Tour
LEAD: America's stadium-rock season opened here today with a bang - or, more precisely, the nine-hour roar of Van Halen's Monsters of Rock Tour.
Drums boomed, singers shouted and howled, guitars blared and shrieked as Van Halen, the Scorpions, Dokken, Metallica and Kingdom Come, five top heavy-metal bands, performed from midday into the night.


POSTINGS: Bronx 2-Families; Church Backs 18-Unit Pilot
LEAD: An 18-unit pilot project for a Nehemiah-style moderate-income housing program sponsored by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York will break ground at Tiffany and 163d Streets in the South Bronx on Tuesday.
The success of the project, in which nine two-family homes will be built for $1.385 million, will determine the prospects of a program to build 1,000 more such units in the South


Preserving - and Profiting From - the Past
LEAD: HISTORY is making a comeback.


Dukakis Is Unfazed By Attacks
LEAD: When a jarring burst of thunder interrupted Michael S. Dukakis's talk at a Cranford, N.J., day care center the other evening, the normally staid Democratic Presidential candidate quipped, ''Bush is at it again.''


DATA UPDATE: May 29 ,1988
LEAD:
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS/N.Y.-NortheastN.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Apr.
Mar.
Apr. 87
Rents
141.4
1.4
8.5
Homeowner's costs
142.4
0.2
10.3
Fuel and utilities
92.0
-0.3
-0.5
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester,
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson,
*4*Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.


WHAT'S DOING IN THE: Twin Cities
LEAD: One of the first signs of spring in Minnesota usually appears in early April, while ice is still on the ground - convertibles full of college students cruising with tops down, eating ice cream cones and pretending they don't have the car heater on full blast.


With Fish, Hazelnut Oil's Toasted Flavor
LEAD: ALTHOUGH hazelnut oil is usually used in salads, its rich toasted flavor also goes beautifully with fish.
The nutty taste is a perfect foil for red snapper, bass and trout or fish steaks such as halibut, swordfish or tilefish.
It is even better when fresh herbs such as tarragon, thyme or basil are added.


A Gain for the Bald Eagle
LEAD: A pair of bald eagles has built a nest in Massachusetts for the first time since early this century, an occurrence that wildlife officials call a major step toward restoring a breeding population in the state.
The nest was spotted in a red oak tree near the Quabbin Reservoir in central Massachusetts.


D'Amato Urges Latin Nations to Press for Ouster of Noriega
LEAD: Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato urged yesterday that Latin American countries take ''concerted action'' to remove Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega from power in Panama in the wake of the Reagan Administration's failure to negotiate the general's departure.


WATER WOES: OTHER VIEWS
LEAD: THE article ''Water Woes:


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  ART AUCTION  The artists on the East End are a generous lot; show them a good cause, be it social or political, and they usually respond wholeheartedly.
The Retreat, a nonprofit, nonsectarian organization that provides counseling, emergency shelter and guidance to local victims of family violence, gains from this traditional attitude today via an auction of works donated by more than 50 painters and sculptors.


Sweating in the Dark Over Shoreham
LEAD: It was a bad cause - plowing under the $5 billion Shoreham, L.I., nuclear power station - that brought out Governor Cuomo's mastery of politics.
Mastery is the only word to describe his accomplishment, but it is unlikely to be the last word.


Janice Cleveland Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Janice Lee Cleveland and Dana Stanley Washburn, who are to graduate next Sunday from the University of Massachusetts Medical School in Worcester, took place yesterday at the Wellesley Hills (Mass.) Congregational Church.
The Rev.
Victoria Guest, assisted by the Rev.
Jamie Gustafson, performed the ceremony.


Reviews/Music; Harpsichordist, Pianist And Tenor in Recital Debuts
LEAD:  Ketil Haugsand


Julia van Roden Weds Executive
LEAD: Julia McKay van Roden, a daughter of Amy McKay Biddle of Jamestown, R.I., and Donald van Roden of Wyomissing, Pa., was married yesterday to Andrew H. Lerman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max R. Lerman of East Falls, Pa.
The Rev.
Thomas Guthrie Speers 3d performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Merion Golf Club in Ardmore,


Daily Rail Service to Cape Is Returning
LEAD: Passenger train service to Cape Cod from throughout the Northeast will more than double this summer.
Daily service is returning after a 24-year hiatus under a new agreement between Amtrak and a regional railroad.


Zouk, a Distinctive, Infectious Dance Music
LEAD: Empires can sow wondrous musical hybrids.
At the moment, emissaries from across France's past and present domains - Zaire and Senegal and Cameroon in Africa, Martinique and Guadeloupe in the Caribbean - are getting together in state-of-the-art studios in Paris, using American electric guitars and Japanese synthesizers and digital tape decks to assemble pop songs heard around the world.


Linda Gail Kent Wed To Howell B. Binkley
LEAD: Linda Gail Kent, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerol E. Kent of Clarence, N.Y., was married yesterday to Howell Bagby Binkley, a son of Louise Binkley of Winston-Salem, N.C., and the late John E. Binkley Jr.
The Rev.
Carl Thitchener performed the Unitarian ceremony aboard the yacht Binghamton in Edgewater, N


C. E. F. Sandmel Married To Barbara Ann Simonetti
LEAD: The marriage of Barbara Ann Simonetti, a daughter of Mary R. Simonetti of Stamford, Conn., and the late Arthur Simonetti, to Charles Edwin Fox Sandmel, a son of Frances F. Sandmel of Waterville, Me., and the late Rabbi Samuel Sandmel, took place last evening at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated.


POETIC INJUSTICE
LEAD:  Come, Citizen Dog,  we have chosen the short straw. - Henri Coulette, ''The  Blue-Eyed Precinct Worker,'' from ''The War of the Secret Agents''*


Bringing Back a Bit Of the Old Neighborhood
LEAD: NEIGHBORHOOD historic preservation projects - used by local governments in part to revitalize their inner cities - have become another source of work for historians.
Local officials need them to verify the historic significance of properties and design renovations.
Private owners with historic properties need to know what home improvements qualify for a tax credit.


OUR MUSCLE-BOUND NAVY
LEAD: Charles R. Morris's otherwise excellent discussion of our carrier-minded Navy has one serious flaw (''Our Muscle-Bound Navy,'' April 24).
He fails to discuss the Navy's long-stated intention, in the event of war, of operating two to four carriers in a single battle group.
Adapting the author's figures, this means that the battle group could launch 48 to 96 F-14 fighters carrying 288 to 576 Phoenix missiles to meet the oncoming Soviet bombers - not the 24 fighters carrying 144 missiles, which Mr.


Q and A
LEAD:  Going to Cuba


DRUGS IN COLLEGES: TO TEST OR NOT TO TEST; RANDOM TESTS ABUSE DIGNITY
LEAD: NOTHING better illustrates the low regard that the National Collegiate Athletic Association has often had for the rights of student-athletes than its random drug-testing policy.
There are a number of alternatives for addressing the problem of substance abuse.
Unfortunately, the N.C.A.A. chooses an approach that protects the public-relations image of its member institutions but shows little or no concern for the dignity and privacy of the vast majority of hard-working young athletes who are drug-free.


M. I. Fleischer, Investor, to Wed Miss Patterson
LEAD: Edward Patterson of New York has announced that his daughter Lucinda Dear Patterson and Michael Irving Fleischer will be married on June 25.
The future bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norbert Fleischer of Vineland, N.J.


What Right Have We To Meddle in Panama?
LEAD: To the Editor:


What's In Now? Natural Music
LEAD: Regular concert-goers often find that listening to music through loudspeakers is a mixed pleasure, and their cavils are usually of a particular kind.
It isn't that they have unreasonable expectations of reproduced music being anything like the real thing.
They are willing to make allowance for the inherent and irreducible discrepancies between the music and its reproduction.


Picnics and Strolls and Chamber Airs
LEAD: ''I AM a bag of energy,'' said Ruth Glasser Sommers, the New York cellist who has just about singlehandedly organized the new Dobbs Ferry Chamber Music Festival, ''so even though it's taken an enormous amount of time and running around, when I got the idea for a chamber series in a beautiful place, I just went ahead and did it.


DELEGATE TALLY
LEAD: Current breakdown of Presidential preference of delegates to national political conventions, compiled by The New York Times.
Preferences are based on state laws, party rules, delegates' public statements and projections from early results in caucus states.
DEMOCRATS  Dukakis . . . 1,705  Jackson .


Miss Mitchell Is Affianced
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
David Lindsay Mitchell of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Beatrice Hunnewell Mitchell to Paul Scott Sperry, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert K. Sperry of Newtown Square, Pa.


For Reagans, Stately Rooms But No View
LEAD: When President and Mrs.
Reagan stay at Spaso House, they will be adding their names to a long and illustrious list of guests who have visited the yellow mansion that has been the American Ambassador's residence in Moscow since 1933.


Verbatim: A Widening Gap
LEAD: 'America is moving backward - not forward -in its effort to achieve the full participation of minority citizens in the life and prosperity of the nation.
In education, employment, income, health, longevity and other basic measures of individual and social well-being, gaps persist -and in some cases are widening - between members of minority groups and the majority population.


KEROUAC AT THE END OF THE ROAD
LEAD: I grew up in the 50's in St.
Petersburg, Fla., which is probably as close to growing up in a test tube or sitcom as any natural child will get.


Delhi Cupola Waits 20 Years for the Mahatma
LEAD: In the heart of this capital, behind a large monument built by the British to commemorate the dead of World War I, stands an elegant cupola that once housed a statue of King George V. The cupola is still empty, 20 years after King George was removed from his post there.
Because of a continuing controversy about the structure's imperial origins, there is still no sign of the statue of Mohandas K.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  MIDDLETOWN TRIATHLON  The fifth annual triathlon in Middletown next Sunday will start with a bicycle race, continue with a canoe race and end on foot - 36 miles later.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a problem with moss growing on the bricks on my patio.
I've tried using weed killer.
It works, but only temporarily, and it poses a threat to the surrounding shrubs.
Can you suggest anything else?


Takeover in Jersey City
LEAD: The New Jersey Constitution says the state must provide each child with a ''thorough and efficient'' education.
Last week, state education officials were trying to do just that when they moved to take over the Jersey City schools.


8 CANDIDATES VIE IN MONTANA RACE
LEAD: Montana's race for Governor, muddied by the withdrawal of the incumbent and the unexpected death of his principal opponent, has left the state with more candidates than it has seen in 16 years.


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed distribution of The New York Times in some areas.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


NEIGHBOR STATES WAGE A TAX WAR
LEAD: Thousands of New Hampshire residents who work in Maine say they are angry that Maine offers them no benefits while it forces them to pay millions of dollars each year in income taxes.
They have begun lobbying officials of both states and the Federal Government for changes.


Grand Canyon
LEAD: To the Editor: By the fourth day of a rafting trip down the Colorado River through the Grand Canyon, Franz Lidz found things ''a little dull'' and by the fifth day he ''started wishing for an escape helicopter.''


There Is Much Outdoor Work to be Done
LEAD: WEED, plant and mow.
These three deeds are important to catch up after too many days of rain.
Three Days


Illinois Bell Restores Some Phone Hookups
LEAD: A new system has been hooked up to restore service to half of Illinois Bell's 35,000 suburban customers whose telephones have been faulty since Mother's Day.
But some of the residents whose service was restored said they still had phone troubles.


ROOTS OF THE NURSING GAP ARE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
LEAD: Even as the United States opened the golden door to millions of unregistered aliens this month in a historic amnesty program, Federal immigration officials threatened to slam it shut on thousands of foreign nurses working in this country's hospitals.
A deal negotiated last week in Washington will keep the door open for another year.


Rochester Police Killing of a Black Stirs an Outcry
LEAD: The fatal shooting this week of an unarmed black fugitive by a white police officer has stirred a community outcry and a call by a group of black ministers for Governor Cuomo to appoint a special prosecutor in the case.


Correction
LEAD: A report last Sunday about the marriage of Marjorie Fay McCourt to Thomas Savage Clement misidentified the bridegroom's mother.
She is Mrs.
T.
Williams Roberts Jr. of Villanova, Pa.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.96
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.48
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.70
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
8.93
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
13.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
17.75


History Buff Tracking Medal of Honor Holders
LEAD: TOMORROW, just as he has every Memorial Day for the last six years, Henry J. Sundvik of Secaucus will visit Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia to pay homage to winners of the Medal of Honor.


Restoring Windowsills
LEAD: WOODEN windowsills receive a great deal of abuse from weather.
Unless they are carefully maintained, moisture can enter the wood and foster decay.
The only effective repair for badly rotted windowsills is replacement, a tricky job even for experienced carpenters.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Kennebunkport, Me.; Historic Inn To Be Rebuilt
LEAD: THE owners of the Shawmut Inn will soon begin a $20 million project to renovate and expand the historic inn beside the Atlantic Ocean.


Lori Barbanel Is Wed
LEAD: At Congregation Adas Kodesch Shel Emeth in Wilmington, Del., Lori Leslie Barbanel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Barbanel of Tamarac, Fla., was married yesterday to Mark David Kuller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Kuller of Allentown, Pa.
Rabbi Leonard E. Gewirz and Cantor Morris Markowitz officiated.


Siaka P. Stevens Is Dead at 82; Sierra Leone Leader for 17 Years
LEAD: Former President Siaka P. Stevens, who led this small West African nation for 17 years, died today at his home after a brief illness.
He was 82 years old.


Reds' Blunder in 9th Helps Pirates Win
LEAD: Dave Concepcion tagged up too soon from third base to scuttle a ninth-inning rally and preserve the Pittsburgh Pirates' 4-2 victory over the Cincinnati Reds today.


The Science of Socking It
LEAD: THE greatest home-run hitter I ever saw was Ronnie Wolkowitz.
Some people may never have heard of Ronnie Wolkowitz, but for one summer, when I was a boy, Ronnie Wolkowitz terrorized not only pitchers but old ladies carrying groceries, too.


Strutting to the Salsa Beat
LEAD: A couple swaying to the sounds of salsa music as they marched in the Cuban Day Parade yesterday.
At least 6,000 people lined Avenue of the Americas for the fifth annual celebration of the city's Cuban community. (NYT/Dith Pran)


Update on Integration
LEAD: Twenty years ago, a Presidential commission warned that America was ''moving toward two societies, one black, one white - separate and unequal.'' Two decades of substantial progress in civil rights changed that course but America remains a long way from full integration.
Now a new commission, headed by two former Presidents, makes clear the importance of persevering.


Piniella Changes His Job With Yanks
LEAD: Lou Piniella, who was moved from the field to the front office last October in another of George Steinbrenner's annual Yankee shakeups, said today that he had resigned as general manager, although he intends to remain with the Yankees in a scouting and player-evaluation capacity.


Mears Wins a Checkered 500 for His 3d Indy Title
LEAD: The Indianapolis 500, slowed all day by accidents, ended in confusion today.
The only apparently clear facts were that Rick Mears won here for the third time and Roger Penske, the owner of Mears's car, made clever use of the ever-present yellow caution flags.


The Spoils of War
LEAD: Youngsters in a southern suburb of Beirut collecting spent shell casings yesterday as the presence of about 5,000 Syrian soldiers put an end to the fighting between rival Shiite militias.
Syria said yesterday that the troops would be withdrawn in a few days and redeployed in positions around the 14-square-mile area, and that security duties would be turned over to the Lebanese authorities.


Dance; City Ballet Bill a Model of Diversity
LEAD: It may be back to business as usual for the New York City Ballet but, American Music Festival or no, the company keeps pouring out its riches.
In performances Friday and Saturday nights at the New York State Theater, three ballets re-entering the spring repertory suggested the wide range of expression and style of which the City Ballet is capable.


New Zealand (Minus Woolly Thinking)
LEAD: When people in New York and Washington find out that I have recently returned from a self-granted sabbatical year in New Zealand, I can't escape. ''Tell me about it,'' they implore. ''I've been thinking about going  [ working, living, retiring ]  there myself.
Is it as beautiful as they say?
No wonder you look so relaxed.


Music and Dance Series To Open in Central Park
LEAD: Summerstage, an 11-week series of free music and dance at the band shell in Central Park, is to begin on June 17 at 8:30 P.M. with a performance featuring the American Tap Dance Orchestra, the Persuasions and the composer Lenny Pickett.


Dr. Elizabeth Gross Weds Paul Garland
LEAD: Dr.
Elizabeth Jane Gross, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Gross of Sands Point, L.I., was married last evening to Paul Bennett Garland, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Garland of New York.
Rabbi Paul M. Steinberg officiated at the Tavern on the Green in Manhattan.


Clipper and Gipper And Gorbachev, Too
LEAD: AS President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev hold their summit meeting in Moscow, the two leaders will be followed closely by one of their most fervent fans back in the United States: Joe DiMaggio.


Review/Art; Lane's Romantic Paintings Depict New England's Past
LEAD: With most visitors to the National Gallery lining up for the Gauguin exhibition that sprawls across the east wing, a museumgoer might easily overlook Fitz Hugh Lane's placid paintings, which hang in three galleries of the old west wing.
These 61 canvases, many of maritime scenes at sunset, remain on view here through September 5, casting an intense and seductive glow.


Sears Merchandiser Given a Broader Role
LEAD: Matthew A. Howard, in his 26-year career with Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, has been in charge of single, large categories of merchandise.
Now, as the new senior executive vice president, merchandising, for the Sears merchandise group, Mr.
Howard will have his broadest assignment.
It will include product developing, buying, marketing and merchandising of all products and services sold in


Moving Up
LEAD: They make the most money and they have the shortest work weeks, so it should stand to reason that major league baseball, basketball and football players have some of the best of all possible jobs.


Eliza O. Webb Weds Physician
LEAD: The marriage of Eliza Ordway Webb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Gaynor Webb of New Canaan, Conn., to Dr.
Craig Robert Faulks, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Faulks of Rocky River, Ohio, took place yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church in New Canaan.
The Rev.
Guthrie T. Speers Jr. performed the ceremony.


Shall Tourists or Grapes Rule in the Napa Valley?
LEAD: It was a proposal that the Florida marketing company hoped the Napa Valley vintner would find irresistible.


Marketing Wins, News Loses, on TV
LEAD: The television news business is having an identity crisis.
It arises out of conflict.
The conflict is between journalism and marketing.
Journalism addresses the realities of people's lives.
Marketing addresses their fantasies.


WASHINGTON TALK: Art and Politics; Fuentes a World Citizen at Home in Washington
LEAD: Novelist, essayist, professor and diplomat, Carlos Fuentes is a well traveled citizen of the world.
But, at curious junctures in his life, Washington has been home to him, first as the son of a Mexican diplomat posted here in the 1930's, 25 years later as a resident fellow at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars and the last few months as the Heritage Professor of Arts and Cultural Criticism at George Mason University in suburburan


West Point to Update Polluting Plant
LEAD: The smoke is always there, usually a plume of white mist dancing 10 feet above a smokestack on the campus of the United States Military Academy, whose turreted stone buildings dot the highlands across the Hudson River from here.


Memorial Day Closings
LEAD: The nation's stock and commodity markets are closed today in observance of Memorial Day.
Government offices, banks and many businesses are also closed.


Imperfect Ending For Ojeda and Mets
LEAD: In another moment of defeat and disgust, Bob Ojeda paused as he exited a game in April to heave his glove into the box seats.
Yesterday, with everything that was important already having been thrown away, Ojeda opted not to add either his glove or his remaining patience to the mess.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Mears Wins at Indianapolis
Rick Mears won the Indianapolis 500 for the third time in a race slowed by accidents.
The mishaps created confusion over the placement of other drivers.
SportsMonday, page 35.
Tourism vs. Wine-Making
Vintners in California's Napa Valley are resisting development in an area where agriculture and tourism coexist in a delicate balance.


Shaken by Pollution, the Jersey Shore Is Seeking a Comeback
LEAD: Pat Grosshardt, the manager of the Jolly Roger motel in Holgate, N.J., vacuumed rugs, opened windows and talked about the season she would just as soon forget: the summer of '87.


Eriko Kusomoto Marries Dr. Robert John Gottner
LEAD: At St.
Patrick's Cathedral, Eriko Kusomoto, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Kusomoto of Fort Lee, N.J., and Osaka, Japan, was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert John Gottner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Gottner of Arlington Heights, Ill.
The Rev.
James P. McIlhone performed the ceremony.


Laura Lipitz Cherkis Is Wed to John Katz
LEAD: At the Westchester Reform Temple in Scarsdale, N.Y., Laura Lipitz Cherkis was married yesterday to John Katz by Rabbi Jack Stern, a cousin of the bridegroom.


Runaways of 42d Street: AIDS Begins Its Scourge
LEAD: Robert was born on Rikers Island, and his luck never got much better.


BRIEFING
LEAD:  Morale Check


How to Tell Psychologists From Psychiatrists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Coroner's Report Blames Cocaine For Drowning of Illinois Boy, 10
LEAD: Despite his family's insistence that it could not be true, a coroner's report says a 10-year-old boy drowned because he had used cocaine.


Major Shake-Up in Pakistan
LEAD: President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq dissolved the National Assembly today, dismissed his Prime Minister and accused the lawmakers of failing to maintain law and order in Pakistan.


Dollar Speculators Warned
LEAD: A senior United States Treasury official warned financial markets on Saturday not to speculate on the dollar because leading industrial nations were determined to stabilize the currency and to coordinate economic policies.


2 Youths Charged in Disk Jockey's Slaying
LEAD: Two Bronx teen-agers were arrested over the weekend and charged with the murder last year of a rap disk jockey, the police said yesterday.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Albertson's Inc., Boise, Idaho, a food and drug chain, named as a director A. Gary Ames, president and chief executive of Mountain Bell, a subsidiary of U S West, Denver.


Walters in Saudi Arabia
LEAD: Vernon A. Walters, the chief American delegate to the United Nations, held talks today with King Fahd in the Red Sea city of Jidda on the ninth leg of a Middle East tour.
Mr.
Walters is visiting the region to exchange ideas on the war between Iran and Iraq and other issues.


Downturn In Steel Predicted
LEAD: Shipments and profits in the steel industry may have peaked after nearly two years of steady increases.
Indeed, some industry executives and economists are predicting declines in the second half of this year.


Nonprofits Have Unfair Edge in Marketplace
LEAD: To the Editor:


Machine Tool Orders Dropped a Bit in April
LEAD: Orders for American-made machine tools declined six-tenths of 1 percent in April from the previous month, to $253 million, according to a report to be released today by the industry's trade association.


Free Trade a Joy at Quebec Utility
LEAD: Amid the Canadian dispute over the free-trade agreement with the United States, some enthusiastic endorsements have come from Quebec, a province emerging with new confidence from an inward-looking decade under the separatist government ousted in a 1985 election.
And among the Quebec backers of expanded trade, few have more to gain than Hydro-Quebec, the electricity utility that is owned by the province and that has staked its ambitious expansion plans on huge sales to New York and New


Transcripts of Reagan and Gorbachev Remarks
LEAD: Following are transcripts of the statements by Mikhail S. Gorbachev and President Reagan on Mr.
Reagan's arrival today at the Kremlin.
Mr.
Gorbachev's remarks were translated by a Soviet interpreter.
Gorbachev Statement


Gateway Parks Area Needs Federal Help
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hot Potato Redux
LEAD: Dave Bresnahan batted .149 without a home run in 52 games with the Williamsport (Pa.) Bills, but he threw the meanest potato in baseball history, and that's why the minor league team will retire the catcher's number tonight.
Actually, he threw the only potato in the baseball history, but it cost him his job.


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
China will soon allow foreign banks to open branches in large coastal cities, Li Guixian, the governor of the People's Bank of China, said.
Currently, foreign banks can open new branches only in special economic zones in south China.
The New China news agency quoted Mr.
Li as telling a meeting of bankers that China should reform its foreign exchange system, letting coastal cities borrow more short-term foreign exchange, allowing a limited number of individuals to deal in foreign exchange and allowing companies to open foreign exchange accounts.


First Ladies' Traveling Road Show: We're Fine, Thank You Very Much
LEAD: When they met beneath the gilded bronze chandeliers in St.
George's Hall, they smiled with brittle cordiality.
When they listened to their husbands' dueling proverbs, their stolid expressions melted into laughter.
By the time they emerged from the towering Assumption Cathedral, Nancy Reagan and Raisa


The Fame Game
LEAD: He may not be the most famous man in America, but Don Dunphy is in the running.
He has been inducted into eight halls of fame, and as far as anyone seems to know, that may be a record.


Life Beyond the Kremlin
LEAD: They are Europeans. They are Asians.


U.S. PEN Unit Fights For East Bloc Victims
LEAD: Ivan Sokulsky, a Ukrainian poet and journalist, is in solitary confinement in a Soviet labor camp.
He was arrested in 1980 and sentenced to 10 years' ''special regime'' and five years' internal exile for participating in the work of a group monitoring Soviet adherence to the Helsinki Accords.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Aware of your interest in Russian proverbs, let me add another one to your collection: 'It is better to see once than to hear a hundred times.' ''  - Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  [ 6:3. ]


Paris Journal; '68 to '88: A Maoist's Great Leap to the Mainstream
LEAD: When the editor of one of France's leading newspapers is reminded that two decades ago he was a Maoist firebrand, he recalls by way of riposte that a young man named Michel Rocard was so swept up in the student upheaval of 1968 that he proclaimed it ''a genuinely revolutionary situation.''


Edith Newhall Weds
LEAD: St.
David's (Radnor) Episcopal Church in Wayne, Pa., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Edith Allerton Newhall, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Newhall of the Chestnut Hill section of Philadelphia, to David Leslie Stuart Walters, the son of William Walters of Bozeman, Mont., and the late Mary Wilson Walters.


Surprising Stanford Eliminates Rutgers
LEAD: The tag that has been affixed to the Stanford University baseball team -defending national champion - can be as unreasonable as it can be complimentary.


Outdoors: Bluefish Begin to Stir
LEAD: IT was improbable but delightful.
I was at Wasque Point at Chappaquiddick.
The falling tide was racing to the westward, bluefish were in the rip gobbling up alewives that had only recently completed their spawning runs, and I was alone.


Piniella Changes Jobs
LEAD: Lou Piniella announced he had resigned as general manager, but would remain with the Yankees in a scouting capacity. (NYT) Page 39.


Retailers Suffering In Key Sector
LEAD: Meager sales of women's apparel are troubling retailers, whose inventories are mounting as the lightest business season approaches.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Spruced-Up 'Peter Pan'


Battery Park City Fell Into a Political Mudhole
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/2-8


Climbing the Walls
LEAD: For all those times you could have climbed the wall, there's a new product that allows you to scale the heights of your living room, kitchen or office.
It is designed as a practice tool for rock climbers, but its appeal may be broader than that.


Kristin Klein Married To William J. Donahoe
LEAD: Mary Kristin Klein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul L. Klein Jr. of Morgan Hill, Calif., and William Joseph Donahoe, a son of Col. and Mrs.
Joseph Donahoe of Cincinnati, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Daniel Zak, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the chapel of the Sacred Heart School in Menlo Park,


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, MAY 30, 1988
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  The U.S. steel industry's rebound may have peaked after nearly two years of rising shipments and profits, some industry executives and economists say.
A downturn is predicted for the second half of this year because of weaker demand from the auto, appliance and home construction industries.


Memorial Day
LEAD:  NEW YORK  Parades: Manhattan parade starts at 11 A.M. at 72d Street and West End Avenue, goes east to Broadway, north to 86th Street, west to Riverside Drive and north to Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument.
Bronx parade at 11 A.M. at Grand Concourse and Van Cortlandt Avenue East.
Brooklyn parade at 11 A.M.


Horse Racing; Seeking the Gold Captures Peter Pan
LEAD: Seeking the Gold and Tejano ran head and head for nearly a mile before Seeking the Gold drew away to a two-length victory yesterday in the $234,800 Peter Pan Stakes for 3-year-olds at Belmont Park.


Philby's Recruitment
LEAD: To the Editor:


At Publishing Convention, Booksellers and Hype
LEAD: It is six years since the nation's book publishers and booksellers last met in Anaheim, and the industry has undergone major changes since.


Ouster of Texas University Chief Is Generating Charges of Politics
LEAD: The dismissal of the president of Southwest Texas State University has led to bitter allegations of political interference in the Texas higher education system.


Pentagon Reports Troop Cut
LEAD: The armed forces continued to slash their active-duty strength in April to meet budget cuts, paring more than 28,500 positions from their ranks in one month, the Pentagon has reported.


The Sobersided Summit
LEAD: At last we face the possibility of a sobersided Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting.
After the euphoria of Geneva, the frenzy at Reykjavik and the super-salesmanship in Washington, we approach R-G IV somewhat subdued.
Pity we have to break up the team just when they're getting the hang of it.


Revived Mavericks Tie Series at 2-2
LEAD: Suddenly, the playoff series that so many Los Angeles fans thought might be over in four games has turned into a nightmare for the Lakers.


Three Days in Managua: Discord Gives Way to Common Ground
LEAD: After three days of peace talks that ended Saturday night, the Government and the contra guerrillas appear closer than ever to a final armistice, although the two sides are still separated by important differences.


Demotion Denied
LEAD: ''I most assuredly am not considering any other position in or out of Government and do not expect to do so in the future.'' So said Justice Sandra Day O'Connor recently in a statement quashing the suggestion of some Republican leaders and other mentioners that she should fill the Vice Presidential slot on the G.O.P.


Newspaper Executive Kidnapped in Bogota
LEAD: Men firing submachine guns kidnapped a newspaper executive who was once a presidential candidate today after shooting his bodyguard, radio stations reported.


Bangladesh Floods Kill 5
LEAD: At least five people have died and thousands have been forced to flee their homes because of flooding in northeastern Bangladesh, Government officials and news reports said today.


Review/Television; Film Group Tribute To Lemmon
LEAD: Everybody loves Jack Lemmon.
That's the comforting message of ''A Salute to Jack Lemmon,'' on CBS tonight at 10.
The occasion is the 16th Annual American Film Institute Life Achievement Award.
The all-star dinner, adorned with black ties and gowns, took place in Beverly Hills on March 10.


To Save the Endangered Addax Antelope
LEAD: To the Editor:


Plane Crashes Into a House, Killing Four People in Arizona
LEAD: A small plane crashed into a house east of downtown today, killing four people, including a 12-year-old girl who had been in a swimming pool at the residence, the authorities said.


Dana Alison Gelb Is Married to Alan Paul Safran
LEAD: Dana Alison Gelb, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen G. Gelb of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Alan Paul Safran, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert B. Safran of Cherry Hill, N.J.
Rabbi Charles A. Kroloff performed the ceremony in the garden of the Bretton Woods Inn in Morris Plains, N.J.


Woman Is Slain While Holding Infant in Arms
LEAD: A 43-year-old woman was shot to death in her home in Hollis, Queens, Saturday night by four young men who fired 18 bullets into the house while she was holding her 6-month-old son and talking on the telephone, the police said.


Big Protests Mounted In Two Russian Cities
LEAD: Policemen threw punches to break up a demonstration by about 2,000 people in Leningrad organized by a new Soviet opposition party, spokesmen said today.


Jennifer Goddard Marries James H. Scott 3d in South
LEAD: At St.
Paul's Memorial Episcopal Church in Charlottesville, Va., Jennifer Goddard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel Goddard of South Kent, Conn., was married yesterday to James Hamilton Scott 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Scott Jr. of Charlottesville.
The Rev.
David Poist performed the ceremony.


Pistons Lead but Still Worry
LEAD: The usual psychological warfare was on today at the Detroit Pistons' and Boston Celtics' practices.


Maxwell Buys 67% of Printer
LEAD: The British publisher Robert Maxwell said today that the Maxwell Communication Corporation had acquired majority control of a French printing concern, Franc,ois Imprimerie.


REAGAN AND GORBACHEV BEGIN SUMMIT PARLEY IN THE KREMLIN; 'STRIKE SPARKS' ON RIGHTS ISSUE
LEAD: Opening his first visit to the Soviet Union, President Reagan quickly engaged Mikhail S. Gorbachev today in a heated discussion on human rights.


Wall St. Faces More Layoffs As Trading Volume Shrinks
LEAD: Faced with dwindling trading volume and falling revenues, the securities industry is bracing for another large wave of layoffs, with the greatest impact likely to be felt in New York and London.


GM Recall on Throttle Defect
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation is recalling 39,000 1987 model cars to find about 8,700 built with possibly defective throttle cables that may cause the throttle to stick open.
The recall includes 1987 Buick Electra, Oldsmobile Delta 88 and Ninety-Eight, and Pontiac Bonneville models, the company said Friday.


Israel Investigates Charges That Army Buried Arabs
LEAD: The Israeli Army agreed today to investigate charges that soldiers in the West Bank buried four Palestinians up to the chest with rocks for several hours, injuring them slightly.


Business and the Law; Trying State Suits In Federal Courts
LEAD: THE year was 1809 and Chief Justice John Marshall, explaining why Federal courts should be able to hear cases involving state law, said that the Constitution ''entertains apprehensions'' that local courts are biased in favor of local citizens.


THE MOSCOW SUMMIT: THE SOCIAL SIDE  Reporter's Notebook; Presidential Stroll: Chaos and Applause
LEAD: While Yuri and Tatyana Ziman waited under siege in their apartment this evening, President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, took a chaotic stroll along Moscow's Arbat pedestrian mall.


CBS Wins the Olympics: Will It Ever See the Gold?
LEAD: WHEN word came last week that CBS had bought the American television rights to the 1992 Winter Olympics, with a bid of $243 million, industry critics immediately challenged the wisdom of the deal.
Had third-place CBS, desperate for a big play, recklessly overpaid?
It was noted that ABC, which perfected the Olympics as prime-time entertainment, had dropped out of the bidding early after losing money on this year's Winter Games, and that the other network with Olympics experience, NBC, had offered $68 million less than did CBS, which has not staged an Olympics telecast since Dwight D.


Today's Summit Schedule
LEAD: All times are local.
Moscow is eight hours ahead of Eastern daylight time.
PRESIDENT REAGAN  10 to 11:45 A.M.
Meets Mikhail S. Gorbachev in St.
Catherine's Hall in the Kremlin.
Noon to 1:45 P.M.
Returns to Spaso House, the U.S.
Ambassador's residence.  2 to 2:30 P.M.
Visits the Danilov Monastery in Moscow with Mrs.


Indicted State Senator Is County Party Chief
LEAD: A state senator, under indictment on a charge that he accepted a bribe while serving as a county commissioner, has been named chairman of the Mingo County Democratic Party.


In War on Drugs, Military Has Marginal Results
LEAD: Even as Congress moves closer to giving the armed forces more responsibility in the war against drugs, the experience of the last six years suggests that previous efforts by the military have been only marginally effective.


Magazines Pursue Japan's Working Woman
LEAD: The Japanese woman, for years portrayed as a cheerful housewife in a frilly apron, has a new image in women's magazines here: she works.


In a Belgian Field, 7,989 G.I.'s Are Not Forgotten
LEAD: Every year since World War II the visitors have been coming to the American Cemetery here, first when it was a muddy field crowded with wooden markers, now when the larches and hornbeam are lush and mature.


Dr. Harold Rusch, Cancer Researcher, 79
LEAD: Dr.
Harold Rusch, the first director of the University of Wisconsin McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, died of prostate cancer Thursday at his home in Madison.
He was 79 years old.


Molly Heminway Is Wed to Charles E. K. Moseley
LEAD: Molly Lewis Heminway, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Reid Heminway of Middlebury, Conn., and Charles Edward Keeble Moseley, the son of Mrs.
Richard C. Miles of New York and Greenwich, Conn., and the late Charles Guy Moseley, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
A.
Edward Couch performed the ceremony at the Middlebury Congregational


Judy Doctoroff Weds James Anthony O'Neill
LEAD: Judy Ellen Doctoroff, a television producer for Bill Moyers at Public Affairs Television in New York, and James Anthony O'Neill, a research chemist in the microelectronics sciences laboratory at Columbia University, were married yesterday at the Marriott Copley Place in Boston by Rabbi Albert S. Axelrad.


Making the Right Contacts in China
LEAD: Pat V. Mazzarulli knows a lot about selling and buying oil.
But the sure touch he displays in markets from Houston to Tokyo was, by his own admission, little more than groping when he decided there was business to be done in China.


THE NORIEGA FIASCO: WHAT WENT WRONG
LEAD: The collapse of the United States effort to persuade Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to step down as leader of Panama resulted from a series of miscalculations and a lack of coordination among the agencies responsible for policy toward Panama, according to American officials and diplomats.


Yankees Win; Victory May Be Costly
LEAD: John Candelaria's seventh victory of the season might have been the costliest.
The Yankee left-hander, who had been the club's most dependable and most productive pitcher this season, was forced to leave tonight's game against the Seattle Mariners after five innings because of soreness in his left elbow.


U.S. Princes of Church
LEAD:  James Aloysius Hickey


Elaine Black Yoneda, 81, Radical Labor Activist
LEAD: Elaine Black Yoneda, a radical labor activist during the Depression and the 1934 San Francisco general strike, died of a heart attack here on Thursday.
She was 81 years old.


Nothing Mini About the L'eggs Mini Marathon
LEAD: It was a Sunday morning in March, seven days before the official onset of spring.
The woman in the white T-shirt was ahead of me as I eased into the final downhill of a six-mile run around Central Park.


Talks on Strategic Arms Treaty Move Ahead, but Major Problems Remain
LEAD: American and Soviet arms control officials met tonight to try to make headway toward a new strategic arms treaty, even as American officials stressed the difficulties ahead.


Athens Journal; 30-Year Intermission Will End for Black Theater
LEAD: The final curtain fell in the Morton Theater 30 years ago.
But if you stand anywhere in the empty auditorium, amid broken wood planks and crumbling bricks, you can almost see the ghosts of black singers and comedians and hear their music and jokes.


Theater; Tammy Grimes in British-Flavored Solo
LEAD: Near the end of the first act of her one-woman show, ''A Concert in Words and Music,'' Tammy Grimes recalls having been discovered in a nightclub by Noel Coward. ''He taught me more about acting and about life than anyone I've ever known,'' she says while prefacing a rendition of ''If Love Were All'' that is strikingly different from anyone else's.


L.I. Doctor Is Found Slain at Starrett City
LEAD: The body of a physician who had been stabbed in the back of the head was found in some tall grass in Starrett City yesterday afternoon by the security police at the Brooklyn housing project.


POPE CHOOSES 25 NEW CARDINALS, INCLUDING TWO AMERICAN PRELATES
LEAD: Pope John Paul II named 25 new Cardinals today, including two Americans and a Lithuanian whose nomination was said to reflect a determination to strengthen the Roman Catholic Church inside the Soviet Union.


Curbing Dogs With Kindness
LEAD: Response to New York City's anti-dog-litter law was initially good, but compliance has declined precipitously in some areas.
Thus, We Care About New York Inc., a private group devoted to public cleanliness, has enlisted the help of the Girl Scouts, the city's Police and Sanitation Departments and Alpo Pet Foods Inc.


Robert J. Townsend, Ski Coach, 66
LEAD: Robert J. Townsend, a member of the National Ski Hall of Fame and ski coach at Williams College for 22 years, died of cancer Friday at North Adams Regional Hospital.
He was 66 years old.


Strange Surges To Take Memorial
LEAD: Curtis Strange blasted out of a bunker to within 18 inches of the 15th hole for a birdie 4, then sank a 12-foot birdie putt on 17 to win the Memorial Tournament today.
He finished two strokes ahead of Hale Irwin and David Frost.


Korean Trade Surplus
LEAD: South Korea's current account surplus rose 41 percent in the first four months of this year from its level of a year earlier, the Bank of Korea reported Friday.
The current account measures trade in merchandise and services.
The surplus for January through April was $3.89 billion, up from $2.76 billion one year ago.


Belmont Winner Is Mum
LEAD: The winner of the record $500,000 Pick-Six payoff at Belmont Park Saturday was a groom and former jockey's agent who invested $96, according to track officials and friends of the bettor, who has asked to remain anonymous.


Amy Eppler Wed To Steven Epstein
LEAD: Amy Eppler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Klaus Eppler of New York and Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Steven Daniel Epstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bennett N. Epstein of Wilmington, Del.
Rabbi Esther Adler officiated at the Norwalk, Conn., home of Irene Hochheime, a grandmother of the bridegroom.


Bridge
LEAD: Two veteran New York experts, who were playing together a quarter of a century ago, led into the final two sessions of the prestigious Goldman Pairs at the Eastern Regional Championships yesterday.


Twins Run Victory Streak to 8 Games
LEAD: Kirby Puckett didn't know if a first-inning pitch near his head carried a message or not but he answered it with two home runs, including the game-winner.


Afghan Parliament Convenes With Call for End to Fighting
LEAD: President Najibullah today convened Afghanistan's first Parliament in 15 years with a call for Moslem guerrillas to lay down their arms immediately and take legislative seats held open for them.


Soviet Teen-Ager Upsets Navratilova
LEAD: Martina Navratilova has left the French Open to the teen-agers by losing today, 6-3, 7-6, to 17-year-old Natalya Zvereva of the Soviet Union.


In Experiment, Summer Job Program Tries Matching the Student to the Job
LEAD: Most of the 30 or so students gathered in the large library of George Wingate High School in Brooklyn raised their hands when asked, ''How many of you have never had a job before?''


Group Rides Refine Biking Skills
LEAD: LARRY BLOMBERG of Pompton Plains, N.J., an accomplished swimmer, took up bicycling three years ago to round out his fitness and take part in triathlons.
But it was not until he joined group rides that he developed cycling skills, began to fill his competitive potential and truly gained from a sport that requires more technical finesse than meets the eye.


Dance; 2 Kirov Stars Galvanize Ballet Theater 'Bayadere'
LEAD: Even in a ballet season that has witnessed one apparent milestone after another in American-Soviet cooperation, Saturday night's debut with American Ballet Theater by two guest stars from the Kirov Ballet -Altynai Assylmuratova and Faruk Ruzimatov - stands out as a historic occasion.


F.D.A. Move Aids Tiny Company
LEAD: For years the cervical cap has been a cause celebre for a relatively small group of American feminists and health professionals.
But this thimble-shaped birth control device has been little known beyond its circle of enthusiasts.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  SWIMMING  Canadian Sets World Record: Allison Higson of Canada set a world record in the 200-meter breast-stroke yesterday at the Canadian Olympic trials in Montreal.
Higson, 15 years old, was timed in 2 minutes 27.27 seconds, breaking the mark of 2:27.40 set in 1986 by Silke Horner of East Germany.(AP)


JACKSON DEMANDS HELP FOR WORKERS
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, saying an absence of day care has kept hundreds of women from working at newly created jobs at Newark International Airport, urged the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey today to provide child care services for those who need it.


Catherine Keggi, Counselor, Weds
LEAD: At the Congregational Church in Middlebury, Conn., Catherine Grant Keggi, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kristaps Juris Keggi of Middlebury, was married yesterday to George Howard Hunter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Hunter Jr. of New Orleans.
The Rev.
A.
Edward Couch performed the ceremony.


Where Have All the 20-Game Winners Gone?
LEAD: SINCE the end of World War II, 29 pitchers have recorded 20 victories or more in a season three or more times.
Roger Clemens is on his way to becoming the 30th.
If he does, he would be the first to attain that level of quality pitching in the 1980's.


Investigation Is Opened Of Prosecutor in Queens
LEAD: The Manhattan District Attorney said yesterday that he was investigating allegations that the Queens District Attorney, John J. Santucci, had misused city funds in connection with the unsuccessful 1982 and 1984 State Senate campaigns by his son, Thomas Santucci.


Westway Substitute Not on Map For 10 Years
LEAD: Fifteen years after the collapse of the old West Side Highway and more than two years after the ambitious Westway project expired, a new replacement road is still at least a decade away.


Harlan H. Simon Wed To Eden Michele Platt
LEAD: Eden Michele Platt, a foreign exchange broker with Harlow Meyer Savage, and Harlan H. Simon, a foreign exchange trader with Bank America International, both in New York, were married yesterday in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Jack Stern Jr., assisted by Cantor Joseph Boardman, performed the ceremony at the Westchester Reform Temple.


A COLLEGE TRIBUTE TO A 'LONE VOICE'
LEAD: Laurie A. Recht, a 34-year-old legal secretary who was shouted down at a public hearing in Yonkers last January as the only speaker in favor of a court-ordered desegregation plan, received a standing ovation today as the commencement speaker at the College of New Rochelle.


Booksellers' Meeting Draws Publishing Leaders, and Imitators
LEAD: Avon Books once boycotted the annual convention of the American Booksellers Association, saying it was not worth the six-figure cost of attending.
But the publisher was soon back at the same old stand - several stands, in fact.
Concluding that it had been mistaken in staying away, Avon wanted to display its wares in style.


Bush's Top Strategists: Smooth Poll-Taker and Hard-Driving Manager
LEAD: Robert Teeter spent 1976 trying to prove that the Republican in the White House (a congenial, decent, sometimes awkward man) was better than an unknown Democrat (a serious, smart and frugal governor with no foreign policy experience.) Thanks in good measure to Mr.
Teeter's surveys and strategies, President Gerald R.


Campaigns That Turn Off Older Americans
LEAD: Microwave ovens, video cassette recorders, automatic teller machines and other consumer devices are typically marketed as convenient time savers.
But the companies and advertising agencies that are selling them this way may be missing out on the vast market for older Americans, according to a forthcoming study.


New Summit Proverb: Speak Not Russian Ill
LEAD: Before getting down to business in the Kremlin yesterday, President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev added to their summit anthology of Russian folk wisdom.
Mr.
Gorbachev seemed to have some trouble with Mr.
Reagan's contribution, rendered in fractured Russian.


Reagan Is Said to Believe Meese Hurts Bush
LEAD: Howard H. Baker Jr., the White House chief of staff, said today that he and President Reagan believe that the investigation of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d has damaged Vice President Bush's Presidential election chances.


Olympic Notebook; Drug Tests Scare Off Athletes
LEAD: The use of anabolic steroids by some athletes has apparently caused organizers of the Pepsi Invitational next Sunday in Los Angeles to cancel two of the throwing events, the shot-put and the discus throw.


50 HOUSES USED FOR DRUGS FELLED
LEAD: Bulldozers flattened 50 vacant houses over three days last week in an attempt by the Mayor's office to rid the city of buildings used as bases for drug activity.


Books of The Times; Strength and Contemplation in Two Novels
LEAD:  After She Left  By Richard P. Brickner  290 pages.
Donald Hutter/Henry Holt. $18.95.
The Jade Stalk  By Jonathan Fast  271 pages.
E.
P.
Dutton. $18.95.


Sea and Sand Draw Crowds on Memorial Weekend
LEAD: Beachgoers basking under sunny skies yesterday, with temperatures in the 80's, at Coney Island as they celebrated Memorial Day weekend.


Bush's Top Strategists: Smooth Poll-Taker and Hard-Driving Manager
LEAD: In Lee Atwater's world of politics, there is always a price to pay.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; Milk Wars II: the Cartel Strikes Back
LEAD: Just when he thought it was safe to go back into the dairy barn, Marc Goldman heard a rustling in the hay.
It was the old New York City milk cartel, and its fangs were longer than ever.


The Greening of the Red Planet
LEAD: During President Reagan's visit to Moscow this week, his host will engage him in serious talk about a favorite subject, the stars. ''Drop 'Star Wars,' '' Mr.
Gorbachev will say. ''Let's have our countries go together to Mars instead.'' Mr.
Reagan won't lightly abandon his missile defense project but he might be tempted by the Mars mission, which Mr.


Alex Chilton's Ironic Guitar
LEAD: Alex Chilton, the singer and guitarist, opened his show on Thursday night at the Knitting Factory by saying, ''Let's boogie.'' Few phrases have been as ironic.
Launching into a blues medley - ''Te Ni Nee Ni Nu'' and ''Tip On In'' - by the guitarist Slim Harpo, Mr.
Chilton proceeded to sing lines like ''Lay it on me, baby'' without any of the black affectations a listener expects from a white performer.


Old Times Square: A Block of Memories
LEAD: If you are looking for the last vestige of old Times Square, begin at the sign of Simple Simon and the Pieman.


Who Should Honor the Dead?
LEAD: Flags make for wonderful parades, but waving them clouds reason and constricts sympathy.
Even as President Reagan is today an honored guest in the Soviet Union, a veterans' group in a New England town has barred a group of visiting Soviet teen-agers from the town's Memorial Day parade.


Ms. Roberts Wed To Dr. B. D. Zevin
LEAD: Margaret Page Roberts, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene L. Roberts of Philadelphia, and Dr.
Barry David Zevin, a son of Linda Zevin and Dr.
Ronald A. Zevin, both of Short Hills, N.J., were married yesterday in Philadelphia.
Judge Dolores K. Sloviter of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Philadelphia performed the ceremony at the Belmont mansion in Fairmount


Chinese Journalist Pushes His Ideas on 'Openness'
LEAD: Inside the crenelated tower of Chinese journalism, where news stories are aimed not so much at the truth as at instilling a ''correct'' attitude in the reader, Liu Binyan has been an often lone knight errant, a slayer of the dragons of convention, corruption and malfeasance.
And he has paid a heavy price for his outspokenness.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Since they were swapped in the nine-player trade between the Mets and the Padres after the 1986 season, who has been the better hitter, Kevin Mitchell or Kevin McReynolds?


Metro Matters; From City Hall To President Of Lincoln Center
LEAD: When Nathan Leventhal resigned as New York City's Deputy Mayor four years ago to become president of Lincoln Center, he received the following telegram from a law school classmate: ''Congratulations on finally getting into politics.''


Europe Airlines See Profit Drop
LEAD: Leading European airlines expect their profits to fall by about 16 percent this year after a dramatic 93 percent jump in earnings in 1987, the Association of European Airlines said Friday.


Blues; Liquid Solos and Falsetto
LEAD: The blues guitarist and singer Albert King doesn't play a note so much as he worries it.
He'll create an entire line by bending the strings of his guitar instead of moving his fingers, creating liquid solos dripping with passion.
Onstage, Mr.
King passes himself off as an avuncular, happy figure; in contrast, his solos sound anguished.


The Consumer Will Pay
LEAD: To the Editor:


WQXR to Stop Offering Reason for Stock Moves
LEAD: Because experts' interpretations of stock market fluctuations often ''confuse rather than inform,'' New York radio stations WQXR-FM and AM will stop incorporating them into their daily stock market reports, said Warren Bodow, WQXR's president.
The policy change will take effect tomorrow.


Architecture Awards for Restorations
LEAD: Several of New York City's most talked-about restoration projects, as well a shelter for the homeless in Brooklyn and a college library in Queens, have received Albert S. Bard Awards for Excellence in Architecture and Urban Design, which are presented by the City Club of New York.


Crackdown on Tailgate Beers at Shea
LEAD: Under a sky a few shades shy of Mets blue, Gary Deutch and his friends began a time-honored pre-game ritual in the Shea Stadium parking lot yesterday: They gathered at the rear of their Ford Fiesta and popped open a few cans of beer.


Soviet Cyclist Wins in Jersey
LEAD: For the first time ever in an Olympic year, cyclists from the Soviet Union and the United States are holding a series of competitive meets.
They met today in the 17th annual Tour of Nutley Bicycle Classic, a 50-mile race through the streets of this Essex County town.


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed distribution of The New York Times in some areas.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


Dukakis, Afloat Off Jersey, Calls Environmental Policy 'Ridiculous'
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis took to the Atlantic Ocean off the New Jersey shore today to denounce what he called the ''ridiculous'' environmental policies of the Reagan Administration.


Drivers, Start Your Engines
LEAD: Have your friends ever likened your tendencies behind the wheel to those of Parnelli Jones or Mario Andretti?
Have you ever wanted to test your driving skills in a car race?
The Fairfield County Sports Car Club offers you that chance at its third autocross of the season next Sunday.
The event, to be held in the parking lot behind Pitney Bowes in Norwalk,


Beyond the Kremlin
LEAD: They worry about drug and alcohol addiction, a high divorce rate and death on the highway.
They are voracious readers.
They love television and the theater.
Here are some of the facts of life in the Soviet Union 71 years after the Bolshevik Revolution.


Rise in Mortgage Rates Is Causing A Slowdown in Housing Industry
LEAD: Faced with higher mortgage rates and expecting them to rise further, the housing industry has begun to retrench.


New York Can't Afford to Economize on Its Public Libraries; Service for a Lifetime
LEAD: To the Editor:


Accounts
LEAD: *
Zip-Pak Inc. to Della Femina, Travisano &amp; Partners for advertising and Creamer Dickson Basford for public relations.


Darling Outlasts Dodgers' Leary
LEAD: The Mets didn't throw any baseballs at Pedro Guerrero last night, and Guerrero didn't throw any bats at the Mets.
So, the return match never materialized.


Moscow Summit: Preaching to the Unconverted; President Meets With Dissidents, And Tea and Empathy Are Served
LEAD: President Reagan walked up to Abe Stolar with a smile, shook his hand warmly, and said: ''I've just spoken to Mikhail Gorbachev about you.
I told him we came from the same state and were born at the same time.''


Irish Distillers Rejects Offer
LEAD: Ireland's top whisky maker today rejected a joint takeover bid by two British consumer-products companies, Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. and Allied-Lyons P.L.C.


Boat Flips and Passenger Dies
LEAD: A 36-year-old man was killed yesterday when a boat he was thinking of buying hit a wave and flipped over, hurling him into the water near Freeport, L.I., the police said.


Bitter Race Focusing On Bronx Prosecutor
LEAD: When Governor Cuomo appointed Paul T. Gentile as interim Bronx District Attorney last December, the expectation all around was that he would consolidate his position, sail on to win the nomination and election in his own right and become a permanent and powerful fixture in New York City Democratic politics like his predecessor, Mario Merola.


Shara B. Pulver Wed To David Alan Israel
LEAD: Shara Beth Pulver, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin I. Pulver of New York, and David Alan Israel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Phillip D. Israel of Chesterfield, Mo., were married yesterday at the Forest Hills Jewish Center in Queens.
Rabbi Lawrence Siebert and Rabbi Charles Preiss, a grandfather of the bride, performed the ceremony.


Chess
LEAD: To the International Chess Federation, what counts is where you live, not what your nationality is.
Thus, it lists the international master Jonathan Tisdall, an American citizen, as a Norwegian player, and another American, the grandmaster Eric Lobron, as a West German player.


Susan Einbinder Weds Aaron Brenner, Editor
LEAD: Susan Dana Einbinder and Aaron Michael Brenner were married yesterday at the Manor in West Orange, N.J., by Rabbi Ellen Lewis.


Careers; Improving The Quality Of Meetings
LEAD: TOP executives spend 17 hours a week in business meetings, a recent study found, and more hours are spent getting ready.


Fear No Evil
LEAD: Gennadi I. Gerasimov, spokesman of the Soviet Union, a sophisticated man, looked straight at the American people through a TV camera in Moscow and lied.


Communists Slip, Socialists Gain in Local Voting in Italy
LEAD: Italy's Communist Party suffered a clear setback today in local elections while the Socialists advanced.


Jackson Makes Appeal For Black-Jewish Ties
LEAD: As a soft wind fluttered off the Hudson, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson solemnly placed a wreath at a statue honoring Holocaust victims and pleaded for reconciliation between blacks and Jews.


Outsiders Stoke Angola Civil War With Men, Weapons and Bases
LEAD: For years, Angolans on both sides of their country's civil war have sought to obscure the international scope of the conflict.
But a recent visit to four provinces showed a high degree of foreign participation.


Books of The Times; Hollywood Studios and What They Stood For
LEAD:  The Hollywood Studios  House Style in the Golden Age of the Movies  By Ethan Mordden  Illustrated. 387 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Beech-Nut Pays a Fine
LEAD: The Beech-Nut Nutrition Corporation has paid a $250,000 fine to New York State to settle charges that it sold and advertised apple juice for babies that was actually apple-flavored sugar water, state officials said today.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Tuesday  New Home Sales April  Farm Prices May  Wednesday  Leading Indicators April  Construction Spending April  Factory Orders April


Hughes Inquiry Is Reported
LEAD: The Hughes Aircraft Company is under investigation on charges that it earned millions of dollars in improper profits on a 1983 missile contract with the Army, The Los Angeles Times reported Saturday.


Business and Health; Nursing Shortage Is Costing Billions
LEAD: AN ACUTE shortage of nurses in hospitals and nursing homes has added billions of dollars to the nation's escalating expenditures for health care.


Michael Gifford, Press Agent, 53
LEAD: Michael Gifford, a longtime press agent, died of a heart attack Saturday while driving to the East Hampton, L.I., airport to meet her husband, Edwin.
She was 53 years old and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and in East Hampton.


No to 'Star Wars'
LEAD: For the last year or more, an obscure publication, ''Notices of the American Mathematical Society'' has been full of sharp debate over a political initiative by professional mathematicians who oppose military research on space defenses against ballistic missiles.


For Raymond Carver, a Lifetime of Storytelling
LEAD: As a boy growing up in Yakima, Wash., Raymond Carver used to slip into his parents' room in the evening, sit at the foot of the bed and ask his father to tell him a story. ''He was a good talker,'' Mr.
Carver said. ''All I had to do to get him going was ask about my great-grandfather.''


Changing Texas Politics at Its Roots
LEAD: When a statewide business magazine listed the most powerful Texans not long ago, it included familiar businessmen like H. Ross Perot and T. Boone Pickens and politicians like Senator Lloyd Bentsen and Mayor Henry Cisneros of San Antonio.


Magazine Finds a Niche In Medicine and Health
LEAD: From his sunny office in this bayside village north of San Francisco, Eric Schrier, the editor of Hippocrates, acknowledged that the work involved in starting the bimonthly health and medical magazine meant that he and his employees frequently had to ignore their own advice.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Chicago Cubs placed the right-handed pitcher Al Nipper on the 15-day disabled list Monday because of a strained right elbow and purchased the contract of right-handed Jeff Pico from Iowa.
Pico, who was 4-2 with a 2.58 earned run average in the American Association, is scheduled to pitch today against Cincinnati.


Reviews/Television; Minnelli In Three Brief Plays
LEAD: Back in another of her periodic television specials, Liza Minnelli shows the kind of spunk that her fans - this one included - find disarming.
Instead of offering still another hour of belted ballads, the performer has come up with three one-act plays, each of them constructed around the line: ''Sam found out.


Run on Tapes in Indonesia
LEAD: Thousands of people crammed into tape stores in Jakarta and on the island of Bali over the weekend to beat a June 1 ban on the sale of pirated music cassettes.


Political Truth for '88: People Will Accept Taxes, but Not for Everything
LEAD: Ten years after the national tax revolt that Californians started in the 1970's, Americans are no longer slashing away at taxes, but they remain highly skeptical about the way their money is spent by politicians.


Job Description Is Confusing As Yankee Turmoil Persists
LEAD: The job of major league general manager has become uncharacteristically unstable in recent years, which means the other teams only now are starting to catch up with the Yankees.
Lou Piniella's decision to resign the Yankees' job, though, shows how far the others will have to go to catch the Yankees.


High Ratings for One-Piece Swimsuits in Hot Colors
LEAD: The swimsuit season is here, and there's more to celebrate than the prospect of sunny summer weekends.
This year, thousands of swimsuits are in the stores, offering a variety of choices for every figure.


To Our Readers
LEAD: A series of slowdowns and other job actions by the drivers' union have curtailed distribution of The New York Times in some areas.
These actions are associated with contract negotiations, and The Times is unable to say how long the disruptions may continue.
We regret the inconvenience to our readers.


Remembering the Fallen
LEAD: Apart from the official Memorial Day ceremonies, Geneva Belgrave visited the grave of a relative at the Cypress Hills National Cemetery in Brooklyn while a group of veterans took part in a gathering at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial at 55 Water Street.
Page B2. (NYT/Vic DeLucia &amp; Chester Higgins Jr.)


N.B.A. Playoffs; Celtics Get Even in Odd Way
LEAD: The adjectives used to describe today's Boston Celtic-Detroit Piston game weren't the ones usually heard in locker rooms after playoff games.


Jordan, McGrath Tries Unusual Magazine Ad
LEAD: Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor has come up with an imaginative concept for its client Procter &amp; Gamble's Bounty Microwave towels that is intended to attract reader attention in the cluttered environment of women's service magazines.


Swimming; New Wave of Success for Australians
LEAD: When the 1956 Olympics were held in Melbourne, Australians won 8 of the 13 gold medals in swimming.
Since then, although Australia has turned out such outstanding swimmers as Murray Rose, Dawn Fraser and Shane Gould, it has fallen behind the United States, the Soviet Union and East Germany in swimming success.


Fire Destroys Woodstock Playhouse and Arson Is Suspected
LEAD: A fire believed to have been set tore through the 50-year-old Woodstock Playhouse early this morning, destroying a cherished symbol of the cultural life that has made this town renowned through the Catskills and beyond.


Walter A. Richards Jr., Radio and Television Writer, 81
LEAD: Walter A. (Hank) Richards Jr., who wrote for such radio shows as ''Lights Out,'' ''Lux Radio Theater'' and ''Cavalcade of America'' and later for television, died May 23 at his home here.
He was 81 years old.


At Ice-Clad Volcanoes, Vigils for Disaster
LEAD: MILLIONS of people in North and South America live in the shadow of snow-clad volcanoes, some of them ominously astir.


Bridge
LEAD: Two experts who first played together as graduate students 30 years ago captured the prestigious Goldman Pairs Championship at the Eastern Regionals on Sunday.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Security Council


7 Drown in Mississippi Outing
LEAD: A small boat carrying eight people capsized today on a Memorial Day outing, killing six women aboard and a man who tried to rescue them, the authorities said.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Aer Lingus announced that its chief executive, David Kennedy, would take early retirement at the end of the year to pursue interests in the private sector.


Mr. Rybakov Regrets
LEAD: Anatoly N. Rybakov, author of a novel about life under Stalin (''Children of the Arbat,'' published in this country by Little, Brown) that has been a best seller in the Soviet Union since Mikhail S. Gorbachev allowed it to come out there last year, received an invitation to dinner today in Moscow from President Reagan.


Thompson Seeks U.S. Comeback
LEAD: BOARD members of the J. Walter Thompson Company and their guests will converge on the agency's Lexington Avenue headquarters in June, less than a year after the traumatic hostile takeover by WPP Group of Britain.
And if Burt Manning is in the same mood as he was on Friday, they will find J.W.T.'s chairman and chief executive exuding confidence and optimism.


Homeless Center Offers Shelter With Direction
LEAD: The merchant seaman, originally from Louisiana, says he has sailed on the liquor of Skid Row since his wife and year-old daughter died in a traffic accident 15 years ago.


Smithsonian Names Overseer of Exhibitions
LEAD: Anna R. Cohn has been named director of the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service, which brings Smithsonian exhibitions to other museums in the United States and abroad.


Dutch Recover Paintings
LEAD: The Dutch police reported recovering three paintings, including works by Vincent van Gogh and Paul Cezanne, today, less than two weeks after they were stolen from this city's Municipal Museum.


East Beirut Car Bombing Kills 20 and Wounds 83
LEAD: A car bomb exploded today in a crowded area in East Beirut, and the police said 20 people were killed and 83 wounded.


Treasury to Sell One-Year Bills This Week
LEAD: Today's regular weekly auction of three-month and six-month Treasury bills opens the holiday-shortened week, followed on Thursday by an auction of one-year bills.
Tomorrow the Treasury will auction $4 billion of nine-day cash management bills, which are sold to financial institutions in units of $1 million.


A Flaw in the Research Process: Uncorrected Errors in Journals
LEAD: IN 1984, a medical journal reported the frightening finding that a woman had apparently become infected with the AIDS virus simply through kissing.
The case was widely interpreted as evidence that the virus could be transmitted by saliva and that kissing could be dangerous.


Air Force and Navy Try Steps to Keep Jet Pilots
LEAD: To train an Air Force or Navy fighter pilot to the point where he is fully ready for combat in his high-powered airplane takes more than five years and, depending on the aircraft, an investment of $5.3 million to $7.5 million.


Memorial Day Closings
LEAD: The nation's stock and commodity markets were closed yesterday in observance of Memorial Day.
Government offices, banks and many businesses were also closed.


Moscow Summit: Unmaking History and Debating Rights; REAGAN PRESSES GORBACHEV ON CHURCH AND CIVIL RIGHTS; 'SERMONIZING' ANNOYS HOSTS'
LEAD: President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev publicly clashed over human rights issues today as the President, quoting Alexander Solzhenitsyn, appealed for increased civil and religious liberties in the Soviet Union.


Dr. Alan Wolf Is Married To Dr. Paulette Ginsburg
LEAD: Dr.
Paulette Ginsburg and Dr.
Alan Wolf, who received medical degrees this month from the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn, were married yesterday at the Great Neck (L.I.) Synagogue.
Rabbi Dale Polakoff performed the ceremony.


Arthur F. Jones Jr., Writer and Editor, 85
LEAD: Arthur Fredrick Jones Jr., a writer and editor, died of pneumonia Sunday at the Hillcrest (N.Y.) Nursing Home.
He was 85 years old and lived in Pomona, N.Y.


Checking the Spread Of a New Xenophobia
LEAD: Economic nationalism and xenophobia in this country are approaching serious proportions, infecting a number of business and political leaders who ought to know better.
Indulging these emotions is a luxury that comes with a high price tag: lowered living standards and strained relations with our trading partners.


On Memorial Day, Grieving in Private
LEAD: Len Schwende put on his United States Army uniform, the one he wore when he was an artilleryman in Vietnam 16 years ago, and joined a gathering yesterday in Lower Manhattan that was far removed from the official Memorial Day ceremonies around the city.


Car Bomb Kills 20 in East Beirut
LEAD: The scene in the Christian sector of Beirut yesterday after a car bomb exploded, leaving 20 people dead and 83 wounded.
There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the blast.
Page A5. (Agence France-Presse)


Moscow Summit: Looking for the Good News; Party Meeting: A Showdown?
LEAD: An official news weekly has echoed protesters' complaints that conservatives are influencing the selection of delegates in order to blunt Mikhail S. Gorbachev's effort to enact new policies at a Communist Party conference next month.


Redken's Founder Hopes To Take Company Private
LEAD: Paula Kent Meehan, an actress who once played a hatcheck girl on the ''77 Sunset Strip'' television series, founded Redken Laboratories Inc. out of frustration.
Allergic to regular hair spray, she sought out products she could use.


Joan C. Danziger Wed in Massachusetts
LEAD: At Temple Shalom in West Newton, Mass., Joan Caren Danziger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Danziger of West Newton, was married yesterday to Dr.
Daniel Herz Hechtman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert B. Hechtman of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Rabbi Murray Rothman performed the ceremony.


Stunt Pilot Killed in Texas
LEAD: A stunt pilot was killed before thousands of people at an air show Sunday when his biplane crashed and skidded into a lake, the authorities said.
The pilot's body was recovered from the lake shortly after noon, said Bob Newman, a trooper with the Texas Department of Public Safety.


Addenda
LEAD: * Electric Company magazine will be called Kid City beginning in September.


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-15  Reagan and Gorbachev clashed over human rights as the President, quoting from Alexander Solzhenitsyn, appealed for increased civil and religious liberties in the Soviet Union.
Page A1  President Reagan met Soviet dissidents and for 55 minutes was surrounded by the people whose plight has helped shape his own anti-Communist oratory.


Moscow Summit: Looking for the Good News; Reporter's Notebook; For Soviet Journalists, Finding the Right Angle Was Never This Rough
LEAD: The Izvestia correspondent covering President Reagan's visit to the Danilov Monastery had just checked in with a deputy editor, Nikolai I. Yefimov, and the news was irksome.


Police Seeking 2 In Fatal Beating Of a Doctor, 66
LEAD: The police were searching yesterday for at least two suspects in the robbery and fatal beating of a 66-year-old anesthesiologist whose body was found Sunday alongside a creek opposite the Starrett City housing development in Brooklyn.


Gains in New York Care of Retarded
LEAD: Living conditions at institutions for the mentally retarded in New York State have ''greatly improved'' in the last two decades, but many centers still fail to provide adequate teaching and recreation, a state commission has found.


What's Wrong With Massachusetts Health Plan; Medical School Loans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Moscow Summit: Unmaking History and Debating Rights; Soviet Pupils Spared Exams While History Is Rewritten
LEAD: The Soviet Union has canceled final secondary-school history examinations, which had been scheduled to begin today, until textbooks can be brought up to date with the candid approach to history advocated by the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Lintas Given New Task By Phillips-Van Heusen
LEAD: Lintas: New York, one of the Interpublic Group of Companies, has received a new assignment from the Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation.
It is for men's and women's apparel, and the billings are about $5 million.


N.C.A.A. Baseball; Stanford Continues To Scramble Back
LEAD: Late in the evening of their first day of play in the national collegiate baseball tournament, last Friday, a near-elimination caused the Stanford Cardinal's status as defending national champion to seem little more than a cruel joke.


Orangemen Take Lacrosse Title
LEAD: Jim Egan, left, and Brook Chase of Syracuse celebrating after 13-8 defeat of Cornell in championship game.
Victory was 15th straight for the Orangemen as they went undefeated for first time since 1957.
Page D16. (NYT/Joe Traver)


Meese Says His Defense Will Come After Report
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d said today that he would speak out fully in his own defense after the release of a report by the special prosecutor investigating him on allegations of ethical misconduct.


Ernst Ruska, a German Nobel Winner, Dies at 81
LEAD: Ernst August Friedrich Ruska, an electrical engineer who shared the 1986 Nobel Prize in Physics for his invention of the electron microscope, died yesterday in West Berlin.
He was 81 years old.


S.E.C. Vote Is Criticized
LEAD: Two futures exchanges said they oppose the Securities and Exchange Commission's bid to take over regulation of trading in stock-index futures.


N.C.A.A. Lacrosse; Orangemen (15-0) Win Championship
LEAD: The largest crowd ever to attend a college lacrosse game turned out today for the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship match between Cornell and Syracuse.
The 20,220 spectators in the sweaty Carrier Dome did not see much of a contest, however, because the Orangemen scored early and often.


Market Place; Biotechnology Loses Luster
LEAD: BIOTECHNOLOGY stocks, once a glamorous investment, are in the doldrums.
The result, analysts said, could be increased takeover activity within the industry and bargain-hunting opportunities for patient investors.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.If a hole of, say, three feet in diameter were dug straight through the Earth, and an object, such as a brick, were dropped into the hole, how far would it go?


I.R.S. Jolts a Kansas City Charity With Tax Claim Against an Estate
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service has shocked this city's oldest institutions with a tax claim for $201 million against one of Kansas City's wealthiest estates, that of Joyce C. Hall, founder of Hallmark Cards Inc.


IN CHINA, IDEOLOGY TAKES A BACK SEAT TO NEW REALITIES
LEAD: Two months ago at an car engine plant in Henan Province, the factory's Communist Party secretary canceled the director's party credentials ''for taking bribes, arrogance and not acting according to principle.'' Enraged, the plant director dismissed the party secretary from the factory payroll ''for resisting reforms.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  The housing industry has begun to retrench as mortgage rates move higher.
As a result, builders are shying away from speculative projects and mortgage banking companies are laying off employees.
Several leading economists predict that a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage will carry an interest rate of 11.25 percent to 11.50 percent by year-end, compared with 10.58 percent last week.


AC&amp;R/DHB &amp; Bess Adds the Champs Chain
LEAD: The AC&amp;R/DHB &amp; Bess ad agency is already blessed with a number of assignments for footwear from the Kinney Shoe Corporation of the F. W. Woolworth Company.
Now the agency has been named, it announced Friday, to handle the Champs Sporting Goods chain of retail outlets, another Woolworth operation, with an ad budget of more than $1 million.


International Artists to Hold 7 Free Seminars in Festival
LEAD: Seven free seminars featuring playwrights, composers, film makers and other international artists will be presented between June 14 and June 23 at three universities as part of the First New York International Festival of the Arts.


Short-Term Rate Rise Anticipated
LEAD: Short-term interest rates could rise again this week, after having reached their highest levels since just before the stock market crash, according to participants in the credit markets.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: DOG SHOW  Wyndjammer Is Best: Ch.
Meadowlark's Wyndjammer, an Irish setter who answers to the name of Rett and who has been a consistent group winner, yesterday gained his first top award when he was named best of 1,141 dogs at the 61st Union County Kennel Club fixture in the Dunn Sports Center, in Elizabeth, N.J.


Horse Racing; 2d Victory for Gulch In Metropolitan
LEAD: Gulch surrendered the lead to Afleet at the top of the stretch but reclaimed it in the final furlong to post a half-length victory and win his second successive Metropolitan Handicap yesterday at Belmont Park.


Nelligan Plays Role Echoing Her Life
LEAD: Kate Nelligan seemed almost to be crying.
She was sitting in a seat in the empty Second Stage theater, her hands covering her face.
On the stage, ready for the next performance of Michael Weller's new play, ''Spoils of War,'' was the unmade bed with which the play begins - a bed symbolic of the life of the character Ms.


Seoul Assembly Opens on Hopeful Note
LEAD: This nation's first legislature with an opposition majority opened today, amid hopes that the session would forge a new politics of compromise and fears that it could end in stalemate and political crisis.


Pianists to Celebrate Steinway in Gala
LEAD: In 1853 Henry Engelhard Steinway, a German immigrant, took a loft on Varick Street and went into the piano business.
The company he founded, Steinway &amp; Sons, has become the most successful piano manufacturer in the world, and its pianos have been the instrument of choice for several generations of great performers.


Among Sanchezes, Talent Is Relative
LEAD: The French newspapers had called the situation ''La Famille Sanchez Contre La France'' and it has seemed as though the Sanchezes from Spain - Emilio, Javier and Arantxa - are everywhere at the French Open, knocking off seeded players and generally giving their elders a hard time.


New Belzberg Partner Made It Big in Muffins
LEAD: Michael Bregman, a young Toronto entrepreneur who runs a muffin chain, has teamed up with the Belzberg family to buy a hefty chunk of the stock of the International Multifoods Corporation.


Bush's Maine Neighbors Fear Change
LEAD: In bustling Dock Square of this once tranquil seaside resort and fishing village, Vice President Bush is undeniably at home.


Moscow Summit: Preaching to the Unconverted; A Mighty Russian Pulpit for Reagan
LEAD: President Reagan came to Moscow determined to press the human rights issue and encourage greater change in Soviet life.
But it is clear that if he pushes too hard, he runs the risk of embarrassing Mikhail S. Gorbachev and thus slowing the very transformations he wants to encourage.
Nevertheless,


Technology Rises to Challenge of Clever Intruders
LEAD: JUST how difficult would it be to steal the materials needed to make a nuclear bomb or to penetrate the barriers that safeguard bank transactions and vital corporate secrets?


Ailing Brazil Is Divided On Economy
LEAD: With Brazil caught in its worst economic crisis in decades, the Government and a special Constitutional Assembly are at loggerheads over how to change the country's development strategy.


Cherokee's Head Faces Battle to Hold Company
LEAD: James P. Argyropoulos came to the United States hoping to become a rock musician.
Instead, the Greek immigrant began making his fortune in a shoe repair shop in Beverly Hills, Calif., where his original sandal design helped start a fast-growing shoe and apparel company that had sales of $139 million last year.


By Design; Shopping for Fall
LEAD: To the uninitiated, June may seem a zany time to buy things like bright woolen coats, chemise dresses and wide-legged pants, but those with a passion for fashion know different.
They have read the fall previews, and now they want to see, feel, try on and choose.


Australian One of Two New Vatican Aides
LEAD: Pope John Paul II appointed an Australian archbishop today to be deputy chief of the Vatican's most powerful office, the Secretariat of State, and named a new head of the Vatican's foreign affairs department.


U.S.-Japanese Deal on Fighter
LEAD: The United States and Japan have agreed in principle on a multibillion-dollar program to make Japan's next generation of jet fighters, a Japan Defense Agency spokesman said today.


George Bush's Independence Day
LEAD: Today's trivia question is: What happened on Sept. 30, 1968, and why should George Bush care?
The answer: That's when Vice President Humphrey, in a speech in Salt Lake City, began to part company with President Johnson's policies in Vietnam.
But the divorce was a shade too late.
Mr.
Humphrey eventually lost the race to Richard


Beazer Wins Court Ruling
LEAD: Beazer P.L.C., the British concern that is offering $60 a share to acquire the Koppers Company, said yesterday that the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco had effectively removed a Federal District Court injunction against Beazer's takeover bid.


Charla Doherty, Actress, 41
LEAD: Charla Doherty, a television actress who appeared on the soap opera ''Days of Our Lives'' for more than two years in the 1960's, died Sunday, her publicist said.
She was 41 years old.


Moscow Summit: Preaching to the Unconverted; Excerpts From Reagan Talks to Dissidents and at Monastery democracy.
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Reagan's remarks today at Spaso House, where he met with Soviet dissidents, and at Danilov Monastery:  Remarks to Dissidents


Science Watch; Bees at Work: It's All in the Genes
LEAD: FOR worker bees it may often be genes, not environment, that determine the individual's life work, new studies suggest.


N.B.A. Playoffs; Lakers Hope to Recapture Momentum
LEAD: After the Lakers had lost to the Dallas Mavericks for the second successive time at Reunion Arena Sunday, much of the talk in their locker room focused on getting out of town and returning to the friendly Forum, where they've been almost unbeatable for the last two seasons.


Critic's Notebook; In New Films, the Rich Are Gross, Even Murderous, but Not Immoral
LEAD: Diana, the glamorous anti-heroine of ''White Mischief,'' and Rachel, the flighty love object in ''The Moderns'' are beautiful, young women who married for money.
They also share the odd tendency - sensuous, silly and indolent at once - to bathe wearing their pearls.


2 Say Method Averts Need To Kill Whales for Research
LEAD: WHALES can be studied without being killed if researchers take skin samples for genetic analysis, two scientists say.


Army Finds Too Many Commanders Are 'Killed'
LEAD: The Center for Army Lessons Learned here has discovered that too many tank and mechanized infantry battalion commanders were being ''killed'' in training exercises, after which their units deteriorated and were trounced in battle.


At Last, a Turn in the Trade Deficit
LEAD: It looks like the foreign trade deficit has definitively turned around.
That's good news - but only because the previous news has been so bad.


Trash Mounts in San Francisco Janitors Strike
LEAD: A strike by 1,800 janitors here entered its seventh day today, leaving downtown and the financial district strewn with trash.


Israel Enlists Madison Ave. To Revive Sagging Tourism
LEAD: Israel has a crisis in its tourism industry, so Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir decided that he wanted to become personally involved in approving a new tourism advertising campaign.


Letter: On the Mideast; Mr. Awad and Israel's Reason for Being
LEAD: To the Editor:


What's Wrong With Massachusetts Health Plan; Long Waits in Canada
LEAD: To the Editor:


What's Wrong With Massachusetts Health Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


France to Discipline Soldiers In Caledonia Rescue Assault
LEAD: France's Defense Minister said today that several of the commandos who stormed a cave in the Pacific territory of New Caledonia to free 23 French hostages had committed ''acts contrary to military duty'' and would be punished.


British Trade Gap Wider
LEAD: Britain said Friday that its monthly trade deficit had jumped 27 percent, to $:1.125 billion ($2.09 billion), in April and that its current account deficit had nearly doubled, to $:525 million ($975 million).
Economists said the data could mean that a recent rise in the pound's value was pricing British goods off foreign markets.


Continental DC-9 Nearly Hits Light Plane Over Cleveland
LEAD: The pilot of a Continental Airlines DC-9 took evasive action yesterday to avoid hitting a light plane about five miles southeast of Cleveland's main airport, the Federal Aviation Administration said.


Indianapolis 500; Mears's Patience Pays Off for Penske
LEAD: The morning after one of his cars won the Indianapolis 500 for the seventh time in 20 attempts, Roger Penske was orchestrating photo opportunities for about 50 people from around the world.


Puzzling Findings on Bottled Water in Pregnancy
LEAD: California health officials are planning further studies in an attempt to explain puzzling results that seem to suggest that tap water might contribute to miscarriages and birth defects.


Homer in 14th Sinks Yankees
LEAD: Dave Henderson's home run to center field had barely cleared the fence when Billy Martin began his exit from the Oakland Coliseum tonight.
The volatile Yankee manager, ejected from the game in the third inning, left the ball park moments after Henderson's shot beat the Yankees in the 14th inning, 3-2.


Moscow Summit: Looking for the Good News; Signing of Two Modest Arms Accords Is Expected
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union expect to sign two modest arms control accords on Tuesday, American and Soviet officials said tonight.


CBS Sports Trying to Find Black Announcers
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Many, Help Is Near on Health Costs
LEAD: Elderly middle-class Americans and their families will be the first to benefit from legislation meant to shield Medicare recipients from ruin by huge medical bills, in the view of health care experts and Congressional sponsors.


Even PC's Join in Year Of the Mac
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation is expected to introduce several new PS/2 computers and an important new version of the DOS operating system software this week.
The Compaq Computer Corporation is planning to roll out a significant new PC in three weeks.
Several major software companies are finally getting ready to put the shrink wrap on new programs written for the OS/2 operating system.


Game's Just Like Movie
LEAD: THE new George Lucas film, ''Willow,'' has been out for little more than a week, and here's Willow: The Computer Game, an adventure-fantasy that parallels the movie's plot.


Review/Music; Kassav' Plays Zouk, Sound of Caribbean
LEAD: In a concert Sunday that left no hips unmoved, Kassav' defined zouk and zouke, the noun and verb in French Antillean Creole, for the band's first Manhattan audience.
Zouk (which rhymes with ''juke'') is the Caribbean's most up-to-date dance music; it comes from the cross-pollination of ritual and carnival music from Guadeloupe with other Caribbean and North American dance music and French pop, delivered with modern instruments and recording-studio precision.


Baseball; Clemens Stops Angels by 5-2
LEAD: Roger Clemens pitched a six-hitter tonight for his ninth straight road victory and Dwight Evans drove in three runs, two with his third homer of the season, as the Boston Red Sox beat the California Angels, 5-2.


Cuban Prison Life Is Said to Improve
LEAD: American human-rights specialists, among the first foreigners to get an extensive look at Cuba's prisons, say they found a harsh system where inmates snapped to a rigid parade-rest stance when guards appeared.


Menu at the State Dinner
LEAD: About 100 guests were present tonight at the Kremlin for the state dinner given by Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his wife, Raisa, for President Reagan and his wife, Nancy.
Here is the menu, as provided by the Soviet press agency Tass.
Fresh Caviar  Puff Rasstegay  Assorted Fish With Lemon  Stuffed Turkey Fillet With Fruits  Fish Soup a la Suzdal  Asparagus Cream  Pike-Perch Baked With Crabmeat  Loin of Veal Stewed With Vegetables


New Home for Trotter
LEAD: A Swedish horse dealer, John Erik Magnusson, said he had bought a three-quarter share of Mack Lobell, the world-record-holding trotter and last year's Hambletonian winner, for a reported $6 million from Louis Guida.
Magnusson, who now stands three trotter stallions at his farm Bladingeas near Alvesta in southern Sweden, said the 4-year-old Mack Lobell would retire to stud after another two seasons of racing in the United States.


Calling It Quits
LEAD: Terry Blocker, who battled this spring for a starting center-field position with the Atlanta Braves, has left the team's Class AAA affiliate in Richmond.


New York Can't Afford to Economize on Its Public Libraries
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sports of the Times; Piniella to Resist Yankee Recycling
LEAD: NOW that Lou Piniella is no longer the Yankees' general manager, he's the obvious choice to be recycled sooner or later as the next Yankee manager.
Any historian of the Steinbrenner Shuffle might assume that.
And even George Himself might assume that.
After all, in discussing his future as a Yankee employee with no specific role, Lou


Mass Protests Said to Flare In Soviet Armenian Capital
LEAD: A Moscow dissident said mass demonstrations by hundreds of thousands of people flared today in Yerevan, the capital of the Soviet republic of Armenia.


Our Towns; Cadets' Real Rite Is Rush Hour At the Altar
LEAD: Cadets cannot become married until they finish their four years here.
Last Wednesday, the Class of '88 graduated, and ever since, the West Point chapels have been hopping, with someone becoming married every time you turn around, 38 in the last four days alone.


Correction
LEAD: A Media Business article in Business Day on April 21 about Charles E. Hayward misstated his new position at Simon &amp; Schuster.
He was named president of the publishing company's trade book division.


'Mini-City' of Condominiums Faces Long Review Process in Westchester
LEAD: After years of grandiose visions, sketches, studies and revisions, a billion-dollar condominium complex proposed for Davids Island, a deserted Army base off the coast here, is reaching a potentially turbulent stage.


Shakespeare In Tokyo
LEAD: The neighborhood of Shin-Okubo, nondescript and seldom visited, is an unlikely spot for a grand cultural experiment.
Yet here, in full sight and sound of the railroad tracks, stands the Tokyo Globe, a reconstruction of Shakespeare's theater that opened its first season with a series of his history plays - in


Grocery Store Owner Kills Robbery Suspect
LEAD: A grocery store owner shot and killed a robbery suspect early yesterday after the store owner was wounded in an exchange of gunfire in his Bronx store, the police said.


Diaper Import Quotas Under Fire
LEAD: Thousands of parents are likely to pay more for diaper services as a result of import quotas the United States has quietly imposed on plain cotton diapers from China.


Uptown Musical Fights to Keep Its Home
LEAD: A traveling company of ''Mama, I Want to Sing'' is beginning a two-month tour of Japan.
The singing, shouting, all-black, gospel-rhythm-and-blues musical will be presented in English.
Meantime, the home troupe is still belting out the story of the pop singer Doris Troy in twice-a-week summer performances in the East


People
LEAD: *
Allen Adamson has been named senior vice president at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York.


Moscow Summit: Unmaking History and Debating Rights; Gorbachev and Reagan Toasts: 'Man's Survival' and 'Peace and Freedom'
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the toasts by Mikhail S. Gorbachev and President Reagan at a state dinner tonight at the Kremlin.
Mr.
Gorbachev's remarks were translated by a Soviet interpreter.
Gorbachev Toast


Dukakis Signals Sense of Import On Black Vote
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis tried to signal his sensitivity to the importance of the black vote today, meeting with black supporters from around the country, playing down his differences with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, and predicting a unified Democratic campaign this fall.


Waterford Journal; Landmark Town Facing Development Challenge
LEAD: There are more than 1,800 buildings, battlefields, ships, neighborhoods and other sites and structures on the Government's list of national historic landmarks and districts.


Traditional Allies Battle Over Pandas
LEAD: A scramble by American zoos to borrow rare giant pandas from China as a way to generate large crowds has triggered a bitter dispute among longstanding allies in the animal conservation movement.


PATTERNS
LEAD:  What Went Wrong?


Toronto Stock Prices Up
LEAD: Stock prices moved higher in mixed trading today on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
The composite index rose 14.10, to 3,187.20, as stocks falling in price outnumbered those posting a gain, 366 to 329.
Stock exchanges in the United States and Europe were closed for the holiday.


Five Top Sikh Priests Dismissed in Attack On Fundamentalism
LEAD: The five head priests of the Sikh faith were dismissed today and accused of violating religious traditions.


Noriega Loses Support Among Poor
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega portrays himself as the champion of Panama's poor and black, but in this large working-class municipality favored by the regime there is little affection for the general.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of May 29, 1988:
TUESDAY
Becton, Dickinson
Palco Ent
WEDNESDAY
Fieldcrest Cannon
Stanhome Inc
General Dynamics
Stanley Works
Louisville G&amp;E
LS Starrett Co
Natl Convenience Stores
USF&amp;G Corp
Pennwalt Corp
THURSDAY
Allegheny Power
Lucky Stores
Atlantic Energy
SPS Technologies
Bear Stearns
Wal-Mart Stores
Brown Group
Washington National
FRIDAY
Chubb Corp


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''Mr.
General Secretary, allow me to raise a glass to the work that has been done, the work that remains to be done.
And let us also toast the art of friendly persuasion, the hope of peace with freedom, the hope of holding out for a better way of settling things.''  - President Reagan.


Dollar Gains On Continent
LEAD: The American dollar moved higher against other major currencies in Europe today amid optimism that a technical rally would continue.
The price of gold held steady.


In Midst of Tradition, an Evolving Race
LEAD: Along Main Street and down to Davenport, there were banners, balloons and a sprinkling of American flags. ''The Star-Spangled Banner'' sounded from one loudspeaker, Samuel Barber's Adagio for Strings, sounded from another, but amid all the Americana at today's Kugler-Anderson Tour of Somerville, there was an international touch.


New Test May Predict Recurrence Of Cancer In Breast
LEAD: BRITISH and American researchers are experimenting with what they hope will be the first reliable predictor of which breast cancers will recur or spread.


Ciccarelli in Court
LEAD: Dino Ciccarelli of the Minnesota North Stars pleaded not guilty yesterday in a Toronto court to a charge of assaulting an opponent during a game.
The charge stems from an incident during a game between the North Stars and the Toronto Maple Leafs in Toronto on Jan. 6 in which Luke Richardson, a Leafs defenseman, was struck in the head by Ciccarelli.


Speed Control Device
LEAD: To the Editor:


Coveted, but Worn, Beach Reopens
LEAD: When Babylon officials closed Gilgo Beach here last year because of severe erosion, they shut not only one of the East Coast's most famous surfing spots, they ended a summer tradition.


Engineer Says He Has Shed 'Guilt' over Shuttle
LEAD: Roger Boisjoly, an engineer for Morton Thiokol Inc. who argued against the launching of the space shuttle Challenger, said he has stopped blaming himself for the explosion that killed seven astronauts and is ready to go back to work.


A Hungarian for Too Many Seasons
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev's new proposal for limiting the tenure of Communist officeholders would have benefited Janos Kadar.
Had Mr.
Kadar stepped down as Hungary's party chief, say, in 1976, he would have earned glowing notices for his economic reforms and for the relative political tolerance he adopted after ruthlessly crushing the revolutionaries of 1956.


North Korea Welcome
LEAD: Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, said North Korea's demand to be co-host of the 1988 Olympic Games ''is unacceptable,'' but the door for the North's participation would be left open until the last minute.
Samaranch, who arrived in Seoul, South Korea, the site of the Games, for a series of meetings and ceremonies this week, said at an airport news conference that North Korea's bid to be co-host was against the Olympic charter ''and unacceptable because of its political nature.


Michael V. Gilberti Jr. Wed to Paige Tunstall
LEAD: The marriage of Paige Brooke Tunstall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Brooke Tunstall of Summit, N.J., to Michael Vincent Gilberti Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gilberti of Fox Chapel, Pa., took place yesterday at Calvary Episcopal Church in Summit.
The Rev.
William H. Strain performed the ceremony.
He was assisted by the Rev.


Networks Look for News in Moscow
LEAD: Americans devoted to television news who spent some of the sunny Memorial Day weekend in the glow of the tube were rewarded with shots of President Reagan and the First Lady in Moscow, the resplendent interiors of the Kremlin and street scenes.
For part of the time we might have been watching a National Geographic special on Treasures of the Czars or Faces of Russia.


An Earthquake Off Indonesia Causes Blackout in Australia
LEAD: A major earthquake centered just south of the Indonesian island of Timor jolted this northern Australian city today, blacking out most of the suburbs here for about an hour.


Rochester Councilman Under Fire for Absence
LEAD: As City Council members here go, F. Glenn King has always stood out.
He wears expensive-looking suits and jewelry and drives a white Mercedes-Benz.
As a minister, he preaches on Sundays at the nondenominational First Church Divine.


Who's on (TV) First?
LEAD: Most of the game between the Mets and the Los Angeles Dodgers, scheduled to be broadcast on ABC-TV last night, was not seen after the network stopped broadcasting it during a third-inning rain delay.


For MGM/UA, Bidders Are Scarce
LEAD: Few financiers love trading assets more than Kirk Kerkorian.


The Couple's Guide to Competitive Games
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nezahualcoyotl Journal; In Plain of Hungry Coyote, Millions Dwell in Hope
LEAD: Just a quarter of a century ago, there was little here except barren plains and a salty, swampy lake bed.
Today, 2.7 million people live in this sprawling, jerry-rigged settlement just east of Mexico City.
This place, Mexicans, with a certain ironic pride and flair for drama, often describe as the largest slum in the world.


COMMENCEMENTS
LEAD:  OBERLIN


Health-Care Budget Cuts In New York Are Assailed
LEAD: A growing number of health-care advocates and public officials charge that Mayor Koch's budget cuts are jeopardizing patient care by failing to meet the crises of hospital overcowding and the AIDS epidemic.


World's Tallest Platform
LEAD: Seven tugboats today began hauling the world's tallest offshore drilling platform to a site off the Louisiana coast.
After its two drilling rigs are installed in the Gulf of Mexico, the platform, dubbed Bullwinkle, will weigh 78,000 tons and stand 1,615 feet high - 161 feet higher than the world's tallest building, the Sears Tower in Chicago.


Moscow Summit: Looking for the Good News
LEAD: The Summit Schedule  All times are local.
Moscow is eight hours ahead of Eastern daylight time.  10 A.M.: President Reagan arrives at the Kremlin and meets with Mikhail S. Gorbachev in his office.  10:15 A.M.: Mr.
Reagan and Mr.
Gorbachev walk from the Government of the U.S.S.R.
Building through the grounds to the Grand Kremlin Palace, where they hold talks in St.


Grit and Love Bring Team Closer to Baseball Paradise
LEAD: For Johnny Delgado, Jose Medina, Augie Santana, Ariel Chimelis and the other boys on their high school baseball team, these days in Brooklyn fly past, one game into the next, one victory after another, each one closer to that ballplayers' paradise - Yankee Stadium.


Weapons Cuts by Third World to Be Urged at U.N.
LEAD: The United States and its principal Western allies will seek a pledge by developing countries to cut military spending as part of a new international consensus on disarmament at a special General Assembly session that opens Tuesday.


Science Watch; Preying on a Predator
LEAD: Biologists at the University of California in Berkeley have discovered a microorganism that has learned to turn the tables on mosquito larvae that eat it, reversing the roles of prey and predator.


Ex-Israeli Officers Say a Deal for Peace Is Needed
LEAD: A group of several dozen retired senior Israeli military officers are advocating an end to Israel's occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
The occupation is being enforced by the Israeli Army.


INSIDE
LEAD:  High-Tech Vigilance  Devices that read the retina like a fingerprint are among an array of security devices protecting scientific installations.
Science Times, page C1.
Dream Grows in Brooklyn  The Knights of Eastern District High School in Brooklyn may need a miracle to become baseball champions, but they can dream.


