Outdoors: Hunting Waterfowl When the Weather Is Cold
LEAD: HUNTING in the bitter cold of mid-winter does not necessarily require indifference to discomfort.
In fact, such stoicism may be beyond most of us.
But it can be both productive and instructive.


Racial Issues Arise at Talks on New York's Future
LEAD: In a mansion that was home to barons of a bygone era, more than 100 government officials, academics, foundation executives and civic leaders met here this weekend to debate New York City's social and economic future in the wake of last fall's Wall Street collapse.


Medical Establishment Blocks Pain Treatment; A False Hope
LEAD: To the Editor:


A New Twist in Offer For Giant in Belgium
LEAD: When Carlo de Benedetti, the Italian financier, began his attack from the south, Societe Generale de Belgique, Belgium's largest holding company, was forced to seek help from a neighbor to the north.


Medical Establishment Blocks Pain Treatment; Controlled Substances
LEAD: To the Editor:


TV Review; 'Weekend War,' ABC
LEAD: THE television movie ''Weekend War'' is less impressive as a drama exercise than for what it reflects, probably accurately, about widespread public perceptions of United States Government policies in Central America.
Especially since the Iran-contra hearings, the overall picture is riddled with covert maneuverings, evasions and, to put it gingerly, disinformation.


No Plan to Ask Meese to Resign, Baker Reports
LEAD: The White House Chief of Staff, Howard H. Baker Jr., said today that President Reagan had no intention of asking Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d to resign because he is under investigation for his involvement in an Iraqi pipeline project.


January Goes Out With a Pleasant Whimper
LEAD: Joanna Sorocki, 3 years old, top left, and her sister, Leah, 1, playing in the sand at Coney Island yesterday as nearby joggers and strollers, above, took advantage of the 53-degree weather.
At left, visitors to the South Street Seaport encouraging a juggler, Ned Jordie Gelgars. (NYT/Dith Pran)


Carl J. Conti
LEAD: When Steve Chen, one of the nation's leading supercomputer engineers, left Cray Research Inc. in a dispute last year, it was only hours before Carl J. Conti called.
As I.B.M.'s chief of mainframe computer development, Mr.
Conti, 50, seized an opportunity to move I.B.M. into the only major computer field where it currently has no offerings.


Deerfield Journal; 'Deerfield Boy' Is Wary Of Life After Girls
LEAD: In 10 minutes, the headmaster of Deerfield Academy would be breaking the news to many of his 560 boys. ''A few will hiss or boo,'' Robert E. Kaufmann predicted.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption Saturday with an article about the Writers Room on Waverly Place misidentified the writers at work in the photograph.
They were Leonard Marcus, Ruth


Techniques to Add Speed Can Improve Form, Too
LEAD: THE start ramp is steep.
The first three gates look like a forest of slim trees that have been placed directly in your path. ''Ready . . .
Go!'' the starter says, and you push off.
Your heart is in your mouth and your legs are trembling as you breathe hard and aim straight at that first gate.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-14


The Basic Speech; 'America Can Do Better' in Offering 'More Opportunity in the Next Decade'
LEAD: Candidates seeking the Presidential nomination make dozens of speeches in their campaigns.
Some address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
But more often the candidate uses a ''basic speech.'' It summarizes, with little variation from one occasion to the next, how the candidate wants to present himself to the voters.


In Japan, Unsettling Ripple of Crime
LEAD: ''Because that's where the money is,'' Willie Sutton supposedly said when asked why he robbed banks.


Rock: Joe Ely and Band, at the Ritz
LEAD: JOE ELY delivered twanging, stomping, full-tilt rock-and-roll at the Ritz, 119 East 11th Street, on Friday night.
For a decade, Mr.
Ely has been singing and writing songs that match basic rock to lyrics that delight in wordplay and imagery.
In the 1970's, he put together a band that reflected his Lubbock, Tex., background, mixing Mexican accordion, soul saxophone and country steel guitar with guitar-driven rockabilly; on his 1984 album ''Hi-Res,'' he also flirted with computers and synthesizers.


Reloading for Patrick Battle
LEAD: Reprise was the theme sought by all three metropolitan-area Patrick Division teams over the weekend, as each attempted to generate something resembling a winning streak.


Williams Stars as Redskins Smash Broncos
LEAD: Doug Williams turned Super Bowl XXII into a record-setting offensive show today, as well a historic event, by throwing four second-quarter touchdown passes in the Washington Redskins' 42-10 victory over the Denver Broncos.


Borges Is Prolific, in Wagner Tradition
LEAD: At Wagner College, the undergraduate enrollment is about 1,500, the longest walk from a dormitory to a classroom takes five minutes, and students still pay a quarter for a round-trip ride on the Staten Island Ferry.


Pressure on Elway A Key for Redskins
LEAD: Washington's defensive schemes, which imprisoned John Elway's skills, and the use of the size advantage of its offensive line were the key elements in the Redskins' Super Bowl rout of the Denver Broncos.


College Basketball; Syracuse Pounds Michigan by 89-71
LEAD: The Orangemen had been waiting for what seemed like an eternity.


A Debate Over the Impact Of Delaware Takeover Law
LEAD: The rules governing many corporate takeovers are about to change dramatically, all with the stroke of a pen in Wilmington, Del.
The state's Governor, Michael N. Castle, is expected to sign tomorrow a bill that makes unfriendly takeovers harder.


Leaky Mine Threatens A-Waste Storage Plan
LEAD: Far below a fierce landscape of sand and sagebrush a red laser pierces the darkness, guiding miners cutting the nation's first permanent nuclear waste repository from walls of salt that are hard as stone.


With Managua's Assent, Indian Rebel Holds Rally
LEAD: Brooklyn Rivera, the Miskito Indian leader whose forces are at war with the Sandinista Government, was allowed to travel openly to the Miskito region this weekend and hold a public meeting.


Singer Funds For Bilzerian
LEAD: Paul A. Bilzerian, the Florida investor whose bid to take over the Singer Company has been accepted by company executives, said yesterday that he had obtained about $505 million in financing for his offer.


3 Visual Artists Win $5,000 Film Awards
LEAD: Two film makers and a video artist are the recipients of this year's Maya Deren Awards, sponsored by the American Film Institute.
The three - Bruce Conner, Yvonne Rainer and Bill Viola - will each receive a $5,000 cash award.
J.
Hoberman, a film critic for The Village Voice, is to receive a citation for contributions to independent film and video.


Data on Specialist Activity in Plunge
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange's specialists failed to respond to nearly two-thirds of the trading messages they received through the intermarket trading system during the October market collapse, according to an internal report prepared by the exchange.


Ms. Friedlander Weds John Andrew Vacovec
LEAD: Beth Friedlander, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bertram Friedlander of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and Bridgehampton, L.I., was married yesterday to John Andrew Vacovec, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin S. Vacovec of Webster, Mass.
Marvin Axelrod, an associate leader of the Westchester Ethical Humanist Society, performed the ceremony at Le Chateau in South Salem, N


Assailant Dies in Subway Attack
LEAD: A 48-year-old man was fatally stabbed in a dispute with two younger men yesterday after he assaulted their mother on a Queens subway train, the police said.


Few Detect Signs of Fed Easing
LEAD: While economists vainly looked for signs last week that the Federal Reserve had eased monetary policy, interest rates in the credit markets fell sharply on the assumption that the Fed would ratify those declines by pushing short-term interest rates lower.


'Highlights in Jazz' Concert
LEAD: A number of noted jazz musicians, including Tito Puente, Phil Woods and Jon Faddis, are to perform at a ''Highlights in Jazz'' concert on Thursday, at New York University, Loeb Student Center, 566 La Guardia Place.
The concert marks the 15th anniversary of the jazz series.
Also to appear are John Pizzarelli Jr., Bob Mover, Tony Monte, Kenny Washington and James Williams.


Barge Spills Oil Near Puget Sound
LEAD: A barge carrying 318,000 gallons of heavy fuel oil sank four miles offshore today and began leaking, the Coast Guard said.


Iowa Paper Picks Candidates
LEAD: Iowa's largest newspaper, The Des Moines Register, endorsed Bob Dole and Paul Simon today in the state's Feb. 8 Presidential caucuses.
The Register normally does not endorse candidates before the caucuses.


Olympic Notebook; Soviet Help Sought for Seoul
LEAD: Ever so quietly, senior officials of the International Olympic Committee are still working on resolving the issue of North Korea's participation in the Seoul Olympics later this year.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; A Potentially Hot New Issue Is Put on Ice
LEAD: The Neuroscientific Corporation had the right names associated with it to be a hot new stock issue.
By selling shares to the public, the tiny manufacturer of medical equipment hoped to transfer a device developed in the laboratories of Rockefeller University into practical and immediate use in the nation's hospitals.


Stage: 'Heart of a Dog'
LEAD: FOR Mikhail Bulgakov, turning Russia's peasantry and proletariat into a ruling class was not unlike an operation turning a mongrel cur into a human being.
You may dress him up to look the part, but initially his behavior will remain rude, crude and socially unacceptable.


12th Infant Gets New Heart At a Hospital in Loma Linda
LEAD: Surgeons transplanted a heart into an 18-day-old boy born with a fatal defect and said today the infant was in critical but stable condition.


Business and the Law; Regulator's Fears On Bond Insurers
LEAD: JAMES P. CORCORAN is on a mission.
To Mr.
Corcoran, the Superintendent of Insurance of New York State, a key segment of the insurance industry lacks important rules, and as a result, the possibility of an insurance crisis looms.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
James M. Kimmelman has joined Greenstone &amp; Rabasca South, Boca Raton, Fla., as executive vice president and general manager.


Gifts of Varying Size Continue to Be Sent For Neediest Cases
LEAD: Gifts of all sizes, large and small, from $1 to $110,000, continue to flow in to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The 76th annual appeal, which opened after Thanksgiving, runs through February.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Collecting His Dues
LEAD: Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, figures the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers owes him -$1,994.46 to be precise.


School System Will Be Spared On Budget Cuts
LEAD: The New York City Board of Education will be spared a 2.5 percent spending cut that the Koch administration plans to impose on all other city agencies, city and education officials said yesterday.


Nets' Promise Is Thwarted
LEAD: The Nets have often been a troubled franchise since they came into being in 1967 as the New Jersey Americans in the American Basketball Association.
But at the midpoint of this National Basketball Association season, they have a 9-32 record after beating the Detroit Pistons Saturday night.


Episcopal Panel Prompts Debate On Gay Couples
LEAD: An Episcopal Church official said yesterday that the decision of the Newark Diocese to bless homosexual couples ''has set off a lot of sparks'' and has placed the issue of homosexuality high on the church's agenda.


4 Palestinians and an Israeli Wounded in Clashes
LEAD: At least four Palestinian youths were reported shot and wounded by Israeli soldiers today in continuing civil unrest, and a Jewish settler was severely burned by a gasoline bomb.


Protests Erupt in Poland Over Big Price Increases
LEAD: Polish protesters hurled snowballs at the police outside a Warsaw church today as scattered protests erupted against large-scale price increases ordered by Poland's Communist Government.


Dance: Works by Women
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the young choreographers who took part in the Choreographers Showcase on Friday night at the Robert Yohn Dance Loft had ideas, their kinetic images did not always embody those ideas.


In Atlanta, A Cultural Crossroads
LEAD: With the retirement this spring of Robert Shaw from the post of music director of the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra, an era will end in this city's cultural life.


I.B.M. Restructuring Bolsters Its Managers
LEAD: The management restructuring that the International Business Machines Corporation announced last week is intended to bring the responsibility for decision-making closer to the company's operations.
The move will give the five general managers who will run the new major units much greater visibility in the world's largest computer maker.


Patriotic Air
LEAD: As usual, patriotism was very important to the ceremonies.
In a dramatic pre-game event, the Navy's Blue Angels fighter jets zoomed over the field just as Herb Alpert held the last note of the national anthem on his trumpet.
Minutes before, dozens of young men and women carrying red, white and blue balloons formed the Stars and Stripes to Alpert's performance of ''America the Beautiful.


F.B.I. Director Defends Spying on Political Groups
LEAD: William Sessions, the new Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Saturday defended the bureau's spying on groups opposed to the Reagan's Administration's policies in Central America.


Advertising; U.S. Marketer Accounts To Martin and Gleckler
LEAD: The Martin Agency in Richmond and Gleckler &amp; Company in New York have both picked up United States marketers of foreign high-tech products.


What Kind Of People Are We?
LEAD: The outcome of the war in Nicaragua may not be determined by the pending Congressional votes on further aid to the ''contras'' organized and trained by the C.I.A.
But that vote will say much about the United States' right to view itself as a peaceful nation dedicated to self-determination and the rule of law.


Stephen P. Schwartz
LEAD: Stephen P. Schwartz, 53, will have a sensitive job as the person in charge of two midrange office systems -System/36 and System/38 - that have been lagging in rugged competition with minicomputers from other companies.
Mr.
Schwartz will head the I.B.M.
Application Business Systems, which will be responsible for System/3X products.


Music: 'Jacques Brel,' Revue, at Town Hall
LEAD: IT was almost exactly 20 years ago that the revue ''Jacques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris'' opened in New York at the Village Gate and introduced a young generation of theatergoers to the dramatic songs of the Belgian singer and poet, who died 11 years later at age 49.
Arriving when the antiwar movement was in full flower and Bob Dylan's folk-rock diatribes had brought a caustic realism to American pop, Brel's songs of love, death, war and the homeland also spoke to the moment, though in a different vocabulary.


Show Has Lectures, Gear For Outdoors Enthusiasts
LEAD: FOR the second consecutive year, a hunting, fishing and outdoor sports show will be held at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan.
The Dodge National Sportsmen's Show will run Feb. 4-7.


Pregnant? Do Exercise But Exercise Care, Too
LEAD: THE age in which a pregnant woman was regarded as a delicate flower to be secluded until her baby was born passed long ago, but questions remain about just how active she should be.
Increasingly, doctors are advising patients to exercise and stay fit if they wish; some even urge sedentary patients to begin an exercise program after becoming pregnant.


U.S. Envoy Ends Jordan Trip
LEAD: President Reagan's special envoy, Philip C. Habib, left Jordan today to return to Washington after a day of talks with King Hussein.
American and Jordanian officials refused to comment on the talks beyond saying they focused on the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


George H. Conrades
LEAD: George H. Conrades, 48, is described by Myron Kerstetter, an analyst at Gartner Securities, as soft-spoken, personable and a tough manager.
He will run the group that I.B.M. calls Personal Systems, embracing the company's personal computer divisions and its typewriters, displays and other low-end products that have previously been run under different corporate units.


Cabarets Celebrate End Of Painful 'Prohibition'
LEAD: The rafters stayed in place, but another kind of ceiling was lifted at clubs across New York City over the weekend.


Why Does New York Have to Be So Noisy?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Accustomed to His Latest Face
LEAD: Minutes after vanishing from his rococo subterranean hell in the final scene of ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' Michael Crawford begins his daily half-hour ritual of transformation, from the ghoulish star of Andrew Lloyd Webber's new musical to the soft-spoken, 46-year-old English actor who has returned to


COLOMBIANS GROW WEARY OF WAGING THE WAR ON DRUGS
LEAD: Shaken by the murder of the country's Attorney General last Monday, many influential Colombians have begun arguing that this country is paying too high a price for combating powerful drug traffickers.


Bush's Altitude Is Also Rather's
LEAD: While the Bush-Rather clash is passing into history, an interesting question remains unanswered: Why did everybody care so much?


Washington Talk: Briefing; Environmental Agenda
LEAD: When President Reagan was first elected in 1980, the Heritage Foundation had waiting for him a long agenda of actions he could take in dealing with environmental problems.
The recommendations reflected the foundation's conservative perspective.
National environmental groups, whose views were generally in direct opposition to those of the foundation, wrung their hands.


Gephardt Raises Eyebrows With His New Look
LEAD: Has it been the tough television commercials about foreign car manufacturers stealing away American jobs?


Washington Talk: Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; A Bureau That Battled Bootleggers Is Tough Target for Budget-Cutters
LEAD: Mounted in a prominent spot in the offices of one of Washington's major law-enforcement agencies is a blown-up formal photo of a man in his 30's, neatly dressed, hair parted in the middle.


Advertising; Wall Street Journal Hails I.B.M.'s Insert
LEAD: The Wall Street Journal was so pleased about the 16-page I.B.M. advertising insert it carried Friday that it heralded its coming with both print and radio ads.


Iowans Bristle at the Cornfield Image
LEAD: A photographer for a national magazine recently approached Kathleen Wood with a request: find a Presidential nominating caucus that will take place in a one-room schoolhouse.


PLAN COULD STALL BANKING MERGERS
LEAD: The drive by many of the nation's largest banks to expand through acquisitions may come to a near standstill for several years because of a proposal by the Federal Reserve Board.


Concert: 3 Overtures At the Schubertiade
LEAD: SCHUBERT at age 15 reminds us of a legatee who, bursting with new-found wealth, puzzles over how to spend it.
Thus Saturday's Schubertiade concert at the 92d Street Y - the third in this year's series of eight - overwhelmed us with Schubert's spirit even when the invention seemed squandered and misdirected.


Some Stop-Action Views of the Nonstop Action
LEAD:  Star of the Game: Doug Williams of the Redskins getting ready to hand off in the first quarter.
Beleaguered Bronco: Redskins' Dexter Manley grabbing John Elway, Broncos' quarterback, in the second quarter.
Getting Away: Redskins' Timmy Smith eluding a Denver defender at the goal line for a touchdown in the second quarter.


Thoughts Far From Football As Foes Gather Before Game
LEAD: Somewhere far away, the Super Bowl parties were reaching their climax and two weeks of analysis were near their end.
But inside this hotel ballroom where about 1,000 people sat, Super Bowl XXII was nothing more than a point of reference.


Arrests Made
LEAD: A police spokesman, who asked not to be identified, said an undetermined number of arrests were made tonight stemming from the Super Bowl XXII celebration.
The spokesman cited incidents of looting, window breaking and fighting.
No official arrest estimates were available because of the large number of people in the area, the spokesman said.


Hart Tries to Disperse Cloud on Campaign
LEAD: Like the comic strip character Linus and his blanket, Gary Hart trails anger wherever he goes.


Inconsistency Is Knicks' Worst Enemy
LEAD: The Knicks, one game past the midway point of the National Basketball Association season following their overtime loss in Chicago Saturday night, have baffled coaches, scouts and fans with their inconsistent play.


Santa Fe Turns to Olympia &amp; York
LEAD: The Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation joined forces yesterday with the Reichmann family of Canada to fight a bid for control of the large rail, oil and real estate company by the head of the Henley Group.


Mets' Fans Get in Line
LEAD: Thousands of people lined up today outside the new St.
Lucie County Sports Complex to buy tickets for the Mets' spring training games.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  Construction Spending Dec.
Tuesday  Leading Indicators Dec.
New-Home Sales Dec.
Prices of New Homes Dec.
Wednesday





A Concert in Honor Of Vittorio Rieti at 90
LEAD: To honor the 90th birthday of the composer Vittorio Rieti, the St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble is to give a concert devoted to his work at 8 P.M. on Wednesday at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Brooklyn Union Gas Co. named Robert V. Delaney senior vice president and chief administrative officer, Craig G. Matthews senior vice president and chief financial officer, and Helmut W. Peter senior vice president and chief engineer.


Dr. Melanie R. Adams Weds Dr. Dennis M. Fisher
LEAD: Dr.
Melanie Ruth Adams, a resident in pathology at the University of California at San Francisco, and Dr.
Dennis Marshall Fisher, an associate professor of anesthesia and pediatrics at the university, were married yesterday at the Conservative Synagogue of Fifth Avenue in New York.
Rabbi George Cohen and Cantor Donald


Robertson May Be Cause for Uncertainty in Iowa
LEAD: It is hard to know what to expect of Pat Robertson in Iowa, where his unorthodox Presidential candidacy, like the more conventional campaigns of his rivals, will get its first major test Feb. 8.


EUTHANASIA ESSAY PROMPTS PROTEST
LEAD: An essay in The Journal of the American Medical Association describing a young physician's decision to inject a lethal dose of morphine into a terminally ill patient has drawn a flood of letters from doctors calling the action unethical and illegal.


Chiefs Reach a Greek-Turkish Accord
LEAD: After meeting in this Alpine ski resort, the Prime Ministers of Greece and Turkey announced what they said was an important agreement today to help bring peace and cooperation to their traditionally hostile countries.


13 Are Reported Slain In South Africa Clashes
LEAD: Hundreds of homes were burned to the ground and 13 people were reported killed in violence around South Africa over the weekend.


Dukakis Aide's Out for 'Stunt'
LEAD: The Democratic Presidential campaign of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts said today that it had apologized to Senator Paul Simon, a rival, over a Dukakis staff member's attempt to ''volunteer'' at a Simon campaign office.


Record Rushing From Rookie
LEAD: The Washington Redskins' starters were about to be introduced today before Super Bowl XXII when Don Breaux, who coaches the running backs, walked over to Timmy Smith, his prize rookie.


McDonnell to Retire
LEAD: Sanford N. McDonnell, the chairman and chief executive of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, said he would retire in March.
Mr.
McDonnell, 65 years old, has headed the company since 1980.
He said he would be replaced by his cousin, John F. McDonnell.
John McDonnell, 49, is the president of the St.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Paper for Posterity
LEAD: Hold that memo!
That stack of while-your-were-out telephone messages!
That snippet from a draft of the State of the Union Message.
Those who would shred their White House paperwork have to face the preservationists of the Reagan tenancy.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Israelis and U.S.
TV  Israelis wince and debate as they watch American TV news film of the recent Palestinian demonstrations in the occupied territories.
Page A8.
Paying for Nuclear Energy  The nation will pay as much as $100 billion for abandoned nuclear plants or those finished at excessive cost, utility experts say.


Wallace Groves Is Dead at 86; Developer of Resort in Bahamas
LEAD: Wallace Groves, whose Wall Street career ended in the 1930's when he was convicted for mail fraud and who then went on to develop the city of Freeport in the Bahamas into a major resort and gambling area, died Saturday at Doctors Hospital in Miami, six days after suffering a stroke.
He was 86 years old.


Anxious Moments for Cable Viewers
LEAD: It did not come to pass, but many cable television subscribers in Manhattan spent part of yesterday contemplating Super Bowl Sunday without the Super Bowl.


Medical Establishment Blocks Pain Treatment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Washington Talk: Briefing; Anger Toward Brazil
LEAD: Volkswagen dealers are raising Cain in Washington because of reports that their imports from Brazil could be hit by trade sanctions President Reagan is now weighing against that country.


Pet Tiger Hurt in Car Wreck
LEAD: A 290-pound pet tiger, riding in the back seat of a car on its way to a public appearance, was slightly injured in a traffic accident last week but is now back home with its owner.
The cat's owner, Edwin Corders, remained at its side last Thursday for the seven hours it spent at a veterinary clinic here.


The Super Bowl Strut
LEAD: WHAT was the score of the Super Bowl?
That is, in the terms of corporate America, of which the National Football League is happily and devotedly part and parcel, what was the bottom line?


I.M.F. Trying to Be More Flexible
LEAD: The International Monetary Fund, long criticized for insensitivity to the consequences of its demands for austerity in debtor countries, is trying a new approach.


Contra Aid Bill: The 'Hidden Costs'
LEAD: When the House considers new aid for the Nicaraguan contras this week, the package from the White House will carry a price tag of $36.25 million for four months, a figure the Administration argues is relatively modest.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Was Russ Francis the receiver for the San Francisco 49ers who caught the touchdown pass from Joe Montana in the last minute of the 1981 championship game victory over the Dallas Cowboys?


In Yonkers, the Rifts Continue After the Housing Vote
LEAD: The end to the legal battle over desegregating Yonkers' neighborhoods left the city with a bitterly divided government and a large bloc of voters renouncing the very officials they elected just three months ago.


Donald L. Rogers, Executive, 59
LEAD: Donald L. Rogers, president of the Association of Bank Holding Companies, died Jan. 18 of colon cancer at his home in Washington.
He was 59.


Bush and the Iran-Contra Affair: Uneasy Stalemate
LEAD: For more than a year, Vice President Bush has been groping for a way to prevent the Iran-contra matter, the Administration's worst foreign policy disaster, from becoming his own political albatross.


Patrick A. Toole
LEAD: Patrick A. Toole, 50, takes command of I.B.M.
Technology Products, with responsibility for semiconductors and packaging for systems.
Mr.
Toole previously ran the Information Systems Technology Group.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 31, 1988:
MONDAY
Airborne Freight
NCH Corp
Data-Design Labs
Xerox Corp
Lockheed Corp
Zurn Industries
MBIA Inc
TUESDAY
CBI Industries
IE Industries
Diamond Shamrock
Kansas City Pwr &amp; Lt
General Housewares
WEDNESDAY
Corning Glass Works
Panhandle Eastern Corp
Eagle-Picher Indus
Peoples Energy
MA Hanna Co
Pilgrims Pride Corp
Lee Enterprises
Thomas &amp; Betts Corp
McKesson Corp
UtilCorp United Inc
THURSDAY
Amer Genl Corp
IU International
Avon Products
Mercantile Strs $


Metro Matters; Special Access: Helping to Shape Koch's Outlook
LEAD: Press the first button on the private telephone at Gracie Mansion and you'll automatically be connected with a special woman in Mayor Koch's life. ''I have very special access,'' she said.
Nearly every day at 6 A.M., the Mayor picks her up for a 40-minute workout on a treadmills in a downtown gym.


Reporter's Notebook; Arms Debate: Faulting the Fixtures And Sorting Out What Goes Boom
LEAD: Throughout the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's first week of hearings on the new arms control treaty, a steady stream of senators have made discreet pilgrimages from their offices to have a peek.
Their interest was not in the proceedings, but in the room itself, a cavernous, modern hall of wood and marble in the Hart Senate Office


Growth Lag Reported by Purchasers
LEAD: The rate of growth of the nation's economy slowed in January, lagging behind December in production and employment, the National Association of Purchasing Management said in its monthly report, scheduled to be released today.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


Italian Snowslides Kill 3
LEAD: Avalanches in the Italian Alps killed three people and stranded others this weekend, the authorities said today.


Party Line in Washington: Cheering for the Redskins
LEAD: By late Sunday afternoon, the streets of this city were eerily deserted as all those Washingtonians who had not been able to make their way to Jack Murphy Stadium in San Diego headed for television sets and Super Bowl parties.


Osaka Journal; They Call Japan Home, but Are Hardly at Home
LEAD: The narrow streets and small wooden homes look at first like any other Japanese neighborhood.
But here and there, telltale signs appear - a sticker on a door with a tiny Korean flag, bolts of brightly colored Korean silk hanging in a shop window, posters of red-cheeked girls in Korean traditional dress, the kimchi pots of spicy pickled cabbage on display in the central market.


Circumcision Under Criticism As Unnecessary to Newborn
LEAD: Pamela and David Maier are expecting their first child in six months.
Besides choosing a name for their new baby, the Maiers face another difficult decision: If it's a boy, should he be circumcised?


Neoax Raises Its Bid for IU
LEAD: Neoax Inc. said yesterday that it had increased its offer for the IU International Corporation by $1 a share, to $20 a share, or about $548 million.


Fed Backs Bank Merger
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board has approved the proposed merger of the Shawmut Corporation of Boston and the Hartford National Corporation of Hartford.
Shareholders of the two banks overwhelmingly approved the merger last November.
The combined bank, to be called the Shawmut National Corporation, will have assets of about $25 billion.


Thomas J. Conlin, Army Officer, 81
LEAD: Thomas J. Conlin, a retired colonel in the Army, died Wednesday at the Brookhaven Memorial Hospital in East Patchogue, L.I., after a long illness.
He was 81 years old and lived in Bellport, L.I.


Ecuadoreans Vote For New President, With 10 in Running
LEAD: Some four million Ecuadoreans voted today for a successor to President Leon Febres Cordero from a record field of 10 candidates backed by 17 different parties.


Jazz: Wayne Horvitz and James (Blood) Ulmer
LEAD: THE keyboardist and composer Wayne Horvitz and the guitarist and composer James (Blood) Ulmer unveiled two entirely different approaches to music at the Bottom Line Saturday night.
For his records, Mr.
Horvitz, who sounds as happy swinging through be-bop as throwing notes around with the saxophonist John Zorn, constructs perfect musical miniatures.


In U.S. TV, Israelis Find An Unflattering Mirror
LEAD: Not too far from the ancient walls, a modern dish antenna is aimed as if in supplication to the heavens above the Holy Land, eavesdropping on America's nightly news images of Israel.


U.S. AGENCY KNEW OF CONTRACT LEAK, TWO AIDES TESTIFY
LEAD: The General Services Administration knew that competitors for Government telephone contracts had improperly obtained secret bid information about the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, but the agency allowed them to bid on the contracts anyway, according to two agency employees.


Donahue vs. Winfrey: A Clash of Talk Titans
LEAD: The reports of Phil Donahue's death at the hands of Oprah Winfrey have been grossly exaggerated.


Market Place; Utility Risks Seen As Few, for Now
LEAD: FOR people who follow developments in the electric utility industry, the announcement on Thursday by the beleaguered Public Service Company of New Hampshire that it had filed for bankruptcy protection came as no surprise.


To Help Families, Help Housing
LEAD: In his State of the Union Message, President Reagan urged Congress to rally behind family values.
Meanwhile, hard-pressed American families are finding out the truth of December's grim statistics: Total housing starts dropped 18 percent below November.
Apartments are what home-starved city families need; families already combing the streets for vacancies know that apartment- house starts dropped a mammoth 33 percent.


LYLE'S BOGEY WINS PLAYOFF
LEAD: Sandy Lyle of Scotland almost committed the cardinal sin of missing his tee time this morning.
But he capped a big comeback when he won the Phoenix Open by beating Fred Couples on the third hole of a playoff.
He won with a bogey 5 after Couples drove into a pond on the left of the 18th fairway for the second time in less than an hour.


Redskins Rout Broncos, 42-10, in Super Bowl
LEAD: The most exciting Super Bowl in history may have been played in the second quarter of today's game here.


Learning From Errors
LEAD: Colleen Walker was sitting in a tent two summers ago, describing in detail her every golf shot to reporters at the Mastercard International Pro-Am.
She was recounting her final round, explaining how for the first time she had placed second in a Ladies Professional Golf Association Tour event.


A Reprieve From Winter
LEAD: Carsten Vala, a student at Williams College, sun bathing on the campus in Williamstown, Mass., yesterday as the temperature rose above the 50 degree mark.
Unseasonably warm weather prevailed over most of the East while frigid air sent the temperature below zero in parts of the Plains. (AP)


Social Themes in Art
LEAD: An exhibition that opened yesterday at the Museum of Modern Art explores social and political themes in American printed art from the 1960's to the present, using 144 prints and 36 books by 108 individual artists and 16 collectives.
The printed works are organized into six categories: governments and leaders; race and culture; gender; nuclear power and ecology; war and revolution; economics, class struggle and the American Dream.


Capital Plan Is Based on Risks Involved in Bank Assets
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board's proposal to increase its bank capital requirements is based on the concept that certain loans and other assets held by banks carry a higher risk than others.


In Egyptian Schools, Israel Is Still on the Map
LEAD: To the Editor:


Release of Cubans Reported Up Since Riots
LEAD: The Federal Government is releasing five times as many Cubans from prison each month as it did before uprisings at two prisons last year focused attention on the Cubans' efforts to remain in this country, according to a report today in The Atlanta Journal and Constitution.


Dream Street
LEAD: Something there is about a Bond Street or a Rodeo Drive or a Rue du Faubourg St.-Honore that makes the head spin and the fingers itch and the ribs feel the scorch of a red-hot wallet. ''Buy me,'' the glories in the shops proclaim, ''and you'll get a leg up on life.''


Karen Monson, 42, Music Critic and Author
LEAD: Karen Monson, a music critic and author, died of complications arising from cirrhosis of the liver Saturday afternoon at the Monmouth County Medical Center in Long Branch, N.J.
She was 42 years old.


Dr. Leon Menaker, Psychologist, 72
LEAD: Dr.
Leon Menaker, a charter member of the Lincoln Institute for Psychotherapy in Manhattan, died of liver cancer Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old.


'Writers in Performance'
LEAD: Two Irish poets, Derek Mahon and Paul Muldoon, will open this year's ''Writers in Performance'' series on Feb. 15 at 8 P.M. at the Manhattan Theater Club's Stage One, City Center, 131 West 55th Street.
A columnist and screenwriter, Mr.
Mahon is the author of ''Poems: 1968'' and ''Antarctica''; Mr.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Dec. 17 about newspaper editors' views on the character of Gary Hart misstated the year in which Richard M. Nixon ran for the Presidency against George McGovern.
It was 1972; his rival in 1968 was Hubert H. Humphrey.


Broncos Get Caught Up in a Stampede
LEAD: Their explanations came easily. Painfully easily.


Social Democrats in Britain Split Over Merger of Parties
LEAD: The Social Democratic Party voted today to merge with the Liberal Party in the latest effort by Britain's centrists to break the dominance of the governing Conservatives and opposition Laborites.


Finns Choosing President in 2-Day Election
LEAD: Finns began voting today in a two-day presidential election, with President Mauno Koivisto regarded as almost certain to win a second six-year term as custodian of Finland's sensitive relations with the Soviet Union.


Joyce L. Shub Marries Leonard Reed, Writer
LEAD: Joyce Lasky Shub, a writer and a special adviser to the Under Secretary for Political Affairs in the State Department, and Leonard Reed, a writer and contributing editor of The Washington Monthly magazine, were married yesterday at the bride's home in Washington by Judge Harold H. Greene of the Federal District Court for the District of


Kentucky Beats Notre Dame
LEAD: Rex Chapman's 3-point play with 1 minute 18 seconds remaining sparked Kentucky to a 78-69 victory today over Notre Dame.


Miami's New Orchestra Teaches While It Plays
LEAD: The inaugural concert on Feb. 4 of a new symphony orchestra has stirred up greater interest and expectation here than any other cultural event in recent times.


Killing Jars Dallas Into Taking Stock
LEAD: This has always been a city that has defined itself by the ways it differs from other cities: a cool, managerial island of businesslike calm amid the ferment of urban America.


Forty Niner Draws Post 5 in Hutcheson
LEAD: Forty Niner, the early favorite for the Kentucky Derby May 7, drew post five today for his seasonal debut Wednesday against a surprisingly strong field of 3-year-olds in the Hutcheson Stakes at Gulfstream Park.


4 Injured in Derailment Of a Train in Harlem
LEAD: Four people were slightly injured when the eighth car of a 10-car D train was derailed just south of 145th Street and St.
Nicholas Avenue in Harlem last night, officials said.


Weighing of 2 Perils Led to Needles-for-Addicts Plan
LEAD: For more than two years, top officials debated whether giving clean needles to New York City drug addicts would do more good or harm in a city that is home to half the nation's heroin addicts and that expects to bear the worst damage from the rising AIDS epidemic.


Festive Fans Vocal In Their Devotion
LEAD: The Redskins' victory in Super Bowl XXII brought thousands of fans into the streets to celebrate tonight, some of them rabid followers and some of them foreigners with an attitude of pleased befuddlement.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: N.H.L.
Capitals 1, Flyers 0: Kelly Miller scored 3 minutes 17 seconds into overtime to give Washington the victory over Philadelphia yesterday in Landover, Md.
The victory moved Washington into second place in the Patrick Division, 4 points behind the Flyers and 1 ahead of the third-place Islanders.(AP)


Washington Talk: Briefing; Help for Caribbean
LEAD: Little noticed in President Reagan's State of the Union Message was his endorsement of further trade help for the Caribbean Basin.
Under 1983 legislation 22 Caribbean countries benefit from tariff-free access to the United States market.


76ers Lack Punch In Loss to Celtics
LEAD: Larry Bird scored 29 points and grabbed 17 rebounds to lead the Boston Celtics to a 100-85 victory over Philadelphia today as the 76ers hit a National Basketball Association season low with 29 points in the first half.


Corporate Bowl
LEAD: Football may have provided the excuse, but as any hospitality suite hopper in San Diego could attest last week, the real reason for the Super Bowl is money.
The kind that executives of a dozen or so corporations are hoping shows up on the bottom line to justify the millions of stockholder dollars they spent on Super Bowl and other National Football League promotions and sponsorships, not to mention their own Super


American Brands Set To Buy E-II
LEAD: American Brands Inc. announced yesterday that it would buy E-II Holdings Inc. in a deal valued at $2.7 billion, ending a tangled month-long takeover fight that began when E-II made an offer for American Brands.


Advertising; Promotional Campaign For CBS-TV
LEAD: A NEW promotion campaign for CBS-TV breaks today on the network, and if the hopes of Gene F. Jankowski, president of the Broadcast Group, are realized it will help bring a younger audience to the network that attracts the oldest.


Investigations On Boesky Tie Clear Goldin
LEAD: The New York City Comptroller, Harrison J. Goldin, has been cleared of any charges of legal or ethical misconduct after a yearlong series of investigations into his financial relationship with Ivan F. Boesky, the Wall Street speculator.


THE BIG-PLAY QUARTERBACK
LEAD: EVER since George Halas sat on an automobile running board at the Hupmobile agency in Canton, Ohio during the 1920 founding of the National Football League, coaches have talked about their teams having to ''make the big plays.'' But nobody ever made more big plays quicker in a big game than Doug Williams did yesterday in the Washington Redskins' 42-10 triumph over the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XX


Ellen M. Hancock
LEAD: In a company whose upper ranks have long been an exclusive male bastion, Ellen M. Hancock stands out.
Not only is Mrs.
Hancock the highest-ranking woman to be an I.B.M. operating officer, but she may also hold one of the company's toughest jobs.


Grand Central at 75: Beauty and Misery
LEAD: Looking grander than it has in a generation, Grand Central Terminal will mark its 75th anniversary tomorrow with a clear Beaux-Arts victory over decades of neglect and abuse but without its fabled title, ''Gateway to a Continent.''


Being a Mother Takes Art and Science, Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


20 Are Seized in Gambling Raids
LEAD: An illegal gambling ring that handled about $500 million in bets on sporting events - including $5 million on the Super Bowl - was the target of raids on seven apartments in Manhattan Saturday night that resulted in the arrests of 20 people, the police reported.


AIDS, Marriage and Folly in Illinois
LEAD: The Illinois Legislature and Gov.
James Thompson have set an inglorious example of what not to do about AIDS.
Ignoring the advice of their own and other public health authorities, they enacted a law last year that compels everyone getting married in Illinois to be tested for the AIDS virus.
The classic results of this stubborn folly would be ludicrous were it not for the nuisance and dismay inflicted on so many people.


Panel Is Advised It Must Abolish New York City Board of Estimate
LEAD: The commission working to restructure New York City's government has been told by its legal experts that it must devise a radically new form of government - one that abolishes the powerful Board of Estimate and distributes its authority elsewhere.


Unsuccessful Transition
LEAD: On the basketball court, Bob Gaeta has always been a gunner.
He lived and died by the jump shot.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The challenge is not simply to stop the war, because if our people continue to suffer, war will break out again.''  - Brooklyn Rivera, the Miskito leader, on Nicaragua's civil war.  [ A3:3. ]


Concert: Slatkin Leads St. Louis at Carnegie
LEAD: LEONARD SLATKIN is a conductor dedicated to new music with a particular slant.


City Ballet: 2 Debuts In 'Square Dance
LEAD: BECAUSE every cast of a ballet inevitably brings something personal to it, ballet lovers constantly return to certain works just to see how they will look with a particular set of dancers.
Recent performances of the New York City Ballet at the New York State Theater featured some interesting interpretations.


For Japanese in U.S., School, Japanese Style
LEAD: A leading Japanese university plans to build the first high school for Japanese students in the United States on the campus of Manhattanville College in Purchase, N.Y.


Administrators of Neglect
LEAD: Surrogate Renee Roth, are you and the city's other surrogates paying attention?
It's hard to imagine a stronger claim on it than the just-disclosed ''sting'' operation in which court representatives were secretly videotaped stealing cash and valuables from the apartments of people they thought were dead.


Bridge: Jersey Judge Demonstrates Management Style in Match
LEAD: On rare occasions a player can usefully adopt at the bridge table a technique developed in a daily non-bridge occupation.


Joseph J. Coffey Sr., Union Organizer, 80
LEAD: Joseph J. Coffey Sr., a co-founder of Local 804, International Brotherhood of Teamsters, died Saturday at City Hospital Center at Elmhurst, in Queens, after a long illness.
He was 80 years old and lived in Woodside, Queens.


A Smokestack in Poland Emits Odor of Indecision
LEAD: The Delta knitwear factory would simply be closed down, the article said, because environmental officials were tired of waiting for the company's management to put in chimney filters that stop soot.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 1988
LEAD: THE ECONOMY  The Fed may increase capital requirements for banks by 1992, a move that could stall the acquisitions of large savings institutions.  [ Page A1. ]  The proposal is based on the concept that certain loans and other assets of banks carry a higher risk than others. [ D8. ]


B.A.T. to Get Financing
LEAD: B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C. said that it had secured a $3.2 billion line of credit from a consortium of banks to finance its unsolicited bid for Farmers Group Inc.
Last month Farmers, a Los Angeles-based insurance group, rejected a $4.2 billion bid from the British tobacco conglomerate.
B.A.T., based in London, said Saturday that it would finance the deal - worth $60 a share - through debt and cash.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE EXCELLENT EMPIRE. The Fall of Rome and the Triumph of the Church.


Cardinal Is Seen as Kind, if Firm, Monitor of Faith
LEAD: ''In essence, you are looking at the Grand Inquisitor.''


The Journal Gets a New Order
LEAD: For years, The Wall Street Journal - with its huge circulation and staff and its soaring advertising revenues - has been the envy of newspaper publishers and editors throughout the land.


Dance: Olesker and Pou at St. Mark's
LEAD: LIZZIE OLESKER plunged into the supposed trivialities of life and Alyson Pou rose above them in a program of performance art presented by the Danspace Project on Friday at St.
Mark's Church.
In ''House Work,'' Ms.
Olesker conjured up three generations of women and paid a glance to a fourth, in the guise of a young sociology student engaged in a Marxist-feminist interpretation of housework.


Nuclear Plant Drain Put At $100 Billion for U.S.
LEAD: Nuclear plants that were abandoned before completion or finished at excessive cost will cost the nation's economy as much as $100 billion, according to utility experts.
The penalty for this technological wrong turn will be shared by residential and business electric customers, Federal taxpayers and, increasingly, utility stockholders and bondholders.


Man Seized for Threats Dies in an Ambulance
LEAD: A Brooklyn man taken into police custody after threatening neighbors in his apartment building died in an ambulance en route to the hospital on Saturday, the police said, and it is unclear what caused his death.


China Protests
LEAD: The Chinese Government has protested a plan by the Pentagon to include China on a new list of nations that are considered hostile to the United States, according to officials of the Defense Department.


Astronomers Discover Geminga Does Exist
LEAD: WORKING against such long odds that many colleagues had given up on the problem, two Columbia University astronomers have solved the mystery of Geminga, a seemingly empty point in the sky that emits intense gamma rays.


Fiscal Clouds: Connecticut Is Facing Time of Austerity
LEAD: For the last four years, Connecticut and its General Assembly have basked in prosperity.
Legislators in the nation's richest state have seen $1 billion in budget surpluses, cut taxes twice and put $313 million into a ''rainy day'' emergency fund.
Last year they raised spending by 14 percent, one of the highest levels in the country.


House Panel to Conduct Hearings on F.B.I. Spying
LEAD: A House civil rights subcommittee will conduct hearings this month on the F.B.I. surveillance of opponents of the Reagan Administration's Central America policies, the chairman of the panel announced today.


SEEDS OF NOBILITY SEEN IN BLUEBERRY
LEAD: Bob Coffey insists that he is not sore at the President.
But he thinks Mr.
Reagan has had some bad advice, and he is willing to help correct that.


U.S. IS PROPOSING A FRESH APPROACH TO MIDEAST PEACE
LEAD: The United States has undertaken a new Middle East peace initiative to provide elections for Palestinian self-government in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip and a formula for an early peace conference on the Middle East, American and Israeli officials said today.


Waldheim Panel Seeks Telegram
LEAD: A member of a commission investigating Kurt Waldheim's war record flew to Yugoslavia today to try to track down a document that is said to implicate the Austrian President in war crimes.


REPUBLIC GYPSUM CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REPUBLIC GYPSUM CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,543,000
16,434,000
Net inc
761,000
1,654,000
Share earns
.08
.16
6mo sales
27,417,000
30,556,000
Net inc
1,186,000
2,873,000
Share earns
.12
.27


New Smithsonian Gem
LEAD: As of today, the Smithsonian's legendary Hope Diamond will be getting some competition in the field of naturally crystallized pure carbon.


BANK OF SAN FRANCISCO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANK OF SAN FRANCISCO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
260,093
261,133
Per share
.14
.14
Yr net inc
b142,635
1,051,712
Per share
.08
.68
Shares outst
1,825,613
1,551,506
b-Includes a provision for loan losses of $2 million.


Poll Finds Rather Clash Is Failing To Ease Bush's Iran-Contra Woes
LEAD: Vice President Bush's televised quarrel with Dan Rather neither helped nor hurt his image, a New York Times Poll has found, but the persistent controversy over his role in the Iran-contra affair appears to pose a long-term threat to his credibility.


POWELL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POWELL INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
16,694,000
19,954,000
Net loss
2,199,000
1,329,000
Yr rev
67,676,000
78,697,000
Net loss
1,319,000
928,000


Big Assignment For Redskins Is to Win Again
LEAD: Joe Gibbs was worried today, even with his second Super Bowl of the 1980's secure.


G.M. Increases Some Dividends
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation increased the dividends on its class H and class E stock, reflecting improved earnings of the independently reporting subsidiaries that they represent.
Class H shares, which represent G.M.
Hughes Electronics, will pay 22 cents each, up from 18 cents.
Class E stock, which represents Electronic Data Systems, will pay 17 cents a share, up from 13 cents.


Grace's Profit At $50.1 Million
LEAD: Bolstered by strong performances by its specialty chemicals, energy and general business operations, W. R. Grace &amp; Company reported yesterday that it had a net income of $50.1 million, or 59 cents a share, in the fourth quarter of 1987, in contrast to a loss of $559.9 million in the quarter a year earlier.


New Top Executive Due At Bateman Eichler
LEAD: Richard J. Capalbo, a marketing executive known for developing innovative investment concepts and using videos to sell them, will become the chairman, president and chief executive of Bateman Eichler, Hill Richards Inc., a Los Angeles brokerage.


Stanadyne Accepts Bid By Forstmann Little
LEAD: Forstmann Little &amp; Company, a Manhattan investment firm specializing in management buyouts, has agreed to buy Stanadyne Inc., which makes diesel injection systems and Moen plumbing supplies, the two companies said yesterday.


Gore Brings His Presidential Campaign to New York
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr., a Democratic candidate, greeting supporters at a campaign stop he made in Cheektowaga, N.Y., near Buffalo.
Mr.
Gore also made stops yesterday in Rochester, Syracuse and Albany. (AP)


NOEL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOEL INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,006,000
8,312,449
Net loss
961,000
247,647
Yr sales
27,642,251
32,568,228
Net loss
4,572,099
157,706


9 Tutored in Radicals' Case
LEAD: The city is paying $50,000 a year for a private tutor for the children of four women involved in a radical group that engaged in a deadly confrontation with the police three years ago, according to a published report.


New Leader In Seoul Finds Honeymoon
LEAD: It was a small gesture, but South Koreans nonetheless took note the other day when President-elect Roh Tae Woo presided over a public meeting and said that people could smoke if they wished.


NAVADA NATIONAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NAVADA NATIONAL BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
1,074,000
495,000
Yr net loss
231,000
4,080,000
The company said losses in the latest quarter were primarily due to provisions to loan loss reserves and losses taken on the disposal of foreclosed real estate.


Steel Output Up 3.9%
LEAD: Steel production rose to 1.939 million tons in the week ended Saturday, up 3.9 percent from the previous week's 1.866 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute reported yesterday.
The industry's production amounted to 90.3 percent of capacity, up from 86.9 percent in the previous week.
Estimated figures for the year to date showed production at 7.954 million net tons, up 38.5 percent from the 5.743 million net tons in the previous year, when the steel operations of the USX Corporation were shut down by a strike.


TORCHMARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TORCHMARK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
396,314,000
407,079,000
Net inc
b34,764,000
c35,620,000
Share earns
.52
.49
Shares outst
62,257,000
72,734,000
Yr rev
1,590,493,000
1,554,548,000
Net inc
b192,987,000
c205,749,000
Share earns
2.86
2.73
Shares outst
65,757,000
75,050,000


MCGRAW-HILL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCGRAW-HILL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
498,691,000
446,934,000
Net inc
49,927,000
42,003,000
Share earns
1.01
.83
Yr rev
1,751,230,000
1,576,834,000
Net inc
164,794,000
154,009,000
Share earns
3.27
3.04


Belzbergs Buy Countrywide Stake
LEAD: An investment group led by members of the Belzberg family of Canada, has bought a 6.6 percent stake in Countrywide Credit Industries and said it might seek control of the mortgage banking holding company, which is based in Pasadena, Calif.


CITIZENS SAVINGS BANK-MARYLAND reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS SAVINGS BANK-MARYLAND (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
703,000
693,000
Per share
.35
-
Yr net inc
3,087,000
b2,814,000
Per share
1.56
-
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $335,000.
The company went public in December 1986.


TERMIFLEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TERMIFLEX CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,411,804
1,259,704
Net inc
67,852
99,988
Share earns
.05
.07
6mo sales
2,617,125
2,759,294
Net inc
132,504
196,144
Share earns
.10
.14


LOUISIANA GENERAL SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOUISIANA GENERAL SERVICES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
38,338,000
45,315,000
Net inc
1,530,000
1,605,000
Share earns
.26
.27


Schwab Cutbacks
LEAD: Charles Schwab &amp; Company, the discount brokerage, said it would reduce its nationwide work force by about 5 percent, or 160 employees.
The company said the layoffs were necessary because of a drop in stock trading.
They followed other cost-cutting moves in recent weeks.


Results Plus
LEAD:  N.H.L.


Dollar Advances Overseas; Gold Little Changed in U.S.
LEAD: After rising against all key foreign currencies in overseas trading yesterday, the dollar held its gains in New York, where it traded in a narrow range.


ATTORNEY GENERAL DENIES WRONGDOING ON PIPELINE PLAN
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d denied wrongdoing today in connection with a billion-dollar Iraqi pipeline project and insisted he knew nothing about any plan to bribe Israeli officials.


Senate Backs 2 U.N. Labor Pacts
LEAD: The Senate overwhelmingly approved two International Labor Organization conventions today, marking the first time in nearly 35 years that the United States has formally approved treaties with the United Nations agency.


Breast Cancer Continues Gradual Rise
LEAD: New cases of breast cancer among American women are being found at the highest rate ever recorded, the National Cancer Institute said today.


Sports People; Coming to Terms
LEAD: Jose Uribe, the San Francisco Giants' infielder, and Jeff Russell, the Texas Rangers' pitcher, agreed to new contracts with their clubs yesterday after having filed for arbitration.
Uribe will earn a reported $535,000; Russell will receive a reported $190,000. . . .
Arbitration hearings began yesterday.


TV Review; 'FRONTLINE,' ON GRENADA
LEAD: ''FRONTLINE'' remounts the Grenada invasion tonight.


ATALANTA-SOSNOFF CAPITAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATALANTA-SOSNOFF CAPITAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,717,000
7,799,000
Net inc
b1,664,000
2,048,000
Share earns
.19
.22
Yr rev
37,259,000
29,209,000
Net inc
b8,484,000
8,599,000
Share earns
.95
1.00


Behind Grand Central's Public Areas Lies an Array of 'Secret' Chambers
LEAD: ''We're going out over the stars.''


GALAXY CARPET MILLS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GALAXY CARPET MILLS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
65,960,000
58,367,000
Net inc
b2,193,000
1,109,000
Share earns
.65
.33
b-After gains of $563,000 from a change in inventory accounting and $1,149,000 from a change in tax accounting.


France to Get 450 Works From Chagall Estate
LEAD: More than 450 artworks are to be donated to France in lieu of inheritance taxes owed by the family of Marc Chagall.


Groups Challenging Abortion Rules
LEAD: Lawsuits by two states and several advocacy groups are to be filed today to block new Federal regulations that severely restrict access to information about abortion.


Rise in Seagram Bid Wins Martell
LEAD: After an intense six-week battle, the Seagram Company yesterday won its bid for Martell et Compagnie, the 273-year-old cognac house.


CARNIVAL CRUISE LINES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARNIVAL CRUISE LINES (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
125,872,000
102,258,000
Net inc
34,486,000
24,000,000
Share earns
.25
.22
Yr rev
564,080,000
420,837,000
Net inc
152,806,000
97,691,000
Share earns
1.30
.89


13 Beagles Stolen From Researchers
LEAD: Animal-rights proponents have removed 13 beagles used for medical research from the University of California at Irvine.


NEWS SUMMRY: TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-8  Edwin Meese denied wrongdoing in connection with a billion-dollar Iraqi pipeline project and insisted that he knew nothing about any plan to bribe Israeli officials.
It was his first public comment about the matter.
Page A1  Mr.
Meese advised Shimon Peres in a 1985 letter to deal with the national security adviser rather than with the State Department on secret discussions about the pipeline project, officials said.


HYDRAULIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HYDRAULIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,989,000
18,702,000
Net inc
3,325,000
3,127,000
Share earns
.70
.73
Shares outst
4,741,475
4,261,797
Yr rev
70,026,000
63,727,000
Net inc
10,764,000
9,224,000
Share earns
2.40
2.18


Wang to Acquire Convergent Unit
LEAD: Wang Laboratories Inc. has agreed to acquire the Informatics Legal Systems subsidiary of Convergent Inc., the companies announced today.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.


Coral Kinsolving, 57, Advertising Executive
LEAD: Coral Eaton Kinsolving, a former advertising and newspaper executive who was active in New York City community affairs and the management of Democratic political campaigns, died of cardiac arrest on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 57 years old.


The Experience of Touch: Research Points to a Critical Role
LEAD: THE experience of being touched, new research shows, has direct and crucial effects on the growth of the body as well as the mind.


CAPITOL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPITOL BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
200,000
b572,000
Per share
.06
-
Yr net inc
9,900,000
b4,037,000
Per share
3.30
-
b-Net loss  The latest quarter net was reduced by an increase of $4,025,000 in the bank's loan loss reserve and by the reclassification of about $22 million of loans and joint ventures as non-accruing.


Prudential Bonds Backed By Life Insurance Loans
LEAD: The Prudential Insurance Company and its subsidiary, Prudential-Bache Securities, yesterday disclosed an innovative $445.6 million sale of bonds backed by loans to life insurance policyholders.


SUMMIT SAVINGS ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUMMIT SAVINGS ASSN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
38,419
b125,390
Per share
-
.20
6mo net inc
202,037
283,586
Per share
.32
.44
b-Net income


Rail Controller Accepts Blame in Amtrak Crash
LEAD: A control tower operator who fled his post after an Amtrak train and a maintenance vehicle collided last week has acknowledged causing the accident by forgetting to switch the train to an empty track, investigators said today.


INTERTRANS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERTRANS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
28,380,813
20,788,025
Net inc
b325,411
646,921
Share earns
.07
.13
Yr rev
100,777,166
74,801,638
Net inc
b2,399,652
2,326,658
Share earns
.49
.50
Shares outst
4,943,878
4,651,341


ZZZZ Best Denial Issued
LEAD: Ernst &amp; Whinney, the auditor for ZZZZ Best, disputed today that it had impeded a Congressional investigation into the role that the accounting firm played in the collapse of the carpet-cleaning concern last July.
The failure cost investors almost $70 million Barry J. Minkow, the flamboyant chairman of ZZZZ


When Everybody Shouts, Who Listens?
LEAD: When everybody shouts, nobody listens.
The shouting in this country about Nicaragua gets louder and louder, the time for listening and thinking shorter and shorter.


WICAT SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WICAT SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
11,304,000
4,614,000
Net inc
68,000
b3,808,000
9mo rev
31,019,000
20,456,000
Net loss
1,401,000
6,640,000
b-Net loss


ABITIBI-PRICE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABITIBI-PRICE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
786,100,000
697,900,000
Net inc
34,600,000
b28,300,000
Share earns
.47
.38
Yr sales
2,990,000,000
2,760,000,000
Net inc
125,700,000
b107,300,000
Share earns
1.70
1.46


AFP IMAGING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AFP IMAGING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
11,598,247
5,084,871
Net inc
139,247
105,572
Share earns
.03
.02
6mo sales
19,056,655
10,112,164
Net inc
302,568
244,046
Share earns
.06
.05


Freshman Is Tugged by Rival Sides on Rebel Aid
LEAD: Representative Bob Clement, who was sworn in as the newest member of Congress a week ago today, didn't realize he had so many friends.


RJR NABISCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RJR NABISCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,419,000,000
4,217,000,000
Net inc
370,000,000
c314,000,000
Share earns
1.46
1.21
Yr sales
15,766,000,000
15,102,000,000
Net inc
b1,209,000,000
c1,064,000,000
Share earns
4.70
3.83


Market Place; Good Times Seen In Leisure Sector
LEAD: SEVERAL sectors of the recreation and leisure industry stand to benefit from the sharply lower dollar, which makes foreign vacations more expensive, and the lingering fear of a recession, some analysts say.


Born-Again Couture Sets the Trends
LEAD: Five years ago it would have been absurd to think of Paris haute-couture designers as pace-setters for the world's fashion trends.
Charming anachronisms, the made-to-order collections were considered historical monuments, like the Eiffel Tower or the Arc de Triomphe.
The action was in ready-to-wear.


SOUTHWEST AIRLINES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWEST AIRLINES CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
193,900,000
193,990,000
Net inc
b8,922,000
9,027,000
Share earns
.28
.28
Shares outst
31,606,000
32,254,000
Yr rev
778,328,000
768,790,000
Net inc
20,155,000
50,035,000
Share earns
.63
1.55


Kodak Suspends Production of Its Disk Camera
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company said yesterday that it had suspended the production of its disk camera six years after its introduction.
The company said that declining demand and excess inventory had influenced its decision.


Devils Win Third in a Row
LEAD: Mark Johnson scored twice to lift the Devils to a 5-4 victory over the league-leading Calgary Flames tonight.


STOKELY USA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STOKELY USA (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
59,680,000
38,352,000
Net inc
b2,611,000
756,000
Share earns
.31
.09
9mo sales
132,915,000
102,371,000
Net inc
2,710,000
1,109,000
Share earns
.32
.13


U.S. Vetoes U.N. Resolution Urging Restraint by Israelis
LEAD: The United States today vetoed a Security Council resolution that appealed to Israel to exercise restraint in the occupied territories and called for the Middle East situation to be resolved under United Nations auspices.


Weinberger Is Made An Honorary Knight
LEAD: Former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has been awarded an honorary knighthood in recognition of his ''outstanding and invaluable'' contribution to military cooperation between Britain and the United States, the Foreign Office said today.


Marriott Offering $100 Million Issue
LEAD: The Marriott Corporation is offering $100 million of 8 3/8 percent notes, due in 1994, at a price of 99.65 to yield 8.45 percent, through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Hutton.


Rail Workers Strike in Brazil
LEAD: Brazilian rail workers began their first national strike today to press for pay increases of 60 to 80 percent, union leaders said.
Antonio Araujo do Valle, president of the Rio de Janeiro rail workers' union and a member of the national strike command, said all 85,000 workers were on strike.


AMERICAN HOME SHIELD CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN HOME SHIELD CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
13,536,000
10,869,000
Net inc
b1,969,000
c1,025,000
Share earns
.21
.15
Yr rev
47,359,000
38,232,000
Net inc
b6,109,000
c2,375,000
Share earns
.72
.33
Shares outst
8,389,000
6,823,000


Nova Seeks Tests On Cold Remedy
LEAD: The Nova Pharmaceutical Corporation, as expected, asked the Food and Drug Administration to approve human testing of a cold remedy that the company hopes will revolutionize treatment of the common cold.
Nova is developing a nasal spray compound known as bradykinin antagonist, aimed at blocking bradykinin, a powerful pain-producing substance in the human body.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in the Business People column yesterday about management changes at the International Business Machines Corporation identified one appointee incompletely.
It is Stephen B. Schwartz who will head I.B.M.
Application Business Systems.


INOUYE CONCEDES 'ERROR' IN SENATE
LEAD: Senator Daniel K. Inouye, who may be in line to become the next Senate majority leader, acknowledged today that he had made ''an error in judgment'' in pushing a pet measure through Congress as it rushed to adjournment last year.


Bridge: Veteran New York Experts Would Be Impressive Team
LEAD: Selecting the ''best'' team of eight from active players in the New York metropolitan region would be an interesting exercise.


BETZ LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BETZ LABORATORIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
99,732,602
85,236,409
Net inc
10,040,553
7,183,309
Share earns
.65
.45
Yr sales
385,868,031
344,376,784
Net inc
40,633,789
35,544,386
Share earns
2.59
2.23


U.S. Voting Act Exerts a Strong Influence Over New York Politics
LEAD: Betty Dolen, executive director of the New York City Board of Elections, usually has more contact with the Justice Department in Washington than with City Hall a few blocks away.


G.S.A. Official Refuses To Testify on Bidding
LEAD: Sureshar Lal Soni, the design engineer accused of giving secret bid information to competitors for Government phone contracts, exercised his Fifth Amendment right today, as expected, when he was questioned in a deposition proceeding by a lawyer for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


A Gain by Working Women
LEAD: For the first time on record, working women earned 70 percent as much as working men in 1987, the Government reported today.


Mildred Evans Williams, Psychiatrist, 81
LEAD: Mildred Evans Williams, who practiced psychiatry for more than 30 years in Manhattan, died Saturday at the Candlewood Valley Nursing Home in New Milford, Conn.
She was 81 years old.


Hot Plumes at Sea
LEAD: One of the most intriguing recent discoveries at sea has been the sudden outpouring of vast quantities of hot, mineral-laden water from at least one mid-ocean ridge.
They produce volumes of hot water that can be 12 miles wide and more than a quarter mile in thickness.


Home Video Industry Feeling Middle Age
LEAD: The home video industry, born just a decade ago, is already feeling the effects of middle age.


TERMINAL DATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TERMINAL DATA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,673,000
6,076,000
Net inc
187,000
b935,000
Share earns
.04
.21
b-Includes a tax credit of $402,000, a gain after taxes of $1,844,000 from the sale of the Woodland Hills facility, and a provision for a loss of $770,000 on the sale of the Simi Valley facility to Gibraltar Savings.


LOCKHEED CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOCKHEED CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,209,000,000
2,836,000,000
Net inc
134,000,000
c110,000,000
Share earns
2.07
1.67
Shares outst
64,600,000
66,000,000
Yr sales
11,321,000,000
10,161,000,000
Net inc
b421,000,000
c408,000,000
Share earns
6.41
6.18
Shares outst
65,700,000
66,000,000


Community Patrol Plan Making Sidewalks of New York Safer
LEAD: To the Editor:


College Basketball; Villanova Beats Georgetown
LEAD: Villanova's 7-foot-2-inch Tom Greis scored 21 points tonight as the Wildcats built a 16-point lead early in the second half, then held on to defeat Georgetown, 64-58, in a Big East Conference game.


U.S. to Get Andes Condors
LEAD: From 10 to 20 condors from the Andes in South America may be released later this year in California as part of an effort to revive the population of their California cousins.


Nets' Road Slump Ends at 26 in Dallas
LEAD: Buck Williams scored 23 points and the Nets rallied from an 11-point deficit in the third quarter tonight to beat the Dallas Mavericks, 108-103, and snap a 26-game road losing streak dating to last season.


BURNDY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURNDY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
76,249,000
67,074,000
Net inc
b5,034,000
c4,390,000
Share earns
.41
.37
Yr sales
283,949,000
241,038,000
Net inc
b11,608,000
c9,490,000
Share earns
.95
.79


Theory Explains Slow Emergence of Mental Ills
LEAD: MEDICAL scientists have often seen illnesses that seem at first to be isolated reponses to external shocks but later take on lives of their own.
A single episode of depression, for example, can be followed by repeated attacks that come and go with increasing frequency for no apparent reason.


TIMBERLINE SOFTWARE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIMBERLINE SOFTWARE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,082,000
2,105,000
Net inc
209,000
256,000
Share earns
.08
.10
Yr rev
7,653,000
7,200,000
Net inc
413,000
b152,000
Share earns
.16
-


MCI COMMUNICATIONS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCI COMMUNICATIONS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,038,000,000
920,000,000
Net inc
b33,000,000
c502,000,000
Share earns
.11
-
Yr rev
3,939,000,000
3,592,000,000
Net inc
b88,000,000
c448,000,000
Share earns
.31
-


FIRST REPUBLIC BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST REPUBLIC BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
202,000
291,000
Per share
.06
.13
Shares outst
3,096,716
2,322,463
Yr net inc
671,000
526,000
Per share
.26
.30
Shares outst
2,541,355
1,759,130


Walton Gives Up a Post In Shuffle at Wal-Mart
LEAD: Sam M. Walton, the chairman and chief executive of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., announced yesterday that he was relinquishing one of his titles as part of a management realigment.


Savings Unit Note Offering
LEAD: Federal regulators for the savings and loan industry in the Southwest said today they would try to lower the cost of funds for savings institutions in the region by issuing up to $4 billion in notes backed by certificates of deposit guaranteed by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation.


Damage to Puget Sound Area Feared After Oil Barge Sinks
LEAD: Trying to avert an environmental catastrophe, Coast Guard officials here are struggling to contain heavy oil from a barge that sank in pristine water about 70 miles north of Seattle Sunday.


MULTI-COLOR CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MULTI-COLOR CO
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
13,810,000
13,177,000
Net inc
237,000
326,000
Share earns
.11
.22
Shares outst
2,181,000
1,479,000
9mo sales
39,298,000
36,999,000
Net inc
618,000
551,000
Share earns
.34
.37
Shares outst
1,801,000
1,474,000


A Rout That Seemed Riveting
LEAD: THE first reaction during and after the Super Bowl Sunday was:


INTERCHANGE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERCHANGE FINANCIAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
663,840
414,700
Per share
.33
.24
Yr net inc
2,412,454
1,824,732
Per share
1.34
1.06
Per share figures have been adjusted to reflect a 3-for-2 split for stockowners of Dec.


REGIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REGIS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
46,820,000
41,203,000
Net inc
2,341,000
1,329,000
Share earns
.29
.16
6mo sales
93,622,000
83,126,000
Net inc
4,106,000
3,643,000
Share earns
.50
.43


ELIOT BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELIOT BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
774,000
317,000
Per share
.37
-
Yr net inc
2,234,000
b1,024,000
Per share
-
-
b-Includes an extraordinary item of $175,000.
The bank converted to stock ownership in July 1987.


RJR Nabisco
LEAD: The Planters Lifesavers Company, a unit of RJR Nabisco Inc., said it would consolidate some manufacturing operations by closing a plant in Canajoharie, N.Y., and transferring production to other sites.
The plant, which has a work force of 450 and is situated 60 miles west of Albany, will be closed by Dec.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Express Co., appointed Richard M. Moose senior vice president of government affairs.


Winter Takes a Vacation
LEAD: Elana Ripps, left, and Caroline Tepper Marlin took to a jump rope while their coats and those of classmates hung on a fence during a recess in Central Park at West 63d Street.
The temperature rose to a mild 62 degrees yesterday.
Rain is forecast for today. (NYT/Dith Pran)


Passaic Fire Leaves Hundreds of Indians Homeless
LEAD: Residents who were evacuated from an apartment-building fire taking shelter in Passaic (N.J.) High School gymnasium.
One-fourth of the city's Indian population was made homeless.
Page B2. (NYT/William E. Sauro)


RIVERBEND INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RIVERBEND INTERNATIONAL (AMEX)
Year to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
48,900,446
41,923,569
Net inc
2,859,619
1,615,579
Share earns
.55
.36
Shares outst
5,200,000
4,500,000


ANDAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANDAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
24,255,000
13,996,000
Net loss
388,000
b2,251,000
b-After a loss of $825,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


British Banks Lift Rates
LEAD: Three big British banks raised their basic interest rates by half a point today, to 9 percent, after the Bank of England increased its money market rate.
The central bank's move came as a surprise, but Barclays, Midland and National Westminister actrd quickly.


Advertising; 2 New Bakery Accounts At Muller Jordan Weiss
LEAD: Stroehmann Bakeries of Horsham, Pa., has acquired two additional bakeries - Taystee in New York and Dreikorn's in Holyoke, Mass. - and it has assigned them to its agency, Muller Jordan Weiss.
Stroehmann, a powerhouse brand in Philadelphia, has been spending about $3 million through the agency.
The new business adds more than $1 million to the pot.


British Success Story Tries the States
LEAD: IT took less time to set up the computer than to clean up the packing materials afterward -the plastic wrapping and foam bracing and that imitation popcorn that sticks obstinately to everything.


E-II Deal Maker Is Thinking of E-III
LEAD: Is there life after E-II? Donald P. Kelly apparently thinks there is.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Toxic Waste Settlement


McDonnell to Follow His Advice and Retire
LEAD: Sanford N. McDonnell, a 6-foot-2-inch native of Arkansas, says he feels vigorous enough to keep working even though he has announced his retirement as chairman and chief executive of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, effective March 2.


7 Killed in Philippine Battle
LEAD: Six Moslem separatist rebels and one soldier were killed in a one-hour gunbattle in the southern Philippines, the military said today.
It said four soldiers and 15 villagers were wounded in the fighting, which erupted when about 200 rebels of the Moro National Liberation Front attacked an outpost in North Cotabato province on Sunday.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.94
6.79
6.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.67
5.64
5.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.07
6.03
5.60
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.06
8.05
7.03
30-YR.


In Publishing, Job Mobility Starts at the Top
LEAD: Book publishing has long been an itinerant profession, partly because for younger editors, the best way to win a raise or a promotion was to move to another house - preferably with an author or two in tow.


Ward Role For Kidder
LEAD: After an internecine struggle, General Electric Capital has brought Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, the investment banking firm, back into the negotiations to buy Montgomery Ward &amp; Company, according to Wall Street sources with knowledge of the talks.


Arizona Impeachment Hearing Is Stalled
LEAD: Hearings to consider the impeachment of Gov.
Evan Mecham broke down here today when he refused to answer questions from lawyers for a committee of the Arizona House of Representatives.


STERLING DRUG INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STERLING DRUG INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
592,407,000
523,598,000
Net inc
51,815,000
45,149,000
Share earns
.91
.77
Yr sales
2,300,919,000
1,990,434,000
Net inc
196,981,000
171,507,000
Share earns
3.42
2.91


MERRIMACK BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERRIMACK BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
527,000
1,690,000
Per share
.12
.37
Yr net inc
3,020,000
4,672,000
Per share
.66
-
The bank converted to stock form, May 1986.


BFS BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BFS BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
321,000
227,000
Per share
.28
-
Yr net inc
1,320,000
1,334,000
Per share
1.15
-
The bank converted to stock ownership in March 1986.


AMERICAN STANDARD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN STANDARD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
901,900,000
769,700,000
Net inc
41,300,000
c33,000,000
Share earns
1.32
.97
Shares outst
31,300,000
34,100,000
Yr sales
3,399,800,000
2,997,700,000
Net inc
b127,100,000
c188,500,000
Share earns
3.99
5.15
Shares outst
31,900,000
36,600,000


CUMBERLAND FEDERAL SAVNGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CUMBERLAND FEDERAL SAVNGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,572,000
791,000
Per share
.64
-
Yr net inc
5,848,000
6,537,000
Per share
2.39
-
The company went public in May 1987.


SOUTHDOWN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHDOWN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
82,292,000
80,106,000
Net inc
8,461,000
c3,443,000
Share earns
1.23
.38
Yr rev
342,486,000
339,190,000
Net inc
b45,115,000
cd13,100,000
Share earns
6.46
-


Japan Ends 8 Farm Quotas, Keeps 2
LEAD: Caught between foreign pressure to end its quotas on agricultural goods and lobbying by its farmers to keep them in place, Japan's Government decided today to retain its quotas on starch and dairy products and drop eight others.


Murder Trial of 2 in Klan Set
LEAD: A jury of 13 whites and one black was seated today for the murder trial of two former Ku Klux Klan leaders accused in the death of a black teen-ager in a case that drove a Klan unit into bankruptcy.


U.S. Plan Is Aimed To Give Palestinians 'A Stake in Future'
LEAD: Explaining the new United States initiative in the Middle East, one official said today that the aim was to provide ''some kind of interim arrangement that would give the Palestinians a stake in their future.''


Police in Warsaw Detain 50 In Protest Against Rumania
LEAD: The Polish police halted a demonstration outside the Rumanian Embassy in Warsaw in less than a minute today, detaining at least 50 people as they unfurled protest banners.


Tax Watch; A Few Changes In 1987 Act, Too
LEAD: THOUGH the focus of most taxpayers over the next two and a half months will be on April 15 and all the sweeping changes incorporated in their 1987 returns from the Tax Reform Act of 1986, the Revenue Act of 1987 also holds immediate implications for many people.


RLC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RLC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
119,005,000
107,086,000
Net inc
b14,355,000
c307,000
Share earns
.78
-
b-Includes a gain of $10 million from an accounting change.
c-Net loss


Indian Families Are Evacuated In Passaic Fire
LEAD: One-fourth of this city's Indian community was made homeless Sunday by a fire that roared through a 96-apartment building, driving 500 people into the street.


GOULDS PUMPS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOULDS PUMPS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
100,354,000
80,931,000
Net inc
3,838,000
2,834,000
Share earns
.21
.16
Yr rev
385,829,000
356,226,000
Net inc
18,537,000
16,815,000
Share earns
1.03
.94


Drama League Honors 'Phantom' Composer
LEAD: Andrew Lloyd Webber with Eartha Kitt last night during a ceremony at the Hotel Pierre in which he was honored for composing ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' ''Cats'' and five other Broadway musicals.
Donald Sosin, a pianist, and Joanna Seaton, an actress, also took part. (NYT/Angel Franco)


IFR SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IFR SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
9,678,000
7,984,000
Net inc
1,561,000
941,000
Share earns
.26
.16
6mo sales
18,723,000
15,829,000
Net inc
3,067,000
1,766,000
Share earns
.50
.29


Another Collapse For the Broncos
LEAD: Before all their bags were packed, before the dramatic morning-after drop in prices at the souvenir stand in their hotel lobby, the speculation surrounding the restructuring of the Denver Broncos had begun.


Haiti Still Needs Help
LEAD: Haiti is off the front page for now, but it hasn't gone away.


In the Quiet World of Fruit-Eating Fish, a Biologist Feels Too Alone
LEAD: MICHAEL Goulding works in what he calmly describes as ''the greatest evolutionary theater in the world.'' One of the few scholars to study the rivers of the Amazon basin, he spends months sifting through muddy streams in a region where a single river holds more species than all the waters of North


IDAHO POWER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IDAHO POWER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
96,280,247
90,288,615
Net inc
7,970,528
17,255,680
Share earns
.20
.45
Yr rev
394,596,692
408,860,638
Net inc
59,520,480
78,433,113
Share earns
1.63
2.00


Construction Spending Up Only 0.3% for 1987
LEAD: Construction spending, depressed by weakness in apartment and office building, edged up a slight three-tenths of 1 percent in 1987 for the worst showing in five years, the Commerce Department said today.


Gabrielle K. Koppell, School Director, 87
LEAD: Gabrielle Kaufman Koppell, former owner and director of the Riverdale School for Young Children and the mother of Assemblyman G. Oliver Koppell, died of heart failure Sunday at her son's home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
She was 87 years old.


The Return of Printing With Ink
LEAD: SURE, we'd all love to have a laser printer, but at $1,800 to $5,000 and up, lasers are out of the price range of most personal computer users.


Bolshoi Dancers to Star With City Ballet
LEAD: The New York City Ballet has announcedthat Nina Ananiashvili and Andris Liepa, two principal dancers of the Bolshoi Ballet, will perform five times with the company at the State Theater.


Compaq's Net Soars to $49 Million
LEAD: The Compaq Computer Corporation, riding a crest of strong demand for personal computers, said today that its net income tripled in the fourth quarter to $49 million, or $1.25 a share, from $16.2 million, or 57 cents a share, in the comparable 1986 quarter.


INDIAN HEAD BANKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDIAN HEAD BANKS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,422,000
3,907,000
Per share
.93
.92
Yr net inc
16,642,000
12,460,000
Per share
3.60
2.95


COMPAQ COMPUTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPAQ COMPUTER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
432,121,000
186,879,000
Net inc
b49,001,000
c16,234,000
Share earns
1.25
.57
Yr sales
1,224,067,000
625,243,000
Net inc
b136,267,000
c42,897,000
Share earns
3.59
1.52


Chess: Shot by Wilder Stuns Kogan In U.S. Championship Event
LEAD: You can't just indiscriminately bull through openings in the hope of overturning received opinion - there are too many variations and where should you begin?
All you can do is remain receptive to the inspiration for a new strategy when it does strike you.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Tobacco Co., a unit of American Brands Inc., said it had agreed to sell its non-cigarette smoking-tobacco brands, related assets and a Virginia factory to Dorsett STB Inc., of Stamford, Conn., for an undisclosed price.


FIDELITY NATIONAL FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIDELITY NATIONAL FINANCIAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Net inc
128,000
1,990,000
Per share
.03
.74
Shares outst
3,960,000
2,710,000
Yr net inc
4,806,000
2,405,000
Per share
1.34
1.04
Shares outst
3,577,000
2,316,000


New Evidence Citesv Overactive Nerves For Irritable Bowel
LEAD: IRRITABLE bowel syndrome used to be considered a classic psychosomatic disorder.
When patients complained of abdominal pain, gas, diarrhea or constipation that came and went with no apparent reason, their doctors often referred them to psychiatrists.


Excerpts From Statement by Meese on Pipeline Controversy
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a statement today by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d: . . .
As you know, an independent counsel has been engaged since May in an investigation of certain matters insofar as they relate to me, in connection with the Wedtech Corporation and E. Robert Wallach.


Inquiry on Court Aides Was Exposed Early
LEAD: A ''sting'' operation in which New York City property agents were videotaped taking valuables from the homes of people they thought were dead was exposed prematurely last month when the authorities sought the cooperation of two people under investigation, officials said yesterday.


41% OF PREGNANT NAVY WOMEN FOUND UNWED
LEAD: A study by a Navy nurse says a high percentage of the women in the Navy who become pregnant are unmarried.


China Won't Become a Superpower Soon
LEAD: To the Editor:


AMPLICON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMPLICON INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,688,000
16,394,000
Net inc
3,279,000
1,093,000
Share earns
.50
.21
Shares outst
6,525,000
5,100,000
6mo rev
43,275,000
32,929,000
Net inc
4,946,000
2,200,000
Share earns
.76
.43
Shares outst
6,517,493
5,100,000


BRANFORD SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRANFORD SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
574,000
492,000
Per share
.36
.32
Yr net inc
2,174,000
1,418,000
Per share
1.39
.91
Prior year per share earnings were calculated as if the sale of 1,552,500 shares in November 1986 had taken place at the beginning of the year.


Rigged Primary Rules
LEAD: New York's nitpicking election law forces Presidential candidates to spend inordinate time and resources just to get on the ballot for the state's April 19 primary.
But the highest price will be paid by rank-and-file Republican candidates, thanks to the way New York has rigged the political calendar.


Finland's President Leads in Vote but Seems Likely to Face Runoff
LEAD: In a surprisingly suspenseful conclusion to a dull campaign, President Mauno Koivisto failed today to win the clear majority he needed to nail down a second six-year term.


Navy Payment To Grumman
LEAD: The Navy said today that it would pay the Grumman Corporation up to $60 million to help cover unexpected expenses in the development of a new model of the F-14 Tomcat jet fighter.
Under the agreement, the


Sandstrom Returns to Form
LEAD: A power outage having suddenly left his office in darkness, Coach Michel Bergeron carefully made his way down a short hall into the Rangers' locker room.
There, in the meager light provided by an auxiliary floodlight, he stood, smiled, answered questions and waited patiently for somebody to flip the proper switch.


MASSBANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MASSBANK CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,304,000
1,603,000
Per share
.43
.46
Yr net inc
5,521,000
4,509,000
Per share
1.71
-
The per share earnings is not meaningful because the bank converted from a mutual to a stockholder company in May 1986.


The Stage: 'Ariano'
LEAD: ARIANO seems to have everything going for him.
His Laundromats and numbers operation bring in enough to provide his cute wife, Dolores, with a snazzy wardrobe and his cute 7-year-old son, Serafin, with an I.B.M. personal computer.
But Ariano, who is of Puerto Rican descent, is obsessed with what he regards as white America's obsession with color.


MCI Posts Profit in Quarter
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation yesterday reported fourth-quarter net income of $33 million, or 11 cents a share, in contrast to a loss of $502 million in the 1986 period.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Never before have I been accused of taking 30 pieces of silver.''  - Senator Daniel K. Inouye, on the furor over a bill he sponsored.  [ A1:1. ]


Trump Set To Buy All Of Resorts
LEAD: Ending his long-running struggle with the management and shareholders of Resorts International Inc., the developer Donald J. Trump reached an agreement yesterday to buy the remaining Resorts shares he does not already own for about $125 million.


RORER GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RORER GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
281,433,000
269,327,000
Net inc
22,456,000
b6,286,000
Share earns
1.06
-
Yr sales
928,796,000
844,578,000
Net inc
54,340,000
c125,643,000
Share earns
2.51
5.78


Why No Mouse Should Ever Escape AIDS Experiment
LEAD: A LABORATORY at the National Institutes of Health has been turned into a maximum-security prison, with a full complement of locks and bars as well as deadly traps set to destroy any escapees.
Pity the unlucky mouse who decides to make a break for it.


SOUND ADVICE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUND ADVICE INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,525,249
10,866,978
Net inc
876,438
509,607
Share earns
.29
.17
6mo sales
28,724,276
18,180,414
Net inc
1,328,978
798,192
Share earns
.44
.26


Advertising; New at Griffin/Bacal
LEAD: Griffin/Bacal, which last September became the agency for Keystone Camera Products' LeClic videotape, now has been assigned the rest of the Keystone business, mostly the LeClic cameras.
Billings could be $3 million.
McNamara, Clapp &amp; Klein had resigned the account.


Pipeline Plan: Origins in '83
LEAD: The Iraqi pipeline project, now the focus of a special prosecutor's investigation, had its beginnings in 1983, when Bechtel, a San Francisco-based engineering services company, began discussions in the Middle East, according to present and former Administration officials.


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Foley Rated No. 1
LEAD: Thomas S. Foley, the House majority leader, was rated the most effective leader in Congress in a recent poll of 317 senior Capitol Hill aides.
Sixty-six percent of the aides said Mr.
Foley, a Washington Democrat, was doing a very good to excellent job.


GRACE, W R &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRACE, W R &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,304,771,000
1,058,474,000
Net inc
b50,092,000
c559,903,000
Share earns
.59
-
Yr sales
4,515,374,000
3,725,718,000
Net inc
b173,091,000
c472,250,000
Share earns
2.03
-


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. Do animals like dogs and cats have blood types the way people do?
A.
Blood from animals can be ''typed'' just as blood from people is, according to Dr.
Michael S. Garvey, chairman of the department of medicine at the Animal Medical Center in New York City.


Patterns
LEAD:  Accessories by Picasso


Sports People; Nehemiah Talks Track
LEAD: Not many years ago, he was track and field's No. 1 hurdler, and world marks he set in 1981 and 1982 still stand.
But from complacency that made him ''tire of track and field the way a child tires of a toy,'' Renaldo (Skeets) Nehemiah at the age of 24 sought new challenges in pro football and spent four years as a wide receiver for the San Francisco 49ers.


James Linen 3d, 75, Ex-Publisher And President at Time Inc., Dies
LEAD: James A. Linen 3d, publisher of Time magazine for 15 years after World War II and president of the parent Time Inc. from 1960 to 1969, died yesterday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 75 years old and lived in Greenwich.


N.B.A. Notebood; Knicks Are Target Of Scoring Spurts
LEAD: The Knicks appear to bring out the best in opposing players.


FFB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FFB CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,980,000
4,022,000
Per share
.36
.36
Yr net inc
16,276,000
13,351,000
Per share
1.48
-
The company went public in June 1986.


KANSAS POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KANSAS POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
303,693,000
310,881,000
Net inc
19,241,000
20,191,000
Share earns
.55
.53
Yr rev
1,166,458,000
1,198,884,000
Net inc
88,691,000
91,382,000
Share earns
2.46
2.42


Toward Educating the Homeless
LEAD: HOMELESS children are the nation's shame.
Their number has grown to 500,000 to 700,000, according to the National Coalition for the Homeless, a Wasington-based advocacy group.
They live in temporary shelters, in welfare hotels, in abandoned buildings or on the street.


After Slow Start, Kemp's Campaign Moves With Conservatives' Support
LEAD: Are the Republicans re-discovering Jack Kemp?


Candidates to Old and Young: You've Got a Friend
LEAD: Leon Wieseltier, an adviser to Senator Albert Gore Jr., likes to tell the joke about why grandparents and grandchildren like each other so much.


FEDERAL SIGNAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL SIGNAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
87,450,000
66,434,000
Net inc
4,201,000
3,313,000
Share earns
.49
.38
Yr rev
318,150,000
283,464,000
Net inc
14,877,000
11,802,000
Share earns
1.72
1.37


THE DANCE: RACHEL LAMPERT
LEAD: RACHEL LAMPERT cracked choreographic jokes in the works that Rachel Lampert and Dancers presented Sunday afternoon at the Nikolais-Louis Choreospace, 33 East 18th Street.
Although she did not maintain a consistent level of invention, she certainly had a sense of humor.


KOSS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KOSS CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,616,867
6,135,048
Net inc
b998,357
564,471
Share earns
.22
.11
6mo sales
15,537,710
11,341,695
Net inc
b1,743,109
1,115,512
Share earns
.38
.22
b-After tax benefits of $137,000 for the quarter and $237,000 for the 6 months.


WITCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WITCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
368,434,000
326,108,000
Net inc
b13,013,000
16,506,000
Share earns
.57
.74
Yr sales
1,427,650,000
1,355,018,000
Net inc
b63,293,000
65,214,000
Share earns
2.72
2.93


Star Entertainer Loses Its Sparkle
LEAD: For an entertainment company with an extraordinary mystique, MCA Inc. has been performing mundanely of late.


Pause Interrupts Bond Price Rally
LEAD: The bond market rally took a breather yesterday as prices fell slightly after rising sharply in overseas trading.


Contributors From Overseas Give to Neediest Cases Fund
LEAD: Sylvia D. Beyman of Rehovot, Israel, was so distressed over a recent editorial in The New York Times about the needy elderly that she wrote a note to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. ''Please use my donation to help some elderly man or woman,'' she said, sending $50.


Shifting Style, Dukakis Turns to Emotional Heat
LEAD: The audience fell absolutely silent as Michael S. Dukakis read from the memoirs of a journalist imprisoned during the rule of Argentina's military Government.


CROMPTON &amp; KNOWLES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROMPTON &amp; KNOWLES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
58,319,000
53,813,000
Net inc
3,102,000
bc5,443,000
Share earns
.52
-
Yr sales
237,469,000
213,242,000
Net inc
11,750,000
c1,001,000
Share earns
1.95
.08


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


Orion Pictures
LEAD: John W. Kluge, the chairman of Metromedia Inc., disclosed that he had increased his stake in the Orion Pictures Corporation.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Kluge said he had raised his holdings in the motion picture and television production concern to 24 percent, from 23 percent.


Concert: Kronos Plays Soviet Work
LEAD: WHETHER or not female composers are getting enough chances to show their music, they are certainly getting more.
As with all such cases - where a cultural movement has received its impetus in good part from outside sources - there will be a future reckoning, a shaking out process.
At this date, some considerable reputations are going to have to stand on the basis of musical quality alone, not on questions of equal rights or past wrongs.


Report Urges Higher Margin on Futures
LEAD: The staff of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission recommended today that futures exchanges consider increasing the margin, or down payment, investors must put up to buy futures contracts ''to insure greater protection against unexpected price spikes.''


Dance Figures Meet To Guess the Future
LEAD: Alarms were raised, calls to action were made and there was a good deal of often-anguished self-analysis in the three-day ''1988 National Roundtable'' sponsored last weekend at the Vista Hotel in New York by Dance/ U.S.A., a service organization for nonprofit professional dance in America.


Sports People; Fenner Enters Plea
LEAD: Derrick Fenner, the former star running back at the University of North Carolina, has pleaded guilty to one count of cocaine possession, the Prince George's County state's attorney's office said yesterday.
Sentencing was set for March 23 in Upper Marlboro, Md.
Fenner could receive up to four years in prison.


CENTRAL PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL PACIFIC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,180,000
290,000
Per share
.21
.06
Yr net loss
b2,472,000
c757,000
Per share
-
.17
Shares outst
5,588,081
4,554,411
b-After a special provision of $5 million for loan and lease losses.


Both Sides on Contra Aid See Vote Shifting Their Way
LEAD: White House officials and Congressional Democrats asserted today that their latest counts showed the undecided votes in Congress on renewed aid to the contras were turning their way, but neither side was openly confident of victory.


Salant Seeking Apparel Maker
LEAD: The Salant Corporation, an apparel manufacturer that emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings last June, has begun an unsolicited bid to acquire Manhattan Industries, one of the largest apparel makers, for more than $80 million.


Why Murdoch Doesn't Deserve a Waiver
LEAD: For years, I have been a proponent of reasoned deregulation of the broadcast industry.


Candidates Spend a Lot Promising They Won't
LEAD: Presidential candidates have poured nearly $1.8 million into television advertising for the New Hampshire primary, with Republicans outspending Democrats, 13-1, in increasingly testy arguments over who is the most qualified to cut the Federal budget deficit without raising taxes.


Calgary Tries a 'Snow Dance'
LEAD: With the start of the Winter Games 12 days away, everybody around here has been talking about the weather.
One person did something about it.
As his personal contribution to insuring cold temperatures and a white landscape, Iain Baxter, a local artist, choreographed a ''contemporary snow dance'' the other day, by inviting 440 people listed in the Calgary telephone book to the Olympic Plaza downtown.


West Side Co-op Rejects Apartment for Museum
LEAD: The American Museum of Natural History, seeking to provide its new president with an apartment, was turned down for a cooperative in the landmark Beresford Apartments, museum officials have said.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Ronald Fierman has been promoted to group senior vice president, finance and administration, at Warwick Advertising.


Directors' Guild Names Nominees for Top Prize
LEAD: Two extremely dark horses are among the five nominees for the Directors Guild of America's award for the best movie director of 1987.
Nominations were announced Sunday.


AMERICAN FAMILY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FAMILY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b25,813,000
c36,880,000
Share earns
.32
.46
Yr net inc
b102,131,000
c100,697,000
Share earns
1.27
1.26
b-After capital gains of $354,000 for the quarter and $8,849,000 for the year.


SLANDERING BY ABC CHARGED AT TRIAL
LEAD: Victor Lasky, an author who lectured on Communist subversion in America, testified in his libel case yesterday that an ABC television documentary was ''propaganda.''


New Postal Chief Is Selected
LEAD: Anthony M. Frank, chairman and chief executive of the First Nationwide Financial Corporation, will be named to head the United States Postal Service, a spokesman for the nation's sixth largest savings and loan association said today.


Leading Indicator
LEAD: For an event only XXII years old, the Super Bowl has generated amazing lore.
Consider Koppett's Theory.
It holds that if a team from the old, pre-merger National Football League wins the championship, the stock market will finish higher in the year ahead; if a team from the old American Football League team wins, it will finish lower.


Jury Sees Chambers Videotape Account of Killing
LEAD: Robert E. Chambers Jr.'s videotaped account to the police of the death of Jennifer Levin, perhaps the prosecution's central piece of evidence in his murder trial, was played to the jury yesterday.


PTL Sues Bakkers and an Aide
LEAD: The PTL television ministry filed a suit today seeking $52.8 million from its former leader, Jim Bakker, his wife, Tammy, and a former employee, charging mismanagement and unjustified compensation.


Settlement Is Set In Vast Cleanup Of Toxic Waste
LEAD: The Army and the Shell Oil Company agreed today to jointly pay as much as $1 billion to clean up the Army's Rocky Mountain Arsenal, one of the most contaminated toxic waste sites in the country.


AST RESEARCH reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AST RESEARCH (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
92,609,000
47,146,000
Net inc
2,020,000
3,677,000
Share earns
.17
.32
6mo sales
171,209,000
87,381,000
Net inc
2,092,000
6,823,000
Share earns
.18
.59


Derby Poses a Challenge for Forty Niner
LEAD: Forty Niner's credentials as the early favorite for the Kentucky Derby May 7 might appear impeccable.
The colt dominated his rivals last year when he was the 2-year-old champion.
He is a son of Mr.
Prospector, the nation's hottest sire.
He is handled by Woody Stephens, who has won more Triple Crown races than any living trainer.


METROPOLITAN FINANCIAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*METROPOLITAN FINANCIAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b3,900,000
c353,000
Per share
-
.12
b-Includes a one-time charge of $825,000 for employment contract termination.
c-Net income


ACTMEDIA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACTMEDIA INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
34,368,000
25,664,000
Net inc
2,470,000
2,170,000
Share earns
.21
.18
Yr rev
94,163,000
65,412,000
Net inc
6,550,000
4,950,000
Share earns
.55
.42


TRANS WORLD AIRLINES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANS WORLD AIRLINES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
51,000,000
c85,000,000
Share earns
1.20
2.36
Yr net inc
b106,200,000
cd106,300,000
Share earns
1.65
-
b-Excludes unrealized gains of $123 million from investments.


SYNTECH INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYNTECH INTERNATIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
942,000
b564,000
Share earns
.07
.03
Shares outst
9,470,000
8,389,000
b-Includes income of $146,000 from discontinued operations.
The company previously reported on a calendar year basis.


LITTLE, ARTHUR D INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LITTLE, ARTHUR D INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
68,422,000
67,685,000
Net inc
1,272,000
c3,153,000
Share earns
.50
1.24
Yr rev
272,367,000
247,960,000
Net inc
b6,768,000
c6,537,000
Share earns
2.65
2.56


The Mayor's Hard-Times Budget
LEAD: Edward Koch remembers the ''Drop Dead'' days of the fiscal crisis.
The budget he proposed yesterday proposes painful but necessary cuts and taxes.
Will city and state legislators be as disciplined?


BANKS OF MID-AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKS OF MID-AMERICA
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
14,969,000
14,883,000
Yr net loss
39,556,000
49,482,000
The latest periods included provisions for loan losses of $11,280,000 for the quarter and $64,179,000 for the year, compared with year-ago periods of $15,775,000 for the quarter and $72,997,000 for the year.


PAINE WEBBER GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAINE WEBBER GROUP INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
541,325,000
605,604,000
Net inc
7,010,000
17,515,000
Share earns
.16
.57
Shares outst
30,510,000
28,161,000
Yr rev
2,436,963,000
2,412,438,000
Net inc
b72,020,000
74,952,000
Share earns
2.17
2.49
Shares outst
30,719,000
27,043,000


Manila-I.M.F. Accord
LEAD: The International Monetary Fund, pleased with the Philippine economy's performance, has agreed to extend a standby credit facility, Finance Secretary Vicente Jayme said today.
He told reporters after a meeting with President Corazon C. Aquino that the facility was extended until the middle of this year.


EMPLOYERS CASUALTY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMPLOYERS CASUALTY CO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b9,588,261
c10,668,369
Share earns
.95
1.06
Yr net inc
b44,346,762
c44,766,269
Share earns
4.40
4.44
b-After capital gains of $71,000 for the quarter and $1,576,149 for the year.


Hong Kong Port Gain
LEAD: Hong Kong has overtaken Rotterdam. the Netherlands, as the world's busiest container port, the Marine Department director, Gerry Higginson, said today.
He told a news conference that the port recorded a 24.6 percent increase in container traffic in 1987, while officials in Rotterdam expected that their port registered no increase.


JOHNSTON INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSTON INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
30,203,000
25,969,000
Net inc
2,143,000
2,472,000
Share earns
.65
.77
6mo rev
58,685,000
52,022,000
Net inc
4,233,000
4,256,000
Share earns
1.28
1.32


ARKANSAS BEST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARKANSAS BEST CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
196,658,187
176,814,505
Net inc
3,458,994
b1,815,058
Share earns
.35
.18
Yr rev
732,314,048
689,814,805
Net inc
8,760,870
18,205,026
Share earns
.87
1.79


Advertising; Famous Swiss Knives Get a New Promotion
LEAD: As well known as they are, Swiss Army knives have received little, if any, advertising support in the United States.
That's about to change, and those sharp operators at Warwick Advertising are going to do it.


Two Officers Are Cleared In a Killing
LEAD: A Queens grand jury has found no basis for criminal charges against two police officers who fired 11 shots in killing a man who the police said was lunging at one of the officers with a knife.


COLONIAL AMER BANKSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLONIAL AMER BANKSHARES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
1,873,000
b349,000
Per share
-
.23
Yr net inc
525,000
2,202,000
Per share
.34
1.44
b-Net income  The full-year nets included after-tax charges of $2.4 million in 1987 and $460,000 in 1986 for additions to loan loss reserves.


Sports People; Boxer Arrested
LEAD: Donovan (Razor) Ruddock, the ninth-ranked heavyweight in the World Boxing Council rating, was arrested along with his brother and sister Sunday night after a dispute at an airline ticket counter in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The disagreement was said to have begun when Eastern Airline ticket agents told Juneau Ruddock, 20 years old, that her ticket to Toronto was invalid because of a travel agent's mistake.


By Design; Tip Your Hand
LEAD: Gloves keep hands warm in cold weather.
But now, and especially for this coming spring, they have a more glamorous purpose.
In fact, the right pair just may be the strongest gesture of a personal fashion statement.
To contrast with, not match, the rest of an ensemble is the point.
And the stronger the color, the better.


AARON RENTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AARON RENTS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
33,800,000
28,800,000
Net inc
1,300,000
500,000
Share earns
.28
.09
9mo rev
95,100,000
87,200,000
Net inc
3,500,000
3,600,000
Share earns
.71
.68


Florida Weighs Crisis Over Malpractice Insurance
LEAD: The Florida Legislature convenes Tuesday in a special three-day session aimed at easing a medical malpractice insurance crisis that is particularly acute in south Florida.


Bush and Dukakis Top Poll in New Hampshire
LEAD: Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts continue to hold wide leads among prospective voters in the Feb. 16 New Hampshire Presidential primary, according to a CBS News Poll.


New York Board of Estimate Angry at Move to Abolish It
LEAD: Members of the New York City Board of Estimate yesterday angrily rejected the idea that the powerful board was endangered because any effort to restructure it was likely to violate the Federal Voting Rights Act.


Cattle Prices Rise Sharply; A Drop in U.S. Herd Is Seen
LEAD: Cattle futures prices surged on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday.
Analysts said that some contracts advanced in anticipation that a report due Friday would show a decline in the nation's cattle herd.


Another Performance Halted at the Met
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sports of The Times; Bus Ride to History
LEAD: TO the side, a burgundy Subaru sports car symbolized his stature as Super Bowl XXII's most valuable player.
At the lectern, his football-shaped trophy glistened as Doug Williams hobbled up to the microphone yesterday on the damaged left knee that he had ignored while throwing four touchdown passes in the second quarter of the Washington Redskins' 42-10 rout of the Denver


FIRST FINANCIAL SAVINGS OHIO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FINANCIAL SAVINGS OHIO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
491,000
308,000
Per share
.74
-
9mo net inc
1,414,000
731,000
Per share
2.14
-
The company went public in April 1987.


Bernard Shaw of CNN Reflects on Long Climb
LEAD: Bernard Shaw seems puzzled by all the fuss.
The senior Washington anchor of Cable News Network, the all-news, 24-hour cable network, has received much attention in the media since early December when he joined Peter Jennings of ABC, Tom Brokaw of NBC and Dan Rather of CBS in a pre-summit interview of President Reagan.


Suspect Held in Killing
LEAD: A 26-year-old man was arrested yesterday and charged in the slaying and robbery of a Manhattan executive last week, the police said.
The suspect, Charles Youngblood of 295 Prospect Place, had been a frequent vistor to the apartment of the executive, Layne Alexander, Assistant Chief Aaron Rosenthal said.


ACETO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACETO CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
21,952,000
21,906,000
Net inc
873,000
736,000
Share earns
.25
.19
6mo sales
42,192,000
39,902,000
Net inc
1,462,000
1,222,000
Share earns
.41
.32


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A review of ''Jacques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris'' yesterday gave an incorrect closing date for the production, which plays weekends at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street.
The last performance is Feb. 12, not this Saturday.


Leo Steiner Eulogy Laughingly Recalls 'Prince of Pastrami'
LEAD: Leo Steiner, co-owner of the Carnegie Delicatessen and Restaurant, was eulogized yesterday amid laughter and tears as a ''prince of pastrami,'' a ''deli lama'' and a quintessential New Yorker at a memorial service at the Sutton Place Synagogue.


INDIANA BANCSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDIANA BANCSHARES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
274,000
392,000
Per share
.55
1.20
Yr net inc
1,146,000
1,140,000
Per share
2.74
3.42
Shares outst
494,877
247,275
The per share earnings reflect a 5 percent stock dividend paid in December 1987 and a 3-for-1 stock split paid in May 1987.


PEERLESS TUBE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEERLESS TUBE CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
11,923,067
12,239,941
Net inc
8,882
135,260
Share earns
.01
.06
Yr sales
50,792,569
47,075,429
Net inc
1,456,279
b908,320
Share earns
.60
.37
b-Includes a pretax gain of about $240,000 from a change in the method of determining the cost of its inventory from LIFO to FIFO.


ARMCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARMCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
787,400,000
668,200,000
Net inc
b3,100,000
c34,600,000
Share earns
.01
.49
Shares outst
87,000,000
68,400,000
Yr sales
2,927,200,000
2,640,500,000
Net inc
b117,600,000
d472,000,000
Share earns
1.38
-


Advertising; New Mission For Bunny At Playboy
LEAD: THE management of Playboy magazine feels it is beginning to recover from the body blow delivered two years ago when an intimidating letter was sent to retailers by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d's Commission on Pornography.
Advertising pages and circulation figures are turning up for the first time in a long time.


Koch Proposes Cut in Services With Tax Rise
LEAD: Mayor Koch, saying New York City's fiscal condition was poised in the middle ground ''between the high slopes and the valley,'' proposed a $24.9 billion spending plan yesterday that calls for increased taxes and substantial cuts in services to close what he said would be a $758 million budget gap.


Terminal, 75 Years Old, Is Still Grand
LEAD: It is tightly crowded by skyscrapers, its concourse is filled with the homeless as well as with travelers, and it no longer receives such spectacular trains as the Twentieth Century Limited, but Grand Central Terminal is still, at 75, as potent a symbol of New York as it has ever been.


5-Year Notes From G.M.A.C.
LEAD: The General Motors Acceptance Corporation is offering $200 million of 8 1/2 percent notes, due in 1993, at a price of 100, through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


Mr. Meese's Pipelines
LEAD: The Attorney General of the United States is supposed to be an administration's chief lawyer, the counsel who helps his President faithfully execute the laws and the nation's top cop.
As Attorney General for the second Reagan Administration, Edwin Meese seems to be spending more time under the magnifying glass of justice than wielding it.


Let Special Prosecutors Investigate Congress
LEAD: To the Editor:


Euthanasia Debate Revives in China
LEAD: Two magazine articles have revealed that China has revived a sensitive debate on whether to permit the killing of incurably ill people and that one of the country's most prominent women has emerged as an advocate of euthanasia.


BellSouth Offer
LEAD: The BellSouth Corporation said it hadwithdrawn its $564 million offer to acquire the Mobile Communications Corporation of America.
The company said that negotiations had not resulted in a final agreement.
But Mobile Communications said the talks were ended when it told BellSouth that other potential acquirers had expressed serious interest in buying the company, with offers in excess of BellSouth's proposal.


SYSTEMS &amp; COMPUTER TECHOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYSTEMS &amp; COMPUTER TECHOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,663,000
10,110,000
Net loss
586,000
467,000


ECUADOR RIGHTISTS SET BACK IN VOTE
LEAD: In a major setback for conservative forces here, a Social Democrat finished first in Ecuador's presidential election Sunday and will face a left-leaning opponent in a runoff May 8.


Gunman Kills One in Brooklyn
LEAD: Four people were shot, one fatally, by a gunman who fired on his victims from atop a four-story building in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn last night, the police said.


TRUST AMERICA SERVICE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRUST AMERICA SERVICE (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
611,000
625,000
Share earns
.17
.26
6mo net inc
1,091,000
-
Share earns
.31
-
The company's initial public offering was in December 1986.
Results reflect a 3-for-2 stock split on Sept.


MOOG INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOOG INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
74,048,000
66,664,000
Net inc
b4,440,000
b996,000
Share earns
.47
.11
b-Includes a gain of $2,740,000 from cumulative effect of a change in accounting methods for the latest quarter, and the year-ago period includes a loss of $41,000 from discontinued operations.


MDT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MDT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
21,929,000
3,097,000
Net inc
1,002,000
c222,000
Share earns
.20
.12
Shares outst
4,984,000
1,804,000
9mo sales
46,587,000
8,844,000
Net inc
b2,615,000
c650,000
Share earns
.62
.36
Shares outst
4,192,000
1,804,000


Soprano Wins $10,000
LEAD: Marvis Martin, a soprano with the Metropolitan Opera Company, is this year's recipient of the $10,000 Florida Prize, which the regional newspaper group of The New York Times Company gives each year to a Florida native or resident for outstanding work in the visual and performing arts.
Ms.
Martin will receive the award at a ceremony Friday at the Lakeland Country Club, Lakeland, Fla.


CAPE COD BANK &amp; TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPE COD BANK &amp; TRUST (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,866,866
1,723,879
Per share
.78
.72
Yr net inc
8,672,361
7,523,412
Per share
3.60
3.40
Shares outst
2,409,345
2,212,671


A Theory Sees Life, Of Sorts, On Pulsars
LEAD: COULD life exist on the surface of a neutron star, where the temperature hovers around 14,000 degrees Fahrenheit and the pull of gravity is powerful enough to squash atoms?
Several scientists looking into the question believe it is remotely possible.


S.&amp;P. Cuts 5 Bank Ratings
LEAD: The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation reduced the debt ratings of five banking companies yesterday, but the rating service kept intact J. P. Morgan &amp; Company's triple-A rating, the highest rating possible.


WEIS MARKETS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEIS MARKETS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
290,928,000
284,137,000
Net inc
20,994,000
17,925,000
Share earns
.46
.39
Yr sales
1,128,325,000
1,101,473,000
Net inc
75,982,000
65,261,000
Share earns
1.66
1.42


Our Towns; As a Mob Howls, One in Yonkers Pleads for Sanity
LEAD: Laurie Recht says she is 4 feet, 10 1/2 inches tall, though she wears her hair teased up, so this may be a slight exaggeration.
She is 34, has lived on her own since she was 18, working as a secretary.
She's the kind of person who, before going shopping Sunday, peeked into her apartment building rec room and asked if anybody needed anything.


Moseley to Sell Branches
LEAD: The Moseley Holding Corporation said yesterday that its board had decided to sell 28 retail branch offices to other brokerage firms because of continuing losses from their operations.
The company, which was founded in 1850, said it was in the final stages of talks with three other regional brokerages.


Chicago Printers Reject Pact
LEAD: Union printers have overwhelmingly rejected a proposed contract with The Chicago Tribune and will continue their 31-month strike against the newspaper, union officials say.
The vote Sunday by members of Chicago Typographical Union No. 16 was 284 to 51 against the proposed contract.
The contract would have brought lifetime annuities of $500 a month to most of the striking printers, but it also would have meant that only a small minority would have kept their jobs.


Sanders in Awe Over Record
LEAD: On Sunday, Ricky Sanders set a Super Bowl record with 193 yards in pass receptions.
Then came seemingly endless visits from family and friends.
He was weary and tired and happy.
He felt he was on a roller coaster.


SALANT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SALANT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
40,187,000
36,471,000
Net inc
b4,173,000
c6,613,000
Share earns
1.15
-
Yr sales
136,272,000
131,070,000
Net inc
b8,638,000
c5,092,000
Share earns
2.49
-


Congress Can Reduce Parental Kidnappings
LEAD: To the Editor:


Paine Webber Profits Drop
LEAD: Paine Webber Group Inc. yesterday reported fourth-quarter earnings of $7 million, or 16 cents a share, down more than 60 percent from $17.5 million, or 57 cents a share, in the final quarter of 1986.


Siege at Newspaper Ends With Hostages Safe
LEAD: Two heavily armed American Indians took 17 people captive in a newspaper office this morning to protest the death of a black jail inmate.
The Indians released about half the hostages after a few hours, then released the others after a 10-hour standoff.


Dance: A World Tour in One Place
LEAD: AMAN danced its way from country to country on Saturday night at Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: MONEY AND CLASS IN AMERICA:


Careers; Selecting A Specialty In Medicine
LEAD: ASTUDY by Glaxo Inc., the pharmaceutical company, confirms something that medical students have grappled with for years: Prospective doctors pick a specialty with difficulty, even a little agony.
Glaxo discovered that ''an overwhelming majority of 80 percent of medical students'' believed they did not have enough valid information on which to base a decision.


Sports People; Honor for Syracuse
LEAD: The undefeated Syracuse University football team was honored yesterday in Albany at a ceremony attended by Governor Cuomo and state legislators.
The Governor, a former minor league baseball player, said that ''as an over-the-hill athlete from a long, long time ago, it was an absolute joy to watch Coach MacPherson and the Syracuse team this year.


UNION TEXAS PETROLEUM HOLDINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION TEXAS PETROLEUM HOLDINGS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
299,300,000
213,900,000
Net inc
12,500,000
b29,500,000
Shares outst
85,034,315
67,040,095
Yr rev
1,257,400,000
1,255,700,000
Net inc
55,900,000
b57,500,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
71,654,745
67,058,887


Dart Group Raises Bid For Chain
LEAD: The Dart Group Corporation has started a cash tender offer of $31 a share for all the shares of Stop and Shop Companies Inc., or a total of $860 million.


Big Program Trading Firms Unlikely to Cut Back Soon
LEAD: Millions of Super Bowl television viewers learned on Sunday that Shearson Lehman Hutton would not engage in program trading for its own account.
Similarly, several other brokerage firms, including Merrill Lynch, seem to be courting investors by sending the same message through newspaper ads these days.


Yeltsin Speech Termed An Attack on Privilege
LEAD: The former Moscow Communist Party chief denounced privilege and criticized Raisa Gorbachev and Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze in the speech that led to his dismissal, according to a document quoted by Le Monde reported today.


ALBANY INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALBANY INTERNATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
111,433,000
94,616,000
Net inc
7,501,000
4,869,000
Share earns
.31
.20
Shares outst
24,405,000
24,510,000
Yr sales
402,203,000
336,393,000
Net inc
25,245,000
14,717,000
Share earns
1.15
.59
Shares outst
21,992,000
24,947,000


Quarterback Breakthrough
LEAD: Doug Williams's performance in Super Bowl XXII gave a resounding answer to anyone still harboring doubts about whether a black man could quarterback a National Football League team successfully.


KEITHLEY INSTRUMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEITHLEY INSTRUMENTS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,091,000
12,619,000
Net inc
1,358,000
805,000
Share earns
.39
.24


CARLUCCI FAVORS SHIFT IN MX BASING
LEAD: Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci told Congress today that he was uncomfortable with the current deployment of MX long-range missiles in silos that are potentially vulnerable to Soviet attack.


HWC DISTRIBUTION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HWC DISTRIBUTION CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
26,944,000
19,451,000
Net inc
1,325,000
654,000
Share earns
.25
.15
9mo sales
70,819,000
59,377,000
Net inc
2,976,000
1,984,000
Share earns
.60
.46


Georgi Malenkov Dies at 86; Stalin Successor
LEAD: Georgi M. Malenkov, who was a leading political figure in the Soviet Union after the death of Stalin but who was ousted in a Kremlin power struggle and sent into political oblivion, died last month, a Soviet official said yesterday.
He was 86 years old.
Malenkov was Prime Minister for two years and, for a short time, head of the Communist Party.


Takeover Planned For Taco Chains
LEAD: A restaurant operator said he planned to acquire Naugles Inc. and Del Taco Inc. in separate transactions and combine them into what would be the nation's second-largest Mexican-American fast-food chain.
Terms were not disclosed.
Anwar Soliman, chief executive of the American Restaurant Group of Newport Beach,


Najaf Journal; In Ancient Shrines, Prayers and the Seeds of War
LEAD: Some of Islam's holiest and most ancient shrines are here, in this small town in Iraq.
And the seeds of modern conflict were planted here, too, to spread across Iran and much of the Arab world.


AILEEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AILEEN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,163,000
13,746,000
Net loss
3,772,000
963,000
Yr sales
52,218,000
44,774,000
Net loss
6,379,000
2,403,000
The latest year included an idle- plant writedown of $3,521,000 and 1986 included a writedown of $1.4 million.


MAURY FEDERAL SAVINGS- TENNESSE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAURY FEDERAL SAVINGS- TENNESSE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
84,000
276,000
Per share
.15
.48
9mo net inc
b350,000
655,000
Per share
.61
1.14
b-After a writeoff of $88,000 of FSLIC secondary reserve.


2,000 Welcome Champions
LEAD: Some 2,000 cheering fans hailed the return of the Redskins to the Washington area tonight, capping 24 hours of nearly continuous celebration of the team's Super Bowl victory over the Denver Broncos.


Contras' Top Fighter Vows No Letup
LEAD: He is perhaps the most wanted man in Nicaragua.


POSEIDON POOLS reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POSEIDON POOLS
Year to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
24,801,013
16,259,088
Net inc
b1,124,441
958,795
Share earns
.90
.77
Shares outst
1,255,700
1,242,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $49,500.
The company completed its initial public offering on Aug.


Extinctions and Isotopes
LEAD: Two groups of scientists studying isotopes (forms of atoms) have reached sharply contrasting conclusions about the possible causes of mass extinctions.
Their papers appear to add fuel to the debate over comets' role.


Stockman, at Nofziger Trial, Recalls Lobby Effort
LEAD: David A. Stockman, President Reagan's first budget director, described in Federal District Court today how, in 1982, senior White House officials offered Presidential support for a New York military contractor in exchange for votes for an Administration tax bill.


Brazil to Use Own Cash in Paying Debt
LEAD: In a move toward ending its year-long moratorium on debt repayment, Brazil said yesterday that it would pay $350 million today to banks around the world.


Hyperactive Boys Often Turn Out Normal
LEAD: CONTRARY to the expectations of many experts, a new study indicates that boys who are hyperactive do not always have emotional or intellectual difficulties when they grow up.


Shultz to Discuss Arms In Shevardnadze Talks
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz will meet with Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union later this month in an effort to narrow differences on the issue of reducing long-range arms in preparation for another summit meeting in May or June, Administration officials said today.


D. S. Kane Dies at 81; Lawyer and Professor
LEAD: David Schilling Kane, a former president of the American Patent Law Association and former adjunct professor at the New York University School of Law, died of cancer Saturday at Naples (Fla.) Community Hospital.
Mr.
Kane was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Queens Police Are Accused of Torture
LEAD: A man who accused a Queens police sergeant of torturing him with a stun gun testified yesterday that the sergeant repeatedly administered the gun to his body, delivering jolts of electricity that put him in agony and left him scarred.


Register for Primary
LEAD: To the Editor:


George Schieffelin, 82, Ex-Scribner Chairman
LEAD: George McKay Schieffelin, former chairman of the board of Charles Scribner's Sons, died of a heart atack Jan. 24 at St.
Luke's Hospital.
He was 82 years old.


DOW CORNING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOW CORNING CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
334,100,000
281,600,000
Net inc
33,700,000
25,000,000
Yr sales
1,300,000,000
1,100,000,000
Net inc
135,000,000
110,600,000
Down Corning is a joint venture of Down Chemical Co.


Early Cases of AIDS
LEAD: USING a state cancer registry, researchers have identified what they believe were four of the earliest and longest-living AIDS patients in New York, providing a possible clue as to when the AIDS virus first appeared in the city.


SALEM CARPET MILLS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SALEM CARPET MILLS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
94,426,000
81,704,000
Net inc
1,452,000
2,078,000
Share earns
.18
.26
Yr rev
359,354,000
325,396,000
Net inc
5,351,000
6,468,000
Share earns
.67
.94


Profit Off 40% At T.W.A.
LEAD: Trans World Airlines earned $51 million, or $1.20 a share, in the fourth quarter, down 40 percent from $85 million, or $2.36 a share, in the fourth quarter of 1986.


Meese Reportedly Sent Peres to Security Aide
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d told Prime Minister Shimon Peres in the fall of 1985 to deal with the President's national security adviser in discussions about Israeli backing for an Iraqi oil pipeline project, according to American and Israeli officials.


Carte Blanche Loses Plea
LEAD: An arbitration panel has awarded $10 million to the Carte Blanche franchises in Malaysia and Singapore after finding that Carte Blanche International, the parent company, had breached an agreement to support the franchises.


STAGE: 'MARTIN,' MUSICAL
LEAD: IN ''Martin,'' Lamar Alford's musical pageant about the life and times of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., King himself remains a distant figure.
Through the hour-and-45-minute work, fragments of King's speeches, spoken by Everett Van Darby, are scattered like marking stones among scenes depicting ordinary life in America between 1955 and 1968.


OGDEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OGDEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
221,717,000
183,803,000
Net inc
15,466,000
b87,917,000
Share earns
.39
2.27
Yr rev
858,322,000
799,833,000
Net inc
54,026,000
b119,562,000
Share earns
1.35
3.08


LENNAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LENNAR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
93,358,000
74,078,000
Net inc
b6,593,000
c4,560,000
Share earns
.67
.53
Yr rev
330,051,000
221,374,000
Net inc
b23,014,000
c12,471,000
Share earns
2.50
1.43


TOSCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOSCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
321,785,000
167,441,000
Net inc
b20,411,000
c40,870,000
Share earns
.29
1.36
Shares outst
51,240,726
30,159,517
Yr sales
1,187,308,000
708,278,000
Net inc
b52,955,000
c17,580,000
Share earns
.63
.53
Shares outst
49,979,752
27,409, 156


MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
18,266,000
15,182,000
Net inc
805,000
718,000
Share earns
.22
.20


5 Arrested in Series of Muggings in Queens
LEAD: Four men and a woman were arrested yesterday and charged with at least 20 separate street muggings in the last four weeks in eastern Queens, the police said.


Albert Abrams, Maker Of Esquire Polish, 76
LEAD: Albert Abrams, a retired shoe polish manufacturer long active in charitable causes, died of leukemia Friday at Delray Beach, (Fla.) Community Hospital.
He was 76 years old and lived in Boca Raton, Fla.


New Mets Training Complex To Put St. Lucie West on Map
LEAD: There is more to selling Florida real estate these days than promising an absence of backyard alligators and a plentiful harvest of oversized oranges.
New communities tempt prospective settlers with famous resident tennis pros, championship golf courses, horse farms or, in the case of St.
Lucie West, a hometown major league baseball team.


Index of Economic Trends Drops A 3d Month but Few Are Worried
LEAD: The Government's main economic forecasting gauge declined in December for the third straight month.
Such a move has historically indicated a possible recession, but most analysts said the evidence of a downturn was not yet persuasive.


Results Plus
LEAD:  N.H.L.


Girl in Dutchess Is Asked to Help Abrams Inquiry
LEAD: A week after Governor Cuomo assigned him to investigate the case of a black Dutchess County teen-ager who said she was the victim of a racial and sexual attack, Attorney General Robert Abrams traveled here today and made a plea for the girl's cooperation.


Tribune Co. Profit Rises
LEAD: The Tribune Company, a media company that owns The Daily News in New York and The Chicago Tribune, said today that its fourth-quarter profit had doubled.


This Is Probably a Golden Age of Historians
LEAD: To the Editor:


George Bush's Journal
LEAD: I'd been out of the loop for months.


MAYTAG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAYTAG CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
447,100,000
414,300,000
Net inc
30,500,000
25,300,000
Share earns
.40
.29
Yr sales
1,910,000,000
1,720,000,000
Net inc
152,700,000
111,200,000
Share earns
1.91
1.28


Scrounging For Scandal
LEAD: This Iraqi pipeline story is taking on the nature of a witch hunt.


HOSTAGE INCIDENT AT SCHOOL ENDED
LEAD: A gunman who said he wanted to help the homeless held dozens of children and teachers hostage today before the authorities fooled him into giving up his guns and then wrestled him to the ground, the officials said.


'Bronx: Cry for Help'
LEAD: TELEVISION reporters often visit the South Bronx; political candidates do, too.
Brent Owens didn't just visit, however, when he filmed ''The Bronx: a Cry for Help.'' He didn't have to; he already lived there.
His distinctive one-hour documentary will be seen on Channel 13 at 8:30 tonight.


Vietnamese Chief Building Political Base in South
LEAD: The leader of the Vietnamese Communist Party, who came to power a year ago after what diplomats in Hanoi say was a bitter struggle with party hard-liners, appears to be building his political base here, rather than in the north.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:  DEAR DIARY:


WESTERN CO OF NORTH AMERCA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN CO OF NORTH AMERCA (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
57,614,000
35,249,000
Net loss
31,018,000
20,387,000
Yr rev
176,542,000
197,025,000
Net loss
182,647,000
340,516,000
The company said latest quarter results include a charge of $1.1 million in reserve for costs associated with an offshore drilling rig, a charge of $4 million for additional interest expense, writedowns of about $5 million in pension expenses and writedowns of $3 million in additional contractural efficiencies and about


Lawmakers Criticize Kean Budget Plan
LEAD: Governor Kean gave the New Jersey Legislature his proposed $11.8 billion budget for the coming fiscal year today, but the lawmakers focused more on what the Governor did not say than on what he did say.


Boxing Notebook; Film Role Proves Matchmaker for King
LEAD: Lawrence Gordon, the producer of the Nick Nolte-Eddie Murphy film, ''48 Hours,'' is a fight fan.


An All-Rieti Concert For His 90th Birthday
LEAD: ''I am going to be like an opera singer,'' Vittorio Rieti explained a few days after turning 90 last week. ''I will have a farewell, then another farewell, then further farewells.''


38 Argentine Officers Freed
LEAD: The Argentine Army today freed another 38 noncommissioned officers accused of taking part in the military revolt at Monte Caseros on Jan. 16-18.
A total of 130 officers have been released since Friday.


Sports People; Seeks N.F.L. Job
LEAD: Michael Irvin, star receiver for the University of Miami's national football champions, said yesterday that he would forgo a final year of college eligibility. ''Michael Irvin's plan for 1988 is hopefully to be playing in the National Football League,'' said Irvin, who set school career records with 26 touchdown receptions, 143 catches and 2,423 yards in three seasons.


Networks Refuse to Broadcast Reagan's Plea
LEAD: The three major broadcast networks carried their usual prime-time programs last night, refusing to provide live coverage of President Reagan's speech on aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.
The networks said the speech contained nothing new.


Troubling View of a Changed Market
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission's report on the stock market collapse provides the most authoritative -and in some ways the most troubling -description yet of the way that trading in stock index futures has fundamentally altered the way the stock market works.


A.T.&amp;T. Lifts Phone Price
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company has announced that monthly prices for its leased residential phones will rise by as much as 95 cents starting next month.


Federal Judges Are Able To Appoint Experts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sports People; Not Guilty
LEAD: Pete Johnson, the former Ohio State fullback who played for three teams in the N.F.L., was found not guilty of cocaine charges yesterday in Columbus, Ohio, after a United States District Court jury deliberated for only a short time.
Johnson, 33, of Miami, had been charged with conspiracy to distribute cocaine, distribution of cocaine and traveling between states to promote a cocaine deal.


Advertising; A New Path For Diversion Magazine
LEAD: DIVERSION is the name of the magazine.
Its subtitle, ''For Physicians at Leisure,'' describes its mission perfectly.


Let It Pour
LEAD: Over much of the Eastern Seaboard yesterday, people on rainswept streets battled blown-out umbrellas; those who stayed home watched the soaps.
Pigeons sheltered on windowsills; stray cats crouched in doorways; housebound children drove their elders mad.
The groundhog definitely failed to see his shadow.


Where Ram's Horns Blew, New Fear
LEAD: Jewish history in these ancient hills runs all the way from the ram's horn and the prophet Amos to the automatic pistol and Bob Brown.


U.S. Board Rejects Lilco Plan In Key Setback for Shoreham
LEAD: A Federal licensing board today rejected the Long Island Lighting Company's evacuation plan for the Shoreham nuclear power plant.
The board said the plan was ''fundamentally flawed'' and might be inherently unworkable.


Citicorp Rates Fall
LEAD: Interest rates fell at Citicorp's regular weekly auction of commercial paper.
The bank holding company sold $50 million of 91-day paper at an average rate of 6.61 percent, down from 6.7916 percent last week.
Another $50 million of 182-day paper sold at an average rate of 6.635 percent, down from 6.879 percent.


Who Says It's Only a Two-Party System?
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. HOME CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*U.S. HOME CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
203,820,000
203,430,000
Net loss
b46,721,000
cd2,499,000
Share earns
-
.06
Yr rev
786,659,000
766,525,000
Net loss
b45,676,000
d80,071,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $26,480,000 for the quarter and $29,957,000 for the year; the quarter also included an extraordinary charge of $399,000.


THE BASIC SPEECH: Bob Dole; 'We're Going to Have a Spending Freeze in the Dole Administration'
LEAD: Candidates seeking the Presidential nomination make dozens of speeches in their campaigns.
Some address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
But more often the candidate uses a ''basic speech.'' It summarizes, with little variation from one occasion to the next, how the candidate wants to present himself to the voters.


REAGAN, IN SPEECH, PRESSES CONGRESS ON AID TO CONTRAS
LEAD: In an effort to salvage his aid request for the Nicaraguan rebels, President Reagan offered tonight to give Congress a greater voice in deciding whether to release the military part of the package.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Poor Taxpayer
LEAD: Soreheads beware: while it may still be true that anyone is entitled to his day in court, a Federal appeals court here has served notice that henceforth that day may carry a price.


A Mideast Vehicle. Who'll Steer It?
LEAD: Suddenly there's a slim basis for hope, the first genuine opening for Arab-Israeli negotiations since the Camp David accords a decade ago.
But as bullets fly and beatings continue in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and with U.S. and Israeli elections approaching, it will close just as quickly - unless the Reagan


ILLINOIS POWER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ILLINOIS POWER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
292,360,000
278,888,000
Net inc
40,623,000
68,059,000
Share earns
.46
.90
Yr rev
1,219,523,000
1,183,865,000
Net inc
289,556,000
292,721,000
Share earns
3.75
3.98


Slow Comeback For New Issues
LEAD: AFTER being derailed by the October collapse in stock prices, the new-issue market is getting back on track in 1988 - but only at a snail's pace.


Home Sales Off for Month And for Year
LEAD: Sales of new homes slipped in December for the second consecutive month, while sales for 1987 fell 10.1 percent below their 1986 level, the Government reported today.


Race, Justice and the Brawley Case
LEAD: Governor Cuomo finally had no choice but to appoint a special prosecutor in the case of Tawana Brawley: two local prosecutors disqualified themselves after Miss Brawley, a black Dutchess County teen-ager, alleged that she was the victim of a racially motivated kidnapping and sexual assault.


HECLA MINING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HECLA MINING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
24,796,000
10,283,000
Net inc
4,604,000
b14,421,000
Share earns
.17
-
Yr rev
88,690,000
62,057,000
Net inc
10,336,000
b21,232,000
Share earns
.38
-


Raymond Charles Barker, Church Founder, 77
LEAD: Dr.
Raymond Charles Barker, the founder of the First Church of Religious Science in Manhattan and its minister from 1946 to 1979, died of a cerebral hemorrhage Friday at the Eisenhower Hospital in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
He was 77 years old and lived in Rancho Mirage.


British Unions in a Modest Resurgence
LEAD: After years of curbing union power and industrial unrest under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, Britain is dealing with an unsettling rash of strikes this week by coal workers, nurses and seamen.


DANA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DANA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,076,000,000
866,000,000
Net inc
21,000,000
100,000
Share earns
.54
.04
Yr sales
4,142,000,000
3,695,000,000
Net inc
144,400,000
85,900,000
Share earns
3.30
1.68
Shares outst
43,715,000
51,098,000


2 Officers In Robins Fund Plan
LEAD: The two highest executives of the A. H. Robins Company may contribute a total of $10 million to trust funds set up to compensate women injured by Robins's Dalkon Shield birth-control device, according to a bankruptcy reorganization plan filed by the company late Monday night.


Manhattan Restrooms: An Elusive Amenity
LEAD: IF you are Holly Golightly, and you possess a very grand pair of sunglasses and a confident stride, you can probably use any bathroom in New York City.
But if you are less gorgeous (or less impudent), getting to a bathroom when far from home or office can be an ordeal, especially in New York, a city not known for the grace or abundance of its public amenities.


WITCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WITCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
368,434,000
326,108,000
Net inc
b13,013,000
16,506,000
Share earns
.57
.74
Yr sales
1,427,650,000
1,355,018,000
Net inc
b63,293,000
65,214,000
Share earns
2.72
2.93


3 Publishers Announce Editorial Appointments
LEAD: Patricia Soliman, formerly an associate publisher of Simon &amp; Schuster, was named editor at large for Delacorte Press and Dell yesterday, effective immediately.


Theater: 'Dress Suits'
LEAD: THE most striking quality in ''Dress Suits to Hire,'' Holly Hughes's bawdy farce of sexual identity, is the playwright's full-tilt fire-engine language.
Like Sam Shepard, her most obvious influence, Ms.
Hughes, who created ''Dress Suits'' in collaboration with its two performers, Peggy Shaw and Lois


TRW Lays Off 3,000 Workers
LEAD: TRW Inc. said today that it would furlough 3,000 workers, or about 10 percent of its space and military sector work force, in the next few months because of proposed cutbacks in military spending.


Japan Hesitant On Quotas
LEAD: The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trades told Japan today to lift its import quotas on 10 types of farm products to comply with international rules.
Japan said it accepted the ruling, which it had previously blocked but immediately made clear that it wanted to exempt two categories of items.


2 First Boston Leaders Resign Over Strategy
LEAD: Bruce Wasserstein and Joseph R. Perella, the two men who made the First Boston Corporation a leader in mergers and acquisitions, announced yesterday that they had quit their posts at the investment bank after a policy dispute and would set up their own firm.


World of College Financial Aid Grows Fuzzier
LEAD: Parents of college-bound students, welcome to the world of financial aid.


Recital: Boldorini
LEAD: Raquel Boldorini, a pianist from Uruguay who has built a broad South American career and who toured in the United States twice in the 1970's, came to Weill Recital Hall on Monday evening for a concert of music from the first half of the 20th century.


Warmth and Suspicion for Cantor and Rabbi From Soviet
LEAD: The rabbi and the cantor of the Moscow Synagogue arrived yesterday at Yeshiva University for three months of study, amid questions of whether their presence represented a new page in Soviet ''perestroika'' or a new phase of Soviet propaganda.


Corrections
LEAD: The Metro Matters column on Monday misstated the position held at New York University by Mayor Koch's sister, Pat Koch Thaler.
She is an associate dean of the university's School of Continuing Education.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a report in the Business People column yesterday misstated the number of branch offices acquired last week by Bateman Eichler, Hill Richards Inc., a brokerage firm with headquarters in Los Angeles.
It added 3 offices, for a total of 37.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Arkla Inc., Shreveport, La., engaged in the production, purchase and distribution of natural gas, and Entex Inc. of Houston, also engaged in natural gas distribution, said the period prescribed by law for the Federal Trade Commission review of a previously announced poposed acquisition of Entex by Arkla had expired Monday without action by the F.T.C.


TRIBUNE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRIBUNE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
583,573,000
543,856,000
Net inc
b43,215,000
c21,358,000
Share earns
.56
.27
Yr rev
2,159,982,000
2,029,813,000
Net inc
141,537,000
292,870,000
Share earns
1.80
3.63


Soybeans Plunge Below $6 On Weak Export Demand
LEAD: Prices of soybean futures plunged below $6 a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday amid weak export demand.
Grain prices were mixed.
The soybean decline reflected a drop in export demand for soybean meal and soybean oil, said Joel Karlin, an analyst in Chicago for Research Department Inc.


The Price Was Wrong
LEAD: To the Editor:


Phone Contract Testimony Indicates Early Sign of Leak
LEAD: The General Services Administration met with a representative of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company weeks before the final bids were due for Government phone contracts to discuss a possible leak of the company's secret bid information to competitors, an agency official said today in a deposition proceeding.


Wider Inquiry Into Stealing From the Dead
LEAD: New York State and city investigators, expanding their inquiry into thefts of property from the dead, seized accounting records yesterday from Public Administrators' offices in Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx.


Account of Yeltsin Talk Denied
LEAD: A Foreign Ministry spokesman today termed a ''fabrication'' a version of Boris N. Yeltsin's speech to Communist Party officials in which he reportedly criticized Raisa Gorbachev and Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze.


Young at Heart Politically, Elderly Lobby
LEAD: At 4 feet 10 inches, Rose Kryzak could not be easily seen from her place behind the podium in Convention Hall here.
But as she spoke in a reasoned and determined way about the needs of the elderly, she sure could be heard.


P.L.O. Plans a Twist To Exodus Ship Saga
LEAD: The Palestine Liberation Organization is planning to charter a Greek car ferry for a symbolic voyage next week to return Palestinian deportees to Israel, Palestinian officials here said today.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council


Sports People; Illini Hires Mackovicy
LEAD: The University of Illinois selected John Mackovic, the former Kansas City Chiefs' coach, as its new football coach yesterday.
Mackovic, 44, was selected during a closed-door meeting of the school's Athletic Association Board, the sources told The Associated Press.
The Illini defensive coordinator, Howard Tippett, who also had sought the job, said Athletic Director Neale Stoner had called him to say Mackovic had been selected.


MICROWAVE COOKING
LEAD: IT seems as if almost everyone is, like me, on a postholiday diet but bored to death with simple pieces of fish, salads and grilled bits of this and that.
Fortunately, the microwave oven can cook rich-tasting but low-calorie dishes quickly.
You can make enough for just one or two or enough for a group of friends who won't even know they are eating diet food.


Carrington To Head Christie's
LEAD: Lord Carrington will become chairman of Christie's International after his retirement in June as Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the British-based auction house announced yesterday.


Policy on Black Judicial Nominees Is Debated
LEAD: The Justice Department official in charge of screening potential Federal judges testified today that the small number of black nominees, six out of 367 chosen for judgeships in the last seven years, was largely a result of the paucity of qualified black lawyers who share the Reagan Administration's judicial and political outlook.


LOUISIANA GENERAL SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOUISIANA GENERAL SERVICES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
38,338,000
45,315,000
Net inc
1,530,000
1,605,000
Share earns
.26
.27


Sports People; Agent Is Indicted
LEAD: A grand jury in Tuscaloosa, Ala., has indicted Norby Walters, the sports agent, on three misdemeanor counts connected with payments he made to a former University of Alabama basketball star, Derrick McKey, said Attorney General Don Siegelman.
Siegelman said that his office has been advised by Walters's attorney that Walters would waive extradition and voluntarily come to Alabama.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD:  In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Jan. 29
Jan. 22
Jan. 30
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
6.8
6.5
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.8
Gasoline stocks
235.6
234.9
251.4
Distillate stocks
125.6
129.1
142.0
Crude imports, daily
4.6
4.2
3.7
Product imports, daily
2.4
2.3
2.0
Crude stocks
339.0
341.2
328.9
Crude production, daily
8.2
8.2
8.4
Refinery utilization (%)
84.1
83.4
80.3


Concert: James Joyce Set to Music
LEAD: THE urge to set James Joyce to music is understandable:


KEMPER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEMPER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
738,954,000
696,042,000
Net inc
b44,701,000
c62,873,000
Share earns
.77
1.03
Yr sales
3,021,930,000
2,778,275,000
Net inc
b251,352,000
c201,110,000
Share earns
4.12
3.40


Pentagon to Ask Funds For Midgetman Missile
LEAD: Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci has decided to request enough money in the Pentagon's 1989 budget to keep alive development of the single-warhead Midgetman nuclear missile, Administration officials said today.


MACMILLAN INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACMILLAN INC (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
955,312,000
817,797,000
Net inc
b70,707,000
c59,526,000
Share earns
2.74
2.47
Shares outst
27,103,000
24,090,000
b-Includes a pretax charge of $12,711,000 comprising of a gain of $3,833,000 on the disposition of the software division, securities gains and dividends totaling $1,258,000, interest expense of $16,867,000 and a foreign exchange loss of $935,000.


Koch Reverts To Poor Finance
LEAD: New York City is again falling into the expedient and dangerous practice of using capital funds to finance current expenditures, one of the underlying causes of the 1975 fiscal crisis.


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1988
LEAD:  Markets


N. M. Bodecker, 66; He Wrote and Drew Books for Children
LEAD: N. M. Bodecker, an illustrator and author of children's books, died of cancer of the colon Feb. 1 at his home in Hancock, N.H.
He was 66 years old.


Prime Rate Is Lowered By Major Banks to 8 1/2%
LEAD: The nation's leading banks lowered their prime lending rate yesterday by a quarter of a percentage point, to 8 1/2 percent, its lowest level since September.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: WHEN glancing through my recipes for meals that can be made in an hour, I am impressed by the number of hamburger dishes.
Part of the appeal of hamburgers is that they can be teamed with a number of foods and flavors, altering their character with each addition.


Calming the Allies' Jitters
LEAD: Officially, our European allies are supporting without reservation the new treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear forces.
This surface unanimity, however, masks a sea of uncertainty about the long-term reliability of the United States as a defense partner.


Excerpts From S.E.C. Report on Factors in October Stock Market Plunge
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the introduction and executive summary in today's Securities and Exchange Commission report on the stock market plunge:  Introduction


SUPERMARKET CHAIN ACCUSED OF BREAKING VOW ON PESTICIDE
LEAD: Consumer groups complained today that Safeway supermarkets had violated a promise to customers by selling apples containing trace amounts of a potentially hazardous farm chemical.


Sports People; Arbitration Winner
LEAD: Baseball's first salary arbitration case of the year was decided yesterday in favor of a player, Gerald Perry, the 27-year-old first baseman for the Atlanta Braves.
Last season, at a salary of $225,000, Perry batted .270, hit 12 home runs, knocked in 74 runs and stole 42 bases.
The Braves then offered him $375,000 for next season, but Perry asked for $425,000.


Benjamin Kuhn, 82, A Founder of College
LEAD: The Rev.
Benjamin Kuhn, one of seven friars who established Siena College here in 1937, died Sunday at St.
Anthony's Hospital in Warwick, N.Y, after a heart attack earlier in January.
He was 82 years old and lived in Warwick.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-12


Campeau Amends Federated Offer
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation has sent a letter to Federated Department Stores amending its $47-a-share cash offer for Federated to remove the condition that the offer be approved by Federated's board.This apparently signals that Campeau intends to proceed with its $4.2 billion offer even if Federated's board, scheduled to review the bid on Friday, rejects it.


MEESE ADDS LITTLE TO WEDTECH CASE
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d testified in Federal District Court today that he could not remember details of the White House role in the Wedtech Corporation's efforts to obtain a $32 million Army contract in 1982.
But he said at the time he wanted the company to receive a fair hearing.


Foreman Is Fighting Waistline And Critics
LEAD: Last March, after an absence of 10 years from the prize ring, George Foreman stepped between the ropes in Sacramento, Calif., to fight a journeyman named Steve Zouski.


Pentagon Adds to Jobs for Women And Demands End to Harassment
LEAD: The Defense Department directed the military services today to enforce rules against sexual harassment more rigorously and to open more positions to women.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Executive Changes column of Business Day on Monday incorrectly reported a resignation at TW Services, the parent company of Denny's fast-food restaurants.
Donald L. Pierce has resigned as president of Denny's and as a director of TW Services.
Frank L. Salizzoni remains the chairman and chief executive of TW Services.


New Clash on Estimate Board's Fate
LEAD: The intensifying dispute over the future of the New York City Board of Estimate grew more pointed yesterday when the board's special counsel took public issue with Richard Ravitch, chairman of the Charter Revision Commission.


UNION TEXAS PETROLEUM HOLDINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION TEXAS PETROLEUM HOLDINGS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
299,300,000
213,900,000
Net inc
12,500,000
b29,500,000
Shares outst
85,034,315
67,040,095
Yr rev
1,257,400,000
1,255,700,000
Net inc
55,900,000
b57,500,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
71,654,745
67,058,887


In Search of Accountability in Campus Courses
LEAD: David Pillemar, a professor of psychology at Wellesley College in Massachusetts, recently became interested in how students pick their majors.


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: FOOTBALL season is over.
I realized the end had come the other night when God was prominently mentioned several times on television.
This doesn't happen much.
I'm not counting those times on ''Dynasty'' when Alexis says, ''Thank God Blake will never own that oil pipeline.''


Discount Stores for Fledgling Gourmets
LEAD: IN the suburbs around New York City consumers weaned on Twinkies and cheese spread are broadening their gastronomic horizons at Passport Foods Outlet.
The fledgling seven-store chain, retail experts say, is the nation's first to sell imported delicacies at discount prices.


Recital: Nico Castel
LEAD: ADMIRERS of Nico Castel's sharply etched portrayals at the Metropolitan Opera (most recently a hilarious Majordomo in ''Ariadne auf Naxos'') had a chance to see another side of his work Sunday evening at Merkin Concert Hall, where he gave a recital of musical Judaica ranging from Gounod's ''Le Juif Errant'' through settings of Heinrich Heine by Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco to Sephardic and


Profits Plunge At First Boston
LEAD: First Boston Inc., battered by losses in its risk arbitrage unit and by the general downturn in business activity after the stock market collapse in October, reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings plummeted 91.7 percent on a 35.3 percent decline in revenues.


CULLUM COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CULLUM COMPANIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 9
1988
1987
Sales
273,926,000
231,433,000
Net inc
3,888,000
4,484,000
Share earns
.24
.27
28wk sales
622,575,000
525,822,000
Net inc
b11,811,000
9,235,000
Share earns
.72
.56


California Bond Rate Higher In Response to Tax Rules
LEAD: California's first issue of tax-exempt bonds with interest subject to the Federal alternative minimum income tax resulted in interest rates that were about half a percentage point higher than is traditional for the state's bonds, which are completely exempt from Federal income tax.


Ex-Pan Am Executive Gets Continental Post
LEAD: Martin R. Shugrue Jr., who was ousted two weeks ago as vice chairman of the Pan Am Corporation, yesterday was elected president of Continental Airlines Inc.
For much of the last year, Continental has been seeking to solve service problems that brought a flood of customer complaints.


Appeal Is Filed on Special Prosecutor Law
LEAD: The Supreme Court was asked Monday to reinstate legal provisions that created special prosecutors to investigate charges of wrongdoing by high-ranking officials of the Federal executive branch.


Finnish Chief Wants to Cut Power of His Job
LEAD: According to a Government official here, Mauno Koivisto once likened his mission as President of Finland to that of the character played by Gary Cooper in ''High Noon.''


When Trade Tigers Grow Up
LEAD: President Reagan had good reason to drop Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong and Singapore from a program that gives favored tariff treatment to most of the third world.
Those nations, known in trade circles as the ''four tigers,'' no longer need special help.
Indeed, the time has come for them to share more responsibility for world trade expansion by relaxing their own import restrictions, by adopting flexible currency exchange rates, or both.


HUDSON FOODS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 19
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUDSON FOODS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 19
1988
1987
Sales
129,804,813
107,636,081
Net loss
5,693,343
b7,494,732
Share earns
-
.60
b-Net income


Bulgaria Reins In Its Enthusiasm for Change
LEAD: At the end of the special conference of the Bulgarian Communist Party last week, Bulgaria was in the position it has occupied since the end of World War II -as close as possible to the Soviet Union.


How Fragonard Came to Met
LEAD: In the Jean-Honore Fragonard exhibition that opens this Saturday at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, both the artist and the museum have done their magic.
The show radiates color, clarity and completeness of design, and the paintings hang like seemingly inevitable expressions in a seemingly permanent home.


S.E.C. STAFF URGES CURBS ON TRADING OF STOCK FUTURES
LEAD: A staff report by the Securities and Exchange Commission today called for a series of changes that would reduce the role of trading in stock index futures, which it asserted worsened the October stock market plunge.


TORCHMARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TORCHMARK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
396,314,000
407,079,000
Net inc
b34,764,000
c35,620,000
Share earns
.52
.49
Shares outst
62,257,000
72,734,000
Yr rev
1,590,493,000
1,554,548,000
Net inc
b192,987,000
c205,749,000
Share earns
2.86
2.73
Shares outst
65,757,000
75,050,000


Mr. Goldin, Off One Hook
LEAD: New York City's Comptroller, Harrison Goldin, broke no law when he touted investments in companies controlled by Ivan Boesky.
So says the city's Investigations Commissioner, Kenneth Conboy, along with Federal and local prosecutors.
It's a welcome finding, though it hardly settles the issue of propriety.


KANSAS CITY POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KANSAS CITY POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
156,669,000
151,038,000
Net inc
13,887,000
4,398,000
Share earns
.39
-
Yr rev
704,839,000
664,870,000
Net inc
103,982,000
106,458,000
Share earns
3.01
2.80


Games Teach Black History
LEAD: Teachers across the nation are turning their students' attention this week to lessons ranging from slavery to civil rights as Black History Month begins.


Diebold President Set To Add Job of Chairman
LEAD: Diebold Inc., a maker of automatic teller machines and security equipment, said yesterday it would give its president and chief executive, Robert W. Mahoney, the additional post of chairman after its annual meeting in April.


Frenchman Slain in Car by Beirut Gunmen
LEAD: Gunmen killed a Frenchman in East Beirut today in the latest attack on French citizens here.


WEBB, DEL E CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEBB, DEL E CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
83,299,000
65,084,000
Net loss
b16,545,000
c96,628,000
Yr rev
288,420,000
275,505,000
Net loss
b96,628,000
cd19,607,000
Share earns
-
2.37
b-Includes a loss of $241,000 and $4,214,000 from discontinued operations for the quarter and year, respectivley; the year also includes a $1,050,000 loss on the exchange of common stock for notes, and a $3,834,000 loss from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Takeover Law Tested
LEAD: The Black &amp; Decker Corporation filed suit today against Delaware's corporate anti-takeover law, just hours after its enactment.


Political Memo; A Foggy Homestretch For Democrats in Iowa
LEAD: And now, the finale.


Shad, Too, Signal the Season
LEAD: THE groundhog did not see its shadow , and to confirm that spring is on its way shad is also here.
The first are on sale at a few fish markets in the New York area.
This succulent and richly flavored member of the herring family is excellent to broil, grill or bake.
Shad roe is also available and is at its best lightly sauteed in plenty of butter or olive oil.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Housing constitutes a basic social good and cannot simply be considered a market commodity.''  - The Pontifical Commission for Justice and Peace.  [ A3:3. ]


Storytelling as an Art Form
LEAD: The show tonight in Alice Tully Hall is called ''The Raconteurs,'' and thereby hangs a tale.
Several tales, in fact, and they will be told by two of the most accomplished practitioners of what is sometimes called an endangered art.


Grand Met Ends Bidding for Martell
LEAD: Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., a British hotel conglomerate, formally ended a six-week bidding war for the French cognac maker Martell &amp; Compagnie by saying it would not contest a rival offer from the Seagram Company.


Key Rates
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.75
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.73
6.96
6.20
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.67
5.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.08
6.07
5.59
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.96
8.06
7.04
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.41
8.41
7.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.31
9.35
8.69
MUNICIPAL BONDS*
7.89
7.92
7.05


Treasury Debt Issues Up Sharply
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose sharply yesterday as securities dealers became more optimistic that demand from domestic and Japanese investors would be strong the next few days.


Whirlpool Splits Into Seven Units
LEAD: The Whirlpool Corporation of Benton Harbor, Mich., said it had reorganized into seven units, a structure it said would make each operation more accountable for its performance.


SNAP-ON TOOLS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SNAP-ON TOOLS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
195,110,000
177,696,000
Net inc
23,889,000
15,893,000
Share earns
.57
.38
Yr sales
754,303,000
670,086,000
Net inc
88,596,000
65,496,000
Share earns
2.13
1.59


Bridge: Best Possible Aceless Hand Turned Up in Quebec Game
LEAD: Back in the 30's, Ely Culbertson offered a cash prize for an authenticated case of someone picking up the best possible hand - 37 high-card points, although he did not express it that way - or the worst possible hand, all the deuces, treys and four spots plus a five.
Nobody collected.


14 Arrested at Alabama Capitol In Bid to Remove Confederate Flag
LEAD: The president of the Alabama N.A.A.C.P. and 13 other blacks were arrested today as they tried to scale an 8-foot fence around the State Capitol in an effort to take down a Confederate flag atop the building.


Henley Lifts Stake In Santa Fe
LEAD: The Henley Group said yesterday that it had increased its stake in the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation and vowed to continue its proxy fight to gain control of the company.


A Faster Bobsled for U.S. Teams
LEAD: WHEN the United States bobsled teams streak down the ice at the Winter Games in Calgary, Alberta, later this month they may be able to challenge the East Germans, Swiss and Russians for the first time in years thanks to some recent innovations in sled design and construction made by engineers and high-tech companies working as volunteers.


PANHANDLE EASTERN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PANHANDLE EASTERN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
385,831,000
572,817,000
Net inc
35,949,000
c79,970,000
Share earns
.67
-
Yr rev
1,563,441,000
2,223,078,000
Net inc
b108,247,000
c542,095,000
Share earns
2.04
-


Signalmen Union Is Ordered To End a Walkout at L.I.R.R.
LEAD: Signalmen on the Long Island Rail Road who walked off their jobs yesterday in a protest against what they said were hazardous working conditions were ordered back to work last night by Judge I. Leo Glasser of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


AMFAC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMFAC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
592,842,000
532,397,000
Net loss
b10,846,000
c43,863,000
Yr rev
2,195,062,000
1,962,204,000
Net inc
b5,021,000
cd66,599,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $9.6 million for the quarter and year.


FIRST BOSTON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST BOSTON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
266,744,000
412,015,000
Net inc
5,093,000
61,603,000
Share earns
.21
1.68
Yr rev
1,322,296,000
1,309,765,000
Net inc
108,885,000
180,555,000
Share earns
3.12
5.14


Outpatient Clinic for Those With AIDS Virus Opens in West
LEAD: The opening of the nation's first outpatient clinic specializing in the treatment of people who tests have shown have the AIDS virus but have not developed symptoms of the disease itself was announced here today.


The Diary Of an Eater: Confessing To Experts
LEAD: EVERYONE knows that Americans eat too much fat, sodium and sugar, and that they ought to consume more whole grains, fruits and vegetables.


EMERSON ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMERSON ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,578,240,000
1,431,076,000
Net inc
124,937,000
109,269,000
Share earns
.54
.47
The year-ago quarter restated to reflect an acquisition accounted for as a pooling of interests and the Sept.


RLC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RLC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
119,005,000
107,086,000
Net inc
b14,355,000
c307,000
Share earns
.78
-
b-Includes a gain of $10 million from an accounting change.
c-Net loss


PROFILS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
American Cyanamid Co.
$60,200,000
+15.5
Great Northern Nekoosa
56,700,000
+52.8
Kerr-McGee Corp.
14,700,000
+67.0
Maytag Corp.
30,500,000
+20.6
Ogilvy Group Inc.
14,500,000
+17.9
Panhandle Eastern Corp.


Levin Finding Was Withheld
LEAD: The police detective who arrested Robert E. Chambers Jr. in August 1986 conceded yesterday that he had withheld information that could have backed up Mr.
Chambers's account in a videotaped statement about Jennfier Levin's death.


How Five Studies Viewed The Market Collapse
LEAD:  Securities and Exchange Commission: New computer-assisted trading techniques that link the stock and futures markets fueled last October's wild swings in stock prices.
The danger of extreme volatility persists, it said.
Also found that many market-makers did not do enough to cushion the plunge in prices.


Brooklyn Man Is Charged in Fatal Sniper Attack
LEAD: A Brooklyn man was arrested yesterday and charged with killing one man and wounding three others in a sniper attack Monday evening, the police said.


Ogilvy Wins Microsoft
LEAD: Ogilvy &amp; Mather of Los Angeles has become agency for the Microsoft Corporation, a leading computer software company based in Redmond, Wash.
The budget is about $14 million.


About New York; Why Lose Time? A Court Reporter Lives by His Pen
LEAD: ''I want to show you that I can stand up on my head,'' Duncan Griffith said upon first meeting, in Room 1610 of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, at 100 Centre Street. ''It's something I learned back in 1950,'' he added, offering further that he was born in 1906.


TOSCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOSCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
321,785,000
167,441,000
Net inc
b20,411,000
c40,870,000
Share earns
.29
1.36
Shares outst
51,240,726
30,159,517
Yr sales
1,187,308,000
708,278,000
Net inc
b52,955,000
c17,580,000
Share earns
.63
.53
Shares outst
49,979,752
27,409, 156


Philadelphia Electric
LEAD: The president of the Philadelphia Electric Company stepped down today as the company released a scathing report calling its Peach Bottom nuclear power plant ''an embarrassment to the industry and to the nation.'' At a news conference at the utility's company headquarters, L. Everett 3d, company chairman, announced that John H.


ALCO HEALTH SERVICES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALCO HEALTH SERVICES CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
504,082,000
405,928,000
Net inc
5,556,000
4,469,000
Share earns
.44
.34


Tough Labor Organizer Leading Strike in Maine
LEAD: At International Paper's sprawling mill here, amid dozens of posters and slogans that festoon its wood-receiving gate, a tiny sign captures the mood of the striking workers in a seven-month labor dispute.
It says: ''Welcome Ray Rogers.''


Washington Talk: The Presidency; Insider's Intimate Portrait of a First Lady's Power
LEAD: Is Nancy Reagan a closet liberal?


People
LEAD: *
Roger H. Clapp, advertising director of Richmond Newspapers, has been elected president of the International Newspaper Advertising and Marketing Executives.


Excerpts From Reagan's Address on Aid to Contras and Democratic Reply
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Reagan's speech last night on aid to the contras, and from the Democratic response by Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of the Cable News Network:  PRESIDENT'S SPEECH


G. Mennen Williams, 76, Is Dead; Governor and Justice in Michigan
LEAD: G. Mennen Williams, the former Governor of Michigan who later served as Chief Justice of the State Supreme Court and as a Federal official in the Departments of State and Justice, died yesterday at St.
John's Hospital in Detroit after suffering a massive cerebral stroke.
He was 76 years old and lived in Grosse Pointe Farms, near


Heather O'Rourke, 12; Starred in 'Poltergeist'
LEAD: Heather O'Rourke, familiar to moviegoers as the child swept into another world by ghosts in ''Poltergeist'' and its sequel, ''Poltergeist II,'' died at Children's Hospital and Health Center in San Diego Monday.
She was 12 years old.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Two Denver Broncos - Dave Studdard, an offensive tackle, and Marc Munford, a linebacker, underwent surgery yesterday.
Studdard suffered a torn ligament in his left knee in the second quarter of the Super Bowl loss Sunday to Washington.
Munford, a rookie, had been sidelined several weeks with a herniated disk in his back.


Cab Driver of Integrity
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 Guilty in Bomb Smuggling
LEAD: A Federal jury today convicted two Canadian citizens of smuggling a bomb into the United States.


F.B.I.'s Chief Says Surveillance Was Justified
LEAD: The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that the bureau began its surveillance of groups opposed to the Reagan Administration's policies in Central America because of information that activists were providing aid to a ''terrorist organization'' in El Salvador.


Vatican Urges Governments to Help the Homeless
LEAD: A Vatican commission called on public authorities today to insure a just distribution of housing, condemning real estate speculation and other practices that treat property as a market commodity without social value.


Two 'Hickey' Sequels, on 'Playhouse'
LEAD: A LITTLE over a year ago, public television's ''American Playhouse'' presented the kind of period romp that sets clubbable types to sighing about the good old days. ''The Prodigious Hickey'' was based on Owen Johnson's ''Lawrenceville Stories,'' a collection of fond anecdotes about innocent pranks and character building at a prep school in the early years of this century.


From Out of the Past, Angel Food Cake
LEAD: SEVERAL weeks ago a friend served homemade angel food cake with raspberry sauce, and everyone asked for seconds.
It wasn't until later that it dawned on me that I hadn't had angel food cake in 20 years.
And that my angel cake slicer, the one with the long teeth, had been sitting idle in the silver drawer.


TRANS WORLD AIRLINES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANS WORLD AIRLINES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
51,041,000
c85,018,000
Share earns
1.20
2.36
Yr net inc
b106,201,000
cd106,328,000
Share earns
1.65
-
b-Excludes unrealized gains of $123 million from investments.


Dole Makes Environment An Issue in New Hampshire
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole unveiled broad elements of an environmental policy today while vigorously attacking the Reagan Administration's enforcement efforts.


Cossacks for Rodeos?
LEAD: Things are going so well in United States-Soviet culture exchanges, said Senator Timothy Wirth of Colorado today, that the next slice of American life in Russia ought to be rodeo.


Soviet Halts Independent Publishing Cooperatives
LEAD: The Soviet authorities have ordered a halt to the creation of independent publishing and printing cooperatives, a Government official said this week.


Huxley Madeheim, Professor, 82
LEAD: Huxley Madeheim, an engineer and former professor of industrial management at Baruch College, died Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.


SPRINGS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPRINGS INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
457,019,000
408,428,000
Net inc
16,412,000
15,822,000
Share earns
.92
.89
Yr sales
1,661,126,000
1,504,984,000
Net inc
55,712,000
32,575,000
Share earns
3.13
1.83


LOGICON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOGICON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
56,703,000
49,120,000
Net inc
2,508,000
2,248,000
Share earns
.53
.47
9mo rev
157,630,000
150,960,000
Net inc
7,244,000
6,792,000
Share earns
1.52
1.42


Document Cannot Be Found, Waldheim Investigator Says
LEAD: A member of the Austrian commission investigating Kurt Waldheim's wartime past said today that he had not found a telegram purportedly linking the Austrian President to prisoner deportations.


For Tibetans, Quality of Life Slowly Improves
LEAD: To the Editor:


Far From India, the Appeal of Chutneys Grows and Grows
LEAD: MAJOR GREY, the well-known mango chutney from India, has considerable competition these days.
American chefs from coast to coast are preparing their own chutneys and serving them with grilled fish, poultry and meats.


OGILVY GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OGILVY GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
219,577,000
168,507,000
Net inc
14,479,000
12,297,000
Share earns
.99
.87
Yr rev
738,508,000
560,132,000
Net inc
29,757,000
26,995,000
Share earns
2.02
1.90


SOUTHERN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,612,705,000
1,604,780,000
Net inc
69,678,000
181,097,000
Share earns
.24
.64
Yr rev
7,010,365,000
6,846,591,000
Net inc
b554,442,000
882,860,000
Share earns
1.92
3.17


Bush Uses Plastic Pistol to Make a Point in Debate
LEAD: Perhaps if the issue had been a different kind of arms control, say nuclear weapons, the debate here tonight between Republican candidates might have developed into, well, a debate.


Balking Agent Loses Appeal
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation was justified in dismissing an agent who refused an order to investigate peace groups whose views he shared, an administrative judge ruled today.


Thomas Johnson, 78; Lost Post in Congress
LEAD: Former Representative Thomas F. Johnson of Maryland, who was convicted in a savings and loan scandal that cost him his Congressional seat, died after an automobile accident Monday.
He was 78 years old.


Appeals Court Voids Ban on Surveys at the Polls
LEAD: A Washington State law banning polls of voters leaving the polling place was ruled unconstitutional today by a Federal appeals court.
The court unanimously held that the law violated freedom of speech.


Playwrights Make Donations To the Neediest Cases Fund
LEAD: A Manhattan playwright, John Tobias, recalls how he and his brother, as young children, used to stage variety shows and send the proceeds to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


HUSSEIN WEIGHING U.S. MIDEAST PLAN
LEAD: King Hussein of Jordan has agreed to consider a new American idea for getting Middle East negotiations under way by the end of the year, American officials and Middle Eastern diplomats said today.


College Hockey Notebook; Beanpot Brings Out The Best in Goalie
LEAD: The goalie's dream - the shutout - came at last for Bruce Racine in his 118th game in the nets for Northeastern.
The occasion was perfect, the opening contest of the 36th Beanpot Tournament Monday night before 14,000 fans in Boston Garden.


Rangers Rally In Final Seconds
LEAD: Whenever the two goaltenders of this dramatic 2-2 tie looked out across the ice before them, they saw tight checking and clogged plays, a reassuring, if unartistic, sight.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
ABB Traction Inc., Purchase, N.Y., a new subsidiary of Asea Brown Boveri Inc. that will supply and service electro-mechanical equipment for the rail and transportation industries, named Carlo Gorla president.


USF&amp;G CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USF&amp;G CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,355,043,000
1,177,346,000
Net inc
b84,833,000
c23,819,000
Share earns
1.06
-
Yr rev
4,826,084,000
4,336,783,000
Net inc
b279,157,000
d296,330,000
Share earns
3.63
4.43
Shares outst
72,404,729
65,329,537


AMERICAN CYANAMID CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CYANAMID CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,025,300,000
949,600,000
Net inc
60,200,000
52,100,000
Share earns
.67
.56
Yr sales
4,166,100,000
3,815,900,000
Net inc
b275,600,000
202,500,000
Share earns
3.02
2.18
Shares outst
91,274,850
92,850,710


District of Columbia Will Provide Bleach For Addict Needles
LEAD: District of Columbia health officials will begin giving drug addicts vials of bleach to clean hypodermic needles in an effort to halt the spread of AIDS, Health Commissioner Reed V. Tuckson has announced.


Addendum
LEAD: *
Middleberg Middleton has changed its name to Middleberg Middleton Picower, for its third partner, Mary Gendron Picower.


Chase Manhattan's Variable Notes
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation is offering $300 million of variable-rate renewable notes with a final maturity in 1993 at a price of par, with the initial interest rate yet to be set, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


4 Chosen for Hall of Fame
LEAD: Alan Page, Mike Ditka, Fred Biletnikoff and Jack Ham were selected today to be inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame next July.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Georgi M. Malenkov, who succeeded Stalin as Soviet leader, misstated the current name of the town in which he was born.
The town, Orenburg, was called Chkalov between 1938 and 1957; it is now once again called Orenburg.


DESOTO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DESOTO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
64,886,000
77,789,000
Net loss
273,000
b395,000
Share earns
-
.09
Yr sales
373,129,000
413,802,000
Net inc
10,577,000
3,909,000
Share earns
2.66
.82
Shares outst
3,970,000
4,787,000


In Okotoks, Alberta, Soviet Figure Skaters Are O.K.
LEAD: The skaters were finishing a difficult lift, he raising her with one hand high above his head, and the crowd of 600 or so, roaring its approval.
A woman standing behind rows of benches stuffed tightly with Okotokians clapped loudly.


EATING WELL
LEAD: NUTRITIONISTS fall, roughly, into two categories: those who champion vitamin and mineral supplements - the more the merrier - and those who are dead set against them.
The former are looked down on by the latter as quacks; the latter are looked down on by the former as old-fashioned fuddy-duddies, stuck in the mind set of the 1950's before certain nutritional information was known.


Carlucci and Soviet Minister Plan Periodic Military Talks
LEAD: Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci and the Soviet Defense Minister have agreed to begin meeting periodically to discuss arms control and other military issues, Administration officials said today.


Super Bowl Rating Falls
LEAD: Super Bowl XXII was the lowest rated Super Bowl since 1974, according to the A. C. Nielsen ratings released yesterday.
Still, 110 million people tuned in, ABC said, making it the fifth most-watched Super Bowl in history.


Al Laney, Sportswriter, 92
LEAD: Al Laney, a sportswriter for more than four decades, died last Sunday at his retirement home, the Fellowship Community, in Spring Valley.
He was 92 years old.


College Basketball; Syracuse Trounces Providence, 92-71
LEAD: Derrick Coleman scored 20 points and grabbed 19 rebounds to lead Syracuse to a 92-71 rout of Providence in a Big East Conference game tonight.


BROCKWAY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROCKWAY INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
257,758,000
247,181,000
Net inc
5,449,000
2,657,000
Share earns
.43
.21
Yr sales
1,082,407,000
1,065,618,000
Net inc
40,750,000
30,284,000
Share earns
3.26
2.44


Brazilian Debt Payment
LEAD: Brazil paid about $350 million to its foreign bank creditors yesterday, as expected.
This payment, which came from Brazil's currency reserves, was mainly for interest due Jan. 15 on previously restructured debt.


Sports of The Times; More Than Half Good
LEAD: CAN one swallow maketh a summer, or one woodcock a winter, or one half a football game?


Chase Is Selling Paris Headquarters
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation, the large United States bank holding company, said it would sell its central Paris headquarters to raise capital.
A Chase spokeman, Clement Redesdale, did not give the selling price or the identity of the buyer.


Film: 'Hoxsey' and Cancer
LEAD: KEN AUSUBEL'S ''Hoxsey:


BUSH TAKING AIM AT CONGRESS ROLE
LEAD: Vice President Bush intensified his attacks on Congress today in an effort to tap anti-Congressional sentiment here in his battle against Senator Bob Dole of Kansas for the Republican Presidential nomination.


EDUCATION: LESSONS
LEAD: Printers, not scholars, decided the spelling of things, the utterly exasperating, often embarrassing, always confusing and inconsistent orthography of the mother tongue.
The 15th-century British printers who translated to type what they heard on the street left a lexicon that has produced one generation of bad spellers after another.


PEPSICO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEPSICO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,466,100,000
3,034,500,000
Net inc
b147,000,000
c116,600,000
Share earns
.56
.44
Yr sales
11,485,200,000
9,109,900,000
Net inc
b594,800,000
c457,800,000
Share earns
2.26
1.75


KERR-MCGEE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KERR-MCGEE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
640,661,000
588,800,000
Net inc
14,749,000
8,809,000
Share earns
.30
.18
Yr sales
2,607,647,000
2,534,553,000
Net inc
81,009,000
b291,683,000
Share earns
1.67
-


GREAT NORTHERN NEKOOSA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT NORTHERN NEKOOSA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
782,600,000
534,800,000
Net inc
56,700,000
37,100,000
Share earns
1.04
.69
Yr sales
2,589,000,000
2,039,200,000
Net inc
200,600,000
85,300,000
Share earns
3.68
1.60
Shares outst
54,576,093
53,272,814


'New Breeze' Is Noted as the Sandinistas, With Eye on the U.S., Cast Aside Old Rules
LEAD: On Sunday morning, as about 2,000 anti-Government protesters made their way through Managua's dusty streets, a young man broke away from the march, ran toward the sidewalk and produced a can of spray paint.


EAST BERLIN FREES ITS RIGHTS LEADERS
LEAD: Leading members of East Germany's fledgling human rights movement were released from prison today, and they left for West Germany, possibly against their will.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Armed With Credit Card
LEAD: Americans wishing to contribute to the fight against gun control legislation can now obtain a special VISA credit card that will automatically make a contribution to the Citizens Committee for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms every time it is used.


STANLEY WORKS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANLEY WORKS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
458,507,000
384,296,000
Net inc
26,167,000
c22,461,000
Share earns
.61
.53
Yr sales
1,763,147,000
1,371,270,000
Net inc
b86,639,000
c78,714,000
Share earns
2.00
1.86


Study Says Rights Agency in New York Is Too Slow
LEAD: A mayoral panel sharply criticized the New York City Human Rights Commission yesterday, saying that it took years to resolve many complaints that should be handled in weeks or months.


Nets Lose on Road Again
LEAD: Walter Berry scored 28 points tonight to lead the San Antonio Spurs to a 118-106 victory over the New Jersey Nets, who had ended a 26-game losing streak on the road Monday night.
The Nets now have lost 19 of 20 road games this season.


INSIDE
LEAD:  U.S. Effort in Mideast


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Still Shining at 40


Security Guard Convicted
LEAD: A jury in Brooklyn convicted a former security guard yesterday in the slaying of Dawn Livecchi, a 20-year-old design student, in the doorway of her Fort Greene brownstone.
The defendant, Anthony Jenkins, 26, was accused of shooting her after she refused his sexual advances.
He was convicted on two counts of second-degree murder, one count of second-degree manslaughter and one count of criminal possession of a weapon.


Romaine Fielding, Businessman, 68
LEAD: Romaine Fielding, who handled transactions with the Soviet Union for several companies, including his own, died of cancer Thursday.
He was 68 years old.


3 Soldiers and Panamanian Held on Drug Charges
LEAD: A Panamanian citizen wearing a United States Army uniform was arrested along with three American soldiers after they stepped off a military transport plane carrying a large quantity of cocaine, the Federal authorities said Monday.


Greenspan Opposes Brady Plan
LEAD: Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, today rejected a Presidential task force's proposal that the Fed take over supervision of trading in the securities markets.


Many Arab Schools Are Shut In Israeli Bid to Curb Unrest
LEAD: Israel ordered widespread closings of Palestinian schools and universities in the occupied territories today in the face of continuing unrest.


Economic Scene; 'Value-Added' Tax Has Advantages
LEAD: BRUCE BABBITT'S rivals for the Democratic Presidential nomination have leapt at the idea like cats seeking the jugular.
Michael Dukakis says the Babbitt proposal for a broad-based consumption tax ''would soak the middle class.'' Paul Simon's spokesman says the tax, levied at each stage of production as a ''value-added'' tax, ''would leave the wealthy laughing all the way to the bank.


Foster Wheeler
LEAD: The Foster Wheeler Corporation said its president, Louis E. Azzato, was prepared to meet with Asher B. Edelman, but not to discuss his proposal to pay $16.50 a share, or almost $575 million in cash, for the company's stock.
Mr.
Edelman, who holds about 11.5 percent of Foster Wheeler's common stock outstanding, proposed last week that the company create a recapitalization plan or, as an alternative, accept his buyout offer.


Shuttle Crash Hurts 16 Near Grand Central
LEAD: At least 16 people were injured, none seriously, when a 42d Street subway shuttle collided with a Transit Authority garbage collection train near Grand Central Terminal early this morning, officials said.


BOOKS: ON CHILD ABUSE
LEAD: BY SILENCE BETRAYED.
Sexual Abuse of Children in America.
By John Crewdson. 267 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $17.95.


Texaco to Mail Its Ballots
LEAD: Texaco Inc. said yesterday that it would begin mailing ballots to its shareholders today so they could determine whether the company should emerge from bankruptcy.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE RACE TO FASHODA: European Colonialism and African Resistance in the Scramble for Africa.
By David Levering Lewis.
Illustrated. 304 pages.


Washington Talk: Briefing; In the Money
LEAD: Leaders of the Democratic National Committee say they are encouraged by the successes of their fund-raising efforts in 1987.


Board Rebuffs Move by Futures Exchange
LEAD: In a stunning last-minute rebuff, the board of the Commodity Exchange Center yesterday voted not to allow the New York Futures Exchange to move onto the trading floor at 4 World Trade Center next Monday, as previously agreed.


TV Reviews; The Smothers Brothers
LEAD: TOM AND DICK SMOTHERS are in a helicopter that is taking them to their ''20th Reunion'' show at CBS. ''Don't forget,'' one says with evident satisfaction, ''this was the network that fired us.'' Suddenly, outside the studio below, a bunch of what look like suit-and-tie network executives man an antiaircraft gun and start firing at the chopper.


Changes in Special Education Urged
LEAD: Despite considerable progress in efforts to educate handicapped children since the passage of a landmark Federal law 12 years ago, so many flaws have developed in the various programs that they have become ''both segregated and second class,'' two experts in special education say.


Sydney Journal; A Bad Lot, the Convict Fathers? Goodness, No!
LEAD: Aunt Laura is not to be told, but old Ellen, the other relatives acknowledge with an indulgent smile, was rather a bad hat.


Dollar Off in Quiet Trading After Prime Rate Reduction
LEAD: The dollar declined against most major foreign currencies in quiet trading yesterday, largely because of a reduction in domestic interest rates and uncertainty about the outcome of this week's sales of $27 billion of Treasury debt.


Real Estate; New Tower At North End Of Times Sq.
LEAD: FOR decades some sort of eye-catching advertisement, like today's neon Coca-Cola sign, has been the visual focal point of the northern end of Times Square.


Strange Old Man on Sullivan St.: New Mob Power
LEAD: Almost every afternoon, a graying, unimpressively dressed man emerges from an apartment building on Sullivan Street in Greenwich Village and gingerly crosses the street to a dingy store, where he spends several hours playing cards and whispering to confidants.


Caledonian Chief Resigns
LEAD: Sir Adam Thomson, the chairman and chief executive of British Caledonian Group P.L.C., resigned today in a move related to the airline's takeover by British Airways P.L.C., Caledonian said.
Three other members of


Rig Count Down Again
LEAD: The number of oil and gas drilling rigs working in the United States dropped again last week, Baker Hughes Inc. announced today.
The count fell by 62, to a total of 964.
A year ago, the count stood at 826.
Although the rig count usually declines during the first few months of the year, the drop last week was particularly large.


Knicks Capture 5th in Row at Home
LEAD: The first half of the Knicks' season was filled with many glaring weaknesses, among them the problems of holding a fourth-quarter lead or winning a close game, especially on the road.


Julius Joseph Jr., Advertising Executive, 79
LEAD: Julius Joseph Jr., a partner in the Franklin &amp; Joseph advertising agency in White Plains, died of heart failure Jan. 21 at the Veterans' Administration Nursing Home in the Bronx.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Cooking at Pier 92


Extend South Street Seaport Historic District
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fine Wine, Good Food, One Price
LEAD: A DECADE or so ago, one of the best small restaurant cellars in New York was kept by Louis Daniel at Le Chambertin, on West 46th Street.
Unlike the vast majority of people who owned French restaurants, Mr.
Daniel knew his wines and treated them with great care.


Nursing Candidates Take Compromised Test
LEAD: Officials in 44 states and United States territories yesterday began administering a two-day national examination leading to the licensing of registered nurses despite evidence that a copy of the test had been stolen and photocopied in California.


MAN IN THE NEWS: Anthony M. Frank; Innovator for Postal Job
LEAD: When Robert Setrakian, a governor of the United States Postal Service, needed advice on who might make a good Postmaster General, he asked one of the businessmen he trusted most:


Palmdale Journal; Where City Meets Desert Somewhat Awkwardly
LEAD: This has long been Los Angeles County's last frontier, a sparsely settled oasis of clean air, light traffic and reasonable housing prices at the edge of the Mojave Desert.


Advertising; N.W. Ayer Europe Wins Gillette Account
LEAD: N.W.
Ayer's European network of advertising agencies has won the Personal Care division of Gillette Europe.
The budget is about $25 million.


Rumors Squelched on Soviet Atom Accident
LEAD: False rumors of a nuclear accident in the Soviet Union swept across Western Europe today, touching off speculation in grain and dollars on financial markets before being squelched by Soviet and Swedish officials.


AVX CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AVX CORP (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
271,888,000
195,359,000
Net inc
15,811,000
b3,098,000
Share earns
1.20
-
b-Net loss


VICTORIA BANKSHARES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VICTORIA BANKSHARES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
2,538,000
b875,000
Per share
-
.14
Yr net loss
1,277,000
17,258,000
b-Net income


AMERICAN WATER WORKS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN WATER WORKS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
117,129,000
113,813,000
Net inc
12,011,000
12,876,000
Share earns
.39
.42
Yr rev
483,435,000
466,480,000
Net inc
56,033,000
42,168,000
Share earns
1.82
1.37
Shares outst
30,279,000
30,142,000


New York Says New System Speeds Ambulance Response
LEAD: A new 911 dispatching system for ambulances reduced response time to heart attack victims in New York City last month, city officials said yesterday.


INTERNATIONAL LEASE FIANCE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL LEASE FIANCE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
65,615,000
29,587,000
Net inc
b31,345,000
8,034,000
Share earns
.92
.25
Yr rev
179,630,000
124,041,000
Net inc
b51,237,000
32,954,000
Share earns
1.49
1.02


U.S. Asks Italy to Take F-16 Jets That Spain Has Ordered Removed
LEAD: The United States has asked Italy if it would be willing to accept 72 F-16 jet fighters that must be withdrawn from Spain, Administration officials said today.


BANTA, GEORGE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANTA, GEORGE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
72,646,000
70,622,000
Net inc
3,651,000
3,521,000
Share earns
.31
.30
Yr sales
302,384,000
287,376,000
Net inc
17,081,000
15,905,000
Share earns
1.46
1.37


Homosexuals Detect New Signs of Friendliness Amid Bias
LEAD: Amid a tide of discrimination against homosexuals caused by the AIDS epidemic, gay men in New York City are beginning to discern a countervailing attitude - a new sense of openness and understanding on the part of some heterosexuals.


Justice for All in the Baby M Case
LEAD: At a stroke, New Jersey's Supreme Court brought clarity and justice to the Baby M case, which so tormented the nation last spring:


Key Rescuer of Salant Now Seeks Acquisition
LEAD: It took Ray W. Williams two years to bring the Salant Corporation back from Chapter 11 bankruptcy, and now he wants to expand the apparel company by acquiring Manhattan Industries, another clothing company that sells under a number of well-known brand names, including Perry Ellis, John Henry and Yves Saint


AMERICAN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (MIAMI, FLA) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (MIAMI, FLA) (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b7,933,000
c5,686,000
Share earns
-
.51
b-After a credit of $2,617,000 from cumulative effect of change in accounting.
c-Net income and after a charge of $2,538,000 from change in accounting.


OKLAHOMA GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OKLAHOMA GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
224,956,823
246,279,255
Net inc
25,654,969
26,277,296
Share earns
.59
.56
Shares outst
42,326,415
46,184,918
Yr rev
1,064,520,576
1,091,871,909
Net inc
b124,611,766
126,267,930
Share earns
2.85
2.75
Shares outst
42,887,448
43,300,138


Time to Save Open Land Is Running Out
LEAD: At this rate, there may be no farmland left in New Jersey in two decades.
Litchfield County, Conn., lost nearly half of its agricultural acreage over two decades.
Scout camps in Hunterdon County, N.J., and Dutchess County, N.Y., beset by declining attendance, encroaching suburbs and even a lack of lifeguards, were coveted by developers.


Defeat of Contra Aid: The 219-211 Roll-Call Vote in the House
LEAD: Following is the 219-211 roll-call vote by which the House today rejected President Reagan's request for $43 million in aid to the contra rebels in Nicaragua.
A ''yes'' vote is to approve the President's plan; a ''no'' vote is to reject it.
Voting yes were 47 Democrats and 164 Republicans.
Voting no were 207 Democrats and 12 Republicans.


PITNEY BOWES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PITNEY BOWES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
643,391,000
563,395,000
Net inc
67,905,000
53,900,000
Share earns
.87
.68
Yr rev
2,250,537,000
1,986,686,000
Net inc
199,448,000
b167,924,000
Share earns
2.53
2.12


Arts Festival Lists Music Offerings
LEAD: The First New York International Festival of the Arts, scheduled in June and July, is announcing its offerings by discipline.
Music, listed below, was officially announced today, with the other arts to be released over the next two weeks.


The Crash and Its Best Students
LEAD: In the latest formal study of the October stock crash, the Securities and Exchange Commission paints the picture of a rapidly changing market organized around obsolete rules and expectations.
The proposed reforms could reduce the probability of another crash.
But meanwhile, a much larger and more constructive change has probably already occurred among the pension and mutual funds that now dominate the market.


Campeau Sharply Raises Bid for Federated
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation strikingly increased, by $14 a share, its bid yesterday for Federated Department Stores Inc., seeking to blunt any opposition to its proposed takeover.


ALCO STANDARD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALCO STANDARD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
920,457,000
863,505,000
Net inc
22,648,000
12,417,000
Share earns
.48
.30
The company said the results reflect adoption of FASB No. 96.


FISERV INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FISERV INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
22,421,000
19,929,000
Net inc
1,960,000
b1,132,000
Share earns
.24
.15
Yr rev
85,531,000
70,370,000
Net inc
7,174,000
c5,480,000
Share earns
.92
.85


A MYSTERIOUS HOUSE PUTS ON THE RITZ
LEAD: THE Kips Bay Boys'


THE FRAGRANT HOUSE: AN EXPANDING MARKET FOR EVERY MOOD
LEAD: What is the first thing you notice upon entering a friend's home?
Probably the way it smells: the chicken in the oven, the Little League uniform awaiting the wash or, ideally, an aromatic spray of frangipani in the foyer.


Ruling Hailed By Opponents Of Surrogacy
LEAD: Opponents of surrogate motherhood applauded the New Jersey Supreme Court's ruling in the Baby M case, saying it had confirmed their views on the dehumanizing nature of surrogacy contracts.


Precious Metals Plummet Amid Many Uncertainties
LEAD: Prices of gold, silver and platinum futures plunged yesterday as the ranks of sellers dwindled throughout the trading session.


F.B.I. Bars Racism or Harassment of Any Type
LEAD: To the Editor:


HERS
LEAD: ''I HATE buffets; I'm bulimic,'' Maxine remarks casually, as if she's admitting that purple is her favorite color.
We are standing in the buffet line at the Westwood Marquis Hotel, an unlikely choice for a confessional.


Breakup of Savings Unit In California Considered
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Bank Board is again leaning toward breaking the Financial Corporation of America into a number of pieces to solve the problems of the troubled savings and loan organization, a member of the bank board said today.


Palestinians' Choice
LEAD: Out of the turmoil in the West Bank and Gaza has come a moment of opportunity.
There is a chance, just a chance, of turning from hatred and savagery to the path of negotiation.
But that can happen only if the moment is seized by the crucial actors: Israel, the Palestinians, the United States.


AN INTERNATIONAL SET OF DESK ACCESSORIES
LEAD: WHEN he started a product-design company in Tokyo 18 months ago, Ippei Inoh chose top talents from three countries as consultants.


Big Matchup: Tyson-Spinks
LEAD: Representatives for Mike Tyson, the undisputed heavyweight champion, and Michael Spinks, the top challenger, said yesterday that they had agreed on terms for a long-awaited title bout.


Mother Held in Rape of Daughter by 2 Men
LEAD: Two men and a 33-year-old Bronx woman were arrested last night and charged with the repeated rape of her 7-year-old daughter, the police said.


Index Futures Causing Turf Battle
LEAD: Government agencies are notorious for their turf battles, and the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission today began what is bound to become an intense struggle between the S.E.C. and its sister agency, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, over the regulation of stock index futures.


College Basketball; Michigan, With Big First Half, Tops Iowa by 120-103
LEAD: Gary Grant, Glen Rice and Terry Mills led a first-half surge as Michigan scored a surprisingly easy 120-103 victory over Iowa in a Big Ten Conference game tonight.


ELECTROMAGNETIC SCIENCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTROMAGNETIC SCIENCES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
18,249,000
14,480,000
Net inc
1,832,000
1,567,000
Share earns
.26
.21
Yr sales
65,173,000
47,952,000
Net inc
6,807,000
5,479,000
Share earns
.93
.75


Kennedy Confirmed Unanimously for Supreme Court
LEAD: Judge Anthony M. Kennedy acknowledging the applause of his students in Sacramento, Calif., after being confirmed by the Senate, 97-0.
The vote was preceded by speeches by liberals and conservatives praising him for sometimes contradictory aspects of his record and views.
He joins a deeply divided court that lacks a clear majority on some of the most contentious issues facing the nation.


FAR WEST FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAR WEST FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
94,751,000
89,908,000
Net inc
1,211,000
4,929,000
Share earns
.15
.59
Yr rev
369,971,000
338,984,000
Net inc
21,828,000
29,158,000
Share earns
2.62
3.01


A U.S. Frame-Up of Nicaragua Charged
LEAD: A former senior Panamanian official said today that the White House set up a secret operation in 1986 that called for Panama to arrange an East bloc arms shipment that could be captured in El Salvador and falsely linked to Nicaragua's Government.


The Limit of Chaos Tempts A New School of Architects
LEAD: SITTING at his drafting table wearing leopard-spot shoes, jeans and a shaggy sweater, a 25-year-old student at the Southern California Institute of Architecture in Santa Monica works on a model that looks like a sprawling house of cards.
With leaning walls and inclined floors, the building seems about to collapse.


Dr. Irving Goldaber, Sociologist, 62
LEAD: Dr.
Irving Goldaber, a Miami sociologist died, apparently of a heart attack, Saturday in Monterey, Calif., where he was conducting a labor-management program.
He was 62 years old.


DST SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DST SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
34,416,000
27,264,000
Net inc
5,122,000
5,492,000
Share earns
.26
.29
6mo rev
137,462,000
96,206,000
Net inc
19,790,000
13,189,000
Share earns
1.01
.69


A Woman For All Seasons
LEAD: MARICICA PUICA'S sore left leg may be trying to tell her something: even the most versatile female runner of the decade may have her limits.


Washington Hails The Champions
LEAD: A throng of 600,000 screaming, shoving Redskins fans lined a downtown parade route today to give a hero's welcome to Washington's Super Bowl champions and their idolized quarterback, Doug Williams.


McDonnell Set For New Jets
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that it intended to begin production by July on a new family of airplanes equipped with an advanced engine that is fuel efficient and quieter.


Warren F. Savage, Professor, 65
LEAD: Warren F. Savage, professor emeritus of materials engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, died of cardiac arrest on Jan. 24 in Reston, Va.
He was 65 years old and lived in Averill Park, N.Y.


COBE LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COBE LABORATORIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
54,883,000
46,442,000
Net inc
3,204,000
2,503,000
Share earns
.49
.37
Yr sales
194,108,000
174,012,000
Net inc
10,019,000
9,484,000
Share earns
1.49
1.42


BP America Bids For Lear Petroleum
LEAD: BP America Inc., the United States subsidiary of the British Petroleum Company, has offered to acquire the Lear Petroleum Corporation in a deal that BP America has valued at $250 million.
The Dallas-based Lear said it would study the offer with a recapitalization plan presented to the company by an investor group last month.


Reagan's Point Man on Contra Issue
LEAD: As Elliott Abrams ended his testimony before the Iran-contra committees last summer, several senior members of Congress warned that it would be difficult to provide new aid for the Nicaraguan rebels as long as Mr.
Abrams stayed in office.


Prison Aides Give Inmate Murder Alibi
LEAD: A man charged by the Brooklyn District Attorney's office with murdering a stranger beneath a highway overpass one year ago tomorrow was in an upstate prison at the time of the killing, state correctional officials said yesterday.


Film: Pavarotti in China, in 'Distant Harmony'
LEAD: LUCIANO PAVAROTTI and China make a formidable match in ''Distant Harmony,'' a cheerful documentary about the tenor's tour of the country in June 1986.
The director, DeWitt Sage, had the playful notion of playing off Western grand opera against traditional Chinese music and, in the course of these 85 highly entertaining minutes, reconciling them.


INTERCHANGE FINANCIAL SERVCES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERCHANGE FINANCIAL SERVCES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
663,840
414,700
Per share
.33
.24
Yr net inc
2,412,454
1,824,732
Per share
1.34
1.06
The per share earnings have been retroactively adjusted for a 3-for-2 split distributed Jan.


Federal Inquiry Sought on Attack
LEAD: The chairman of a House judiciary subcommittee plans to ask the Justice Department to name a Federal prosecutor to investigate recent cases involving allegations of racism, including the Tawana Brawley incident in Dutchess County, according to his aides in Washington.


Columbia Names Dean Of Architecture School
LEAD: Bernard Tschumi, the architect and designer of the Parc de la Villette in Paris, has been named the seventh dean of the Columbia University Graduate School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation, Michael I. Sovern, president of the university, announced on Monday.


GREAT AMERICAN FIRST SAVNGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT AMERICAN FIRST SAVNGS BANK (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b13,071,000
27,851,000
Per share
.54
1.18
Yr net inc
b88,125,000
91,790,000
Per share
3.68
4.09
b-After an extraordinary gain of $1,640,000 from the repurchase of convertible subordinated debentures for the quarter and an extraordinary gain of $259,000 from retiring convertible subordinated debentures in the first quarter.


EASTMAN KODAK CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTMAN KODAK CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,530,000,000
3,030,000,000
Net inc
242,000,000
b74,000,000
Share earns
.75
.22
Yr sales
13,300,000,000
11,550,000,000
Net inc
1,180,000,000
b374,000,000
Share earns
3.52
1.10


Muzzleloading in Vogue Again
LEAD: DAVE PEDIGO, a field representative for the National Muzzleloading Rifle Association, will explain the fundamentals of black-powder shooting at the meeting next Wednesday of the Nassau County Fish and Game Association.


Price Tag On Rescue In Texas
LEAD: Federal regulators estimated today that between $6 billion and $7 billion would be needed initially to curb the capital shortages of battered savings associations in Texas.
But industry advisers cautioned that the full cost of restoring health to the ahaelathe state's savings institutions to health would be much higher.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Duplicate Studies
LEAD: The inspector general of the Labor Department has begun an investigation to determine whether departmental procedures were violated by the award of a $1.3 million contract for a study that virtually duplicated a study done by the department's own Bureau of Labor Statistics.


Paris Opera Ballet to Perform at Met
LEAD: The Paris Opera Ballet will return to the Metropolitan Opera House for three weeks this summer, in a season featuring the American premiere of Robert Wilson's ''Martyre de St.
Sebastien,'' the New York premieres of works by William Forsythe and Maguy Marin, and productions of ''Swan Lake'' and ''The Nutcracker'' by Rudolf Nureyev, artistic director of the company.


Advertising; Emhart Begins Ads For Its New Operation
LEAD: For some 75 years the Emhart Corporation had two operations, one producing such industrial products as machine tools, the other making such consumer goods as Tru-Temper lawn and garden tools and golf club shafts.


Senate, 97 to 0, Confirms Kennedy to High Court
LEAD: The extraordinary seven-month battle over the vacant seat on the Supreme Court ended without a dissenting vote today as the Senate confirmed Judge Anthony M. Kennedy as an Associate Justice.


Market Place; Japanese Bought During Plunge
LEAD: UNTIL the last stages of the bull market, Japanese investors were big buyers of United States equities.
And even when Wall Street prices collapsed in October, the Japanese kept nibbling at stocks in this country, in contrast to the liquidation by American traders, mutual funds and other domestic institutions.


Salk's Injectable Polio Vaccine May Be Revived
LEAD: Health officials are considering a major change in the strategy of polio vaccination, using a new, more potent version of the injectable Salk vaccine that helped eradicate polio in the United States almost 30 years ago.


REAGAN BACKS F.B.I. OVER SURVEILLANCE
LEAD: President Reagan is satisfied that the Federal Bureau of Investigation conducted a proper surveillance campaign against groups opposed to his policies in Central America, the White House said today.


Profit Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
CPC International
$77,000,000
+4.8
Inco Ltd.
75,000,000
*-
Manville Corp.
(60,000,000)
-
Olin Corp.
16,000,000
+100.0
Pitney Bowes Inc.
67,900,000
+26.0
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.
562,100,000
+3.5
Upjohn Co.


Bush Aide Accuses Dole Of Being 'Mean Spirited'
LEAD: In a scathing attack on Senator Bob Dole, Vice President Bush's Iowa campaign manager today accused the Kansan of ''mean spiritedness'' and ''cronyism.''


Polk City Journal; Drive on a Frozen Lake: Trip Can End at Bottom
LEAD: Traffic was light today on Big Creek Lake.
For the most part, the cars that usually cruise its frozen surface on brisk winter days stayed on land instead, their drivers cautious after a brief thaw.


Critic's Notebook; A Flawed 'Tristan' That Improves With Distance
LEAD: I LIKE the ''Tristan und Isolde'' of the Los Angeles Music Center Opera a lot better now than when I saw it in December.
I have forgotten most of the things I thought were wrong, but the vestiges of what was right survive in my head, serving as reminders of the ''idea'' that Wagner's opera really is.


Advertising; Soviet Ad Conference
LEAD: Barry Day, vice chairman and director of professional services at McCann-Erickson Worldwide, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, will be telling 400 Soviet manufacturers today the basics about Western advertising at the first advertising conference in Moscow.
Mr.
Day is expected to show and discuss television spots for L'Oreal, Coca-Cola and Sony and warnings about drug abuse.


Sports People; Bigger Than Life
LEAD: The worst nightmare for National Basketball Association defenders - a 7-foot, 275-pound Larry Bird - came to Boston Garden last night, but only for a public unveiling at halftime of the Celtics-Indiana Pacer game.
The detailed sculpture of the Boston superstar, hand carved in more than 2,000 hours from a single 1,800-pound block of laminated basswood, was the work of Armand LaMontagne, a Rhode Island sculptor.The study of Bird, crouched as if prepared to release a jump shot, was privately un-veiled on Tuesday night at a $1,500-a-couple benefit dinner for the New England Sports Museum.


ACUSON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACUSON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
32,228,000
20,307,000
Net inc
5,579,000
3,213,000
Share earns
.24
.14
Shares outst
23,246,000
22,918,000
Yr sales
105,566,000
64,063,000
Net inc
16,790,000
b11,239,000
Share earns
.73
.54
Shares outst
23,076,000
20,756,000


City Ballet: 'Raymonda'
LEAD: GEORGE BALANCHINE gave the New York City Ballet a chance not just to shine but to glitter and explode when he choreographed ''Raymonda Variations.'' And the company rose to and beyond the occasion in a memorable performance of the ballet on Tuesday at the New York State Theater.


CAPTAIN CRAB INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPTAIN CRAB INC
Qtr to Nov 29
1987
1986
Revenue
3,105,447
3,024,501
Net loss
78,826
b144,963
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income  The company said the year-ago first quarter includes a $360,000 of franchise and other fee income.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allied-Signal Inc., Morristown, N.J., said the Federal Aviation Administration had certified its aircraft collision avoidance system for use by United Airlines.


U.S. to Compensate Defector
LEAD: Administration officials said tonight that the Nicaraguan military official who defected last fall, Roger Miranda Bengoechea, would get an unusually large payment from the United States Government.


BRADLEY REAL ESTATE TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRADLEY REAL ESTATE TRUST (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,168,437
468,389
Share earns
1.24
.14
b-Includes a gain of $3,728,161 from the sale of a building.


GOLDEN POULTRY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOLDEN POULTRY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
32,877,000
30,058,000
Net loss
106,000
b2,801,000
Share earns
-
.36
6mo sales
65,973,000
62,364,000
Net loss
249,000
b6,520,000
Share earns
-
.91


Lawmakers Met Israel Envoy on Shooting of Arabs
LEAD: A dozen members of the House of Representatives met privately last week with the Israeli Ambassador to the United States to express their concern over the beatings and shootings by Israeli soldiers of Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: John Mackovic, who formerly coached the Kansas City Chiefs, was named football coach at Illinois.
The other finalist for the job, Howard Tippett, the defensive coordinator, resigned yesterday.
Mackovic, 44, replaced Mike White, who resigned on Jan. 18. . . .
Greg Kite, the center who was placed on waivers by the Boston Celtics earlier this week, has been acquired by the Los Angeles Clippers.


FEDERAL SCREW WORKS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL SCREW WORKS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,335,000
13,204,000
Net loss
101,000
284,000
6mo sales
28,094,000
26,096,000
Net loss
498,000
391,000


A LOSS FOR REAGAN
LEAD: The House of Representatives, narrowly rejecting President Reagan's Central American policies, voted down his aid package for the Nicaraguan rebels tonight.


An Unexpected Record
LEAD: One day after setting the Staten Island record for most points in a high school basketball game with 75, Kenny White of Monsignor Farrell was late for dinner.
The reason?
The 5-foot-11-inch point guard remained after practice yesterday to work on his outside shot.


Spending Lag Stirring Few Worries
LEAD: American consumers have been keeping a tighter grip on their wallets, but a close analysis of recent data and interviews with business people and consumers suggest there is little prospect that spending will fall far enough or long enough to end the nation's economic expansion, now in its sixth year.


Yonkers Is Given Simulcasts Stay
LEAD: The State Racing and Wagering Board ordered Yonkers Raceway yesterday to end its simulcasts of Aqueduct racing beginning Saturday, but the Yonkers track won a stay of the ruling pending a hearing Feb. 11.


ELCOTEL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELCOTEL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,232,000
2,971,000
Net inc
834,000
584,000
Share earns
.15
.13
Shares outst
5,598,000
4,471,000
9mo sales
17,893,000
7,450,000
Net inc
2,758,000
1,592,000
Share earns
.49
.40
Shares outst
5,673,000
3,970,000


Infighting Is on Rise At Troubled Firms After Stock Plunge
LEAD: Mall Street is working out a new pecking order, honoring its new heroes - whoever is making the most money at the moment - and casting aside yesterday's.
The process is neither tidy nor pretty.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: New York City, taking advantage of the recent decline in interest rates, offered $450 million of tax-exempt bonds yesterday through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 4, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


WHEN INSPIRATION STRIKES TWICE
LEAD:  A. Arc International's Aero chair by Patrick Naggar, introduced in 1985.
B.
Arconas Corporation's Arco chair by Paul Tuttle, produced in Switzerland in 1974, introduced in the United States in 1987.


BANKNORTH GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKNORTH GROUP INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,400,000
2,100,000
Per share
1.11
.95
Yr net inc
7,300,000
6,900,000
Per share
3.36
3.20


Legislators Are Hesitant on Regulating Surrogacy
LEAD: Despite a flurry of bills on surrogate parenting around the country last year, the practice and its legal, ethical and social implications remain in a legislative limbo.


FLEXSTEEL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLEXSTEEL INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
42,117,349
40,360,197
Net inc
2,314,472
1,336,525
Share earns
.32
.19
6mo sales
81,422,087
75,416,829
Net inc
4,242,927
2,761,425
Share earns
.59
.38


REFRIGERATOR AS MESSAGE CENTER
LEAD: A RECENT product called Play it Cool, right, may be just the thing to end the silent and sometimes cryptic messages that festoon the fronts of most refrigerators.


ABINGTON BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABINGTON BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
285,000
510,000
Per share
.12
.22
Yr net inc
1,864,000
1,907,000
Per share
.81
-
The year-ago quarter and year included a dividend of $223,000 from Mutual Savings Central Fund of Massachusetts.


Rev. Harold Mulqueen Dies at 93; A Longtime Professor at Fordham
LEAD: The Rev.
Harold Mulqueen, S.J., whose 80-year association with Fordham University gained him the name ''Father Fordham,'' died of burns Sunday at Bronx Municipal Hospital.
University officials said the burns were sustained in a fire apparently started by his pipe.
He was 93 years old and lived in the Bronx.


Dollar Is Mostly Higher, Lifted by Gold's Decline
LEAD: The dollar rose against most foreign currencies yesterday, buoyed as gold prices plunged to their lowest levels in recent months.


Tunisia Did Not Shoot Palestinian Supporters
LEAD: To the Editor:


Searching For the Best In Day Care
LEAD: A WELL-DESIGNED day-care program can foster your child's emotional and physical development in ways that you may not be able to at home.
Studies have shown that children in group day care may be more self-confident and relate better to both children and adults than children who stay at home.
A poor program, however, can be little more than a preschool parking lot.


U.S. Says Soviet Offered to Cut Aid to Nicaragua
LEAD: The White House said today that the Soviet Union in recent weeks had offered to cut off most military aid to the Nicaraguan Government if the United States ended its aid to the contras and all military assistance to the nations of Central America.


PEOPLES ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
275,423,000
331,245,000
Net inc
19,499,000
18,815,000
Share earns
.60
.58


BRITISH ARTS FESTIVAL IN LOS ANGELES
LEAD: A three-month festival of British arts is to begin here Thursday with the city's first major retrospective of art by David Hockney; it will end April 30, after five performances by the Academy of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields.
Squeezed in between will be more than 50 musical, theatrical and visual-arts events.


The Editorial Notebook; At Home With Lyme Disease
LEAD: A month ago, Lyme disease forced my wife, Elizabeth, back into the hospital.
But this time she was allowed to leave quickly and self-administer the major part of her treatment in the comfort of home.
There's a lesson in her experience that applies to far more than Lyme disease.
Such home care saves money, buoys morale and upgrades the health care delivery system.


2.5% Rise In Factory Orders
LEAD: Factory orders, propelled by heavy demand for aircraft, surged 2.5 percent in December, closing out the best year for American manufacturers since 1984, the Government said today.


AIRGAS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIRGAS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
31,695,000
27,079,000
Net inc
1,188,000
428,000
Share earns
.20
.11
Shares outst
8,535,000
4,627,000
9mo sales
94,857,000
77,009,000
Net inc
b3,173,000
1,654,000
Share earns
.62
.41
Shares outst
5,480,000
4,555,000


Ex-Cleric Is Sued by In-Laws
LEAD: The family of Margaret Railey, a Dallas woman who has been in a coma since last April when she was nearly strangled in her garage, has filed a civil suit against her husband, seeking damages for medical bills and mental anguish.


Ingersoll-Rand Chief Gives Up Presidency
LEAD: The Ingersoll-Rand Company elected Theodore H. Black president and chief operating officer yesterday, putting him in line as a potential successor to Thomas A. Holmes, chairman and chief executive.


WEIS MARKETS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEIS MARKETS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
290,928,000
284,137,000
Net inc
20,994,000
17,925,000
Share earns
.46
.39
Yr sales
1,128,325,000
1,101,473,000
Net inc
75,982,000
65,261,000
Share earns
1.66
1.42


OLIN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OLIN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
503,000,000
416,000,000
Net inc
16,000,000
8,000,000
Share earns
.74
.40
Yr sales
1,930,000,000
1,730,000,000
Net inc
78,000,000
75,000,000
Share earns
3.38
3.36


The Decorated Pillow Suits Victoriana Perfectly
LEAD: ANYONE with a taste for Victoriana or for the overstuffed English style cannot overlook the importance of the fancifully trimmed and beaded pillow as a decorative accessory.
While pillows made from remnants of antique needlepoint or an Aubusson rug and trimmed in velvet and gold braid been available in antiques shops, they are getting harder to find.


AMWEST INSURANCE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMWEST INSURANCE GROUP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b698,000
c654,000
Share earns
.34
.32
Yr net inc
b2,815,000
c2,111,000
Share earns
1.40
1.05
b-Includes an investment loss of $11,000 for the quarter and the year includes realized investment gains of $58,000.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Turf Battle on Markets


INDIANA ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDIANA ENERGY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
94,221,000
106,524,000
Net inc
10,025,000
8,550,000
Share earns
1.80
1.52
Yr rev
291,061,000
381,741,000
Net inc
15,885,000
20,446,000
Share earns
2.87
3.55


Australia Is Investigating 200 for Nazi Crimes
LEAD: More than 200 immigrants to Australia are under ''active investigation'' as possible Nazi war criminals and could face trial here, a special prosecutor said today.


BELL, W &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELL, W &amp; CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
48,906,000
53,305,000
Net inc
b3,808,000
c1,577,000
Share earns
1.25
-
6mo sales
69,067,000
76,676,000
Net inc
b3,381,000
c2,158,000
Share earns
1.11
-


Jams and All, Commuters Like Their Cars
LEAD: Despite the jams and the jolts, a car culture flourishes in New York City, a survey of motorists commissioned by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority shows.


INCO LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INCO LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
571,000,000
384,000,000
Net inc
75,000,000
b6,500,000
Share earns
.70
-
Yr sales
1,789,000,000
1,452,000,000
Net inc
125,200,000
200,000
Share earns
1.09
-


Contras Kill 8 in an Attack on Farm Cooperative
LEAD: They are temporarily out of coffins in Boaco, the provincial capital, something that is happening more and more often these days.
As a result, the bodies of Benito Calero, his wife and two children were being prepared today for burial at a nearby military base.


AVEMCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AVEMCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,468,000
c3,355,000
Share earns
.59
.36
Yr net inc
b19,661,000
c12,165,000
Share earns
2.06
1.32
b-Includes capital gains of $72,000 and $1,220,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


ACTIVISION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACTIVISION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
12,113,000
9,560,000
Net inc
b762,000
c3,930,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo sales
32,156,000
21,972,000
Net inc
b2,747,000
c6,720,000
Share earns
.08
-


BUFFTON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUFFTON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
20,835,648
16,054,795
Net inc
923,780
357,542
Share earns
.25
.11


FOOTHILL GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOOTHILL GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,069,000
c910,000
Share earns
.23
.11
Yr net inc
b7,772,000
c3,239,000
Share earns
.85
.41
b-After total gains of $363,000 for the quarter and $602,000 for the year from tax credits and the feasance of convertible subordinated debentures.


Palestinian Demonstrations Continue
LEAD: Twenty or more Palestinian boys and young men - rocks and chunks of concrete in their hands, checkered kaffiyehs wrapped around their faces - clustered excitedly by their barricade of burning tires at the turnoff to this isolated village among the stony hills, waiting for cars with yellow Israeli license plates.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A brief article from The Associated Press in some editions last Friday about the indictment of 15 people in a scheme to hide drug profits, included a name erroneously in the list of those indicted.
Former Representative Robert Hanrahan of Illinois was investigated by the Internal Revenue Service but was not arrested or indicted, as prosecutors originally reported.


Sports People; Camacho Arrested
LEAD: Hector (Macho) Camacho, the former lightweight champion, was arrested Tuesday in Florida on cocaine and assault charges.
The police reports alleged that Camacho pulled a gun on a person who made an obscene gesture at Camacho's companion.
He was later released on bail.
Camacho, 25, unbeaten in 31 bouts, has not fought since retaining his World Boxing Council lightweight title with a 12-round decision over Cornelius Boza-Edwards at Miami Beach, Fla., on Sept.


Study Backs Theory That AIDS Festered in Africa
LEAD: A new study has found that a low incidence of AIDS infection in a remote African village is unchanged after a decade, suggesting that urbanization and war have played major roles in the continent's recent AIDS explosion.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  A SINKING ISLAND. The Modern English Writers. By Hugh Kenner. 290 pages.


BUTLER MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUTLER MANUFACTURING CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
168,312,000
158,284,000
Net loss
b3,768,000
b4,545,000
Yr sales
614,974,000
576,849,000
Net inc
3,723,000
3,625,000
Share earns
.77
.71
b-After charges for restructuring of $6.8 million and $6.4 million for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: Bank of America, San Francisco, named Robert Capwell a senior vice president.
It also named Larry D. Hartwig, a senior vice president, to oversee its Houston-based Southwest operations.


Gandhi's Wife Pulled Into India Political Fray
LEAD: Returning from a recent holiday in the sun, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi faced new criticism for vacationing at a time of hardship in India.
Even worse, it was described as a vacation with foreigners, including family and friends of his Italian-born wife, Sonia.


Wall Street Executives Call Program-Trade Curb Weak
LEAD: New York Stock Exchange restrictions on program trading do not go far enough, a number of chief executives of major Wall Street firms said yesterday at a special meeting at the exchange.
The meeting of 25 chief executives was held to hear their views on the controversial trading strategy that has been cited as a factor behind increased volatility of stock prices.


New Jackson Finding Dividends in Iowa
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson argues that he is already a winner in Iowa.
And on a frigid Tuesday night, as he entered a union hall to warm applause, the distance he had traveled since his 1984 campaign was clear.


Staff Misled Him Over Threat, Arizonan Tells Impeachment Panel
LEAD: Gov.
Evan Mecham testified today that he had been ill-informed and ill-advised by his staff, and he accused state police officers of lying in testimony about his actions.


Dance: Karen Bernard
LEAD: WHEREAS many choreographers seek to connect movements, Karen Bernard and Tina Dudek emphasized deliberately disjointed movements on Monday night at the Dia Art Foundation.


Advertising; Lord, Geller Shifts
LEAD: Lord, Geller, Federico, Einstein has reorganized its executive ranks.
Edward D. Yaconetti, 49 years old, becomes vice chairman, from executive vice president; C. Ray Freeman, 45, is now executive vice president, general manager, from executive vice president, managing director, and Kevin B. O'Neill, 34, becomes executive vice president, creative director, from senior vice president, creative director.


As Isabel Allende Sees Herself
LEAD: Like most other serious novelists, Isabel Allende of Chile would prefer not to be fingerprinted and imprisoned in a confining category - not as a female writer or as a political writer or even as a Latin American writer.
Just plain novelist, she said the other day, will do.


LINDBERG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINDBERG CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
18,454,947
17,028,430
Net inc
559,112
247,830
Share earns
.12
.06
Yr sales
74,632,354
74,166,226
Net loss
1,080,104
b2,553,530
Share earns
-
.51
b


Grand Jury Questions Regan
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, the former White House chief of staff, and Assistant Attorney General William Bradford Reynolds were questioned today by the Federal grand jury investigating the Iran-contra affair.


Dow Falls 28.35 After Early Gains
LEAD: Stock prices slumped yesterday, and the Dow Jones industrial average, which was up in the early going, fell 28.35 points, or 1.5 percent, to close at 1,924.57.


THEARAPISTS SEE NEED FOR 'SECURITY BLANKET' THROUGHOUT LIFE
LEAD: People who talk to themselves or who have imaginary companions are not necessarily mentally unhinged.
To the contrary, experts say these tactics are two of innumerable helpful and healthy ways to find solace amid life's pains.


Charges Dropped in Quarrel
LEAD: Prosecutors today dropped charges of battery and disorderly conduct against Gary Dotson, whose rape sentence was commuted in 1985 after the woman who accused him of raping her recanted.
Mr.
Dotson was accused of stabbing a cook in a barroom quarrel Dec. 26.
Officials said they were dropping the case because the cook did not want to pursue it.


Questions Persist in Dutchess Assault
LEAD: Glenda Brawley says it was the night she found her 15-year-old daughter, Tawana, in a busy hospital ward in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., slipping in and out of consciousness, that she first became suspicious of how her daughter's case was being handled by authorities.


Opera: 'Miller' Changes
LEAD: OF the six principal singers in Verdi's ''Luisa Miller''


GREAT BAY BANKSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT BAY BANKSHARES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
660,000
626,000
6mo net inc
1,313,000
1,485,000
The per share earnings were not available; the company converted to public form of ownership on Dec. 30, 1987.


EASTERN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTERN CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
15,529,373
13,273,074
Net inc
b895,239
c349,741
Share earns
.92
.36
Yr sales
63,011,966
52,616,796
Net inc
b2,890,970
c1,823,101
Share earns
2.93
1.77


Son Helps Miller Fight 'Yips'
LEAD: Putting has haunted Johnny Miller throughout most of his golf career.


The Hypermarket: 5 Acres of Store
LEAD: A giant supermarket and discount store rolled into one, and spread across five acres of this Dallas suburb, offers a vision of how millions of Americans may shop in the next decade.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Attack on Pipeline
LEAD: Whether or not Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d played an improper role in seeking support for a proposed billion-dollar Iraqi pipeline, environmentalists here and in Israel say the project was a terrible idea.


Allegheny Needs $75 Million to Run
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc., the consumer-products company hit by financial losses and a scandal over benefits paid to former executives, said it needed another $75 million to operate through April.
The company said the $75 million reflected the amount it would fall short after calculating the revenues expected to be generated during this period.


Washington Talk: Congress; Debate on Rebel Aid Has Ring of Campaign Trail
LEAD: In a narrow carpeted room tucked beneath one of the Capitol's curving stairways, Richard A. Gephardt, the Democratic Presidential hopeful, spent this morning as he has most others for the past 18 months - campaigning.


O'Neill Offers Budget That Taps 'Rainy Day' Fund
LEAD: Stressing the need to maintain commitments to existing programs, Gov.
William A. O'Neill proposed a $6.3 billion budget today that neither cuts nor raises taxes, but for the first time dips into Connecticut's five-year-old ''rainy day'' reserve fund.


Summer Camps In Winter
LEAD: This summer, Dr.
Robert A. Kramer, a dentist in Clifton, N.J., will take 12 children on a tour of the United States.
His tour, Discovery U.S.A., is one of the most exotic of almost 50 summer camps that will participate in the National Children's Camp Show Sunday at the Walden School in Manhattan.


HOME &amp; CITY SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME &amp; CITY SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
175,000
1,900,000
Per share
.06
.67
Yr net inc
5,100,000
b8,200,000
Per share
1.79
2.87
b-After a tax benefit of $6.2 million.
The company said writedowns of real estate of $938,000 and a provision for loan losses of $850,000 in the latest fourth quarter, depressed earnings for the period.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


British Airways
LEAD: British Airways P.L.C. said it had signed a $2 billion order for eleven 767 jets from the Boeing Company with an option to buy 15 more.
The first aircraft will be delivered in November 1989, the company said.
The order was first announced last August.
British Airways said that it had signed contracts totaling $400 million with the British engine maker Rolls-Royce P.L.C to supply RB211-524H engines for the aircraft.


Robert Duncan, Poet and Author Of Works on the Creative Process
LEAD: Robert Duncan, a poet and author of a work on the Imagist poet H. D. (Hilda Doolittle), died yesterday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 69 years old.


COMMERCIAL FEDERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCIAL FEDERAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,034,000
b5,154,000
Share earns
.60
.83
6mo net inc
8,789,000
b9,609,000
Share earns
1.01
1.55
b-After extraordinary charges of $501,000 for the quarter and $858,000 for the 6 months.


Mae Gurevich, Active In Politics, Dead at 78
LEAD: Mae Gurevich, vice chairman of the New York State Democratic Party for many years and more recently an aide to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, died of cancer Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 78 years old.


DREYER'S GRAND ICE CREAM reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DREYER'S GRAND ICE CREAM (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
38,257,000
31,421,000
Net loss
399,000
904,000
Yr sales
162,874,000
133,960,000
Net inc
2,774,000
5,914,000
Share earns
.44
.80
Shares outst
6,300,000
7,348,000


U.S. Names Alpine Ski Team
LEAD: Tamara McKinney, a three-time Olympian, and Debbie Armstrong, who won a gold medal in 1984, headed the list of 18 skiers named today to the United States Alpine team for the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary, Alberta.


Sports People; Baseball Contracts
LEAD: Tim Laudner of the Minnesota Twins, Jim Winn of the Chicago White Sox and Jim Pankovits of the Houston Astros agreed to one-year contracts yesterday, reducing the number of players in salary arbitration to 55.
Laudner, a free-agent catcher, agreed to a salary of $295,000, plus an additional $12,500 if he plays 95 games or more.


CITY GAS CO OF FLORIDA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITY GAS CO OF FLORIDA (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,014,212
8,433,635
Net inc
578,596
674,110
Share earns
.21
.25
9mo rev
28,223,617
24,325,758
Net inc
1,652,435
1,973,894
Share earns
.60
.72


Chinese Are Said to Restore Shaky Calm in Tibet
LEAD: The Chinese authorities, using a mixture of jailings, political indoctrination and conciliation, have established a shaky peace over Tibet since the violent anti-Chinese protests four months ago, according to diplomats here.


GRAND UNION CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAND UNION CO
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
667,528,000
646,253,000
Net inc
9,772,000
5,053,000
40wk sales
2,206,385,000
2,114,800,000
Net inc
37,687,000
26,888,000


MAPCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAPCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
476,306,000
386,690,000
Net inc
b63,291,000
14,711,000
Share earns
3.12
.69
Yr rev
1,636,506,000
1,569,909,000
Net inc
b108,391,000
c74,149,000
Share earns
5.20
3.48


BOSTON ACOUSTICS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOSTON ACOUSTICS
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
5,409,664
4,471,305
Net inc
701,567
506,163
Share earns
.35
.29
Shares outst
1,993,520
1,728,352
9mo sales
12,753,308
10,603,265
Net inc
1,391,865
1,093,141
Share earns
.70
.65
Shares outst
1,993,407
1,694,346


Meese's Office Classified Memo
LEAD: The Justice Department classified as secret a memorandum that has put Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d at the center of an inquiry into an Iraqi oil pipeline project, preventing him from releasing it, his lawyer said today.


FLORIDA ROCK INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA ROCK INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
80,681,000
64,775,000
Net inc
6,038,000
4,217,000
Share earns
.66
.45


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on the Consumer's World page last Saturday about devices that clean air and mute noise identified an air-quality expert incompletely.
It was Ron White, air conservation manager for the American Lung Association, who said, ''Small desktop-size air filters are probably worthless.


Marcus Firm Tied to Case
LEAD: Marcus Schloss &amp; Company, a New York brokerage firm, was tied to the ''Yuppie Five'' case today when the Government accused it of trading on the basis of nonpublic information.


Congress Rescinds Measure To Build Schools in France
LEAD: Acting at the request of its author, Congress has killed an $8 million appropriation to build schools in France for North African Jews.


Stage: At the Hellinger, Rodney Dangerfield
LEAD: AT age 66, Rodney Dangerfield is the youngest older comedian - or might he be the oldest younger comedian? - on the block.
Whichever, Mr.
Dangerfield, who opened a two-week engagement at the Mark Hellinger Theater on Tuesday, is the rare comic whose popularity transcends generations.


LOMAS MORTGAGE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOMAS MORTGAGE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
5,506,000
3,507,000
Share earns
.63
.58
Yr net inc
19,902,000
12,874,000
Share earns
2.54
2.14


PMS Drugs Questioned
LEAD: A small study of hormones and moods in women shows no relationship between any of a variety of hormones and premenstrual syndrome.
The finding calls into question certain drugs that have been used to treat the problem.


U.S. and Germany Called Pleased With Dollar's Level
LEAD: The United States and West Germany, whose disputes over economic policies last fall contributed to the decline of the dollar's value, are content with one another's policies now and with current levels of the dollar and interest rates, an Administration official said today.


THOUSANDS ASSAIL OFFSHORE OIL PLAN
LEAD: A Federal hearing on Government plans to allow offshore oil drilling brought ordinary life in this lumber and fishing town of more than 5,700 people virtually to a halt today.


Sports People; Packers Name Infante
LEAD: Lindy Infante, the offensive coordinator who helped the Cleveland Browns to two consecutive appearances in the American Conference championship game, took over yesterday as coach of the Green Bay Packers.
Infante, 47, signed a five-year contract.
Tom Braatz, the Packers' executive vice president of football operations, said Infante's expertise made him attractive.


Argentina Reported Upset by Vaccine Test
LEAD: The Argentina Government will send a formal protest note to the Pan American Health Organization over vaccine experiments on Argentine cows involving a genetically altered virus that it says accidentally infected humans, sources in the Foreign Ministry said Tuesday.


Stock Specialists Viewed as Jittery
LEAD: October's stock market collapse may have given some stock exchange specialists a lasting case of the jitters, with many of them backing away from buying or selling stocks when they are most needed, the staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission reported in its market study released Tuesday.


Effort to Salvage Sunken Barge Goes On
LEAD: Divers taking a break yesterday from salvage work on a barge that sank Sunday in Rosario Strait near Anacortes, Wash.
The barge still contains 350,000 gallons of heavy oil. (AP)


Music: By Schubert In His Teens
LEAD: NO trip can be called an odyssey unless it inspires serious contemplation.
With the 92d Street Y's odyssey-like Schubertiade, which intends to present the composer's complete work over the course of 10 years, listeners are invited to piece together the strands of a composer's evolution and, by extension, to reflect on the creative process itself.


Advertising; Glenmore Consolidates At Grybauskas Agency
LEAD: Glenmore Distilleries has consolidated its advertising business at Grybauskas &amp; Partners Marketing, a Greenwich Village shop that has been serving the Louisville, Ky., spirits company since 1979.


CMS ENHANCEMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CMS ENHANCEMENTS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
40,050,000
25,282,000
Net inc
501,000
456,000
Share earns
.07
.07
Shares outst
7,413,000
7,009,000
6mo sales
73,587,000
40,324,000
Net inc
814,000
817,000
Share earns
.11
.12
Shares outst
7,476,000
7,044,000


GULF STATES UTILITIES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GULF STATES UTILITIES CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
336,250,000
338,454,000
Net inc
48,207,000
24,135,000
Share earns
.30
.08
Yr rev
1,432,586,000
1,478,388,000
Net inc
b241,101,000
244,981,000
Share earns
1.65
1.71


Hughes Aircraft To Buy Satellites
LEAD: The Hughes Aircraft Company said it had agreed to buy the satellite system of the Western Union Corporation.
Terms were not disclosed.
Hughes, the Los Angeles-based subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, said that it would operate the three orbiting satellites in Western Union's Westar VI-S system and that it intended to replace one with a newer model.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Jane Talcott has been promoted to senior vice president, creative director at DDB Needham, New York, a subsidiary of Omnicom Group.


Senseless And Sudden, Death Comes On West Side
LEAD: There were 15 serious crimes in New York City on Jan. 24, according to the log at Police Headquarters.
Five were homicides.
But the case of Daniel Klagsbrun, a victim of one of those crimes two days past his 24th birthday, was not listed as a murder until two days later, when his grieving parents agreed to disconnect him from a respirator at St.


LANE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANE FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,767,000
3,035,000
Per share
.41
.34
Shares outst
7,264,000
6,463,000
Yr net inc
15,185,000
13,014,000
Per share
1.65
1.64
Shares outst
7,252,000
6,285,000


U.S.-Soviet Accord On Design Front
LEAD: IN an effort to improve Soviet product design as part of the Government's proposed economic reforms, the president of the Society of Soviet Designers signed an accord of mutual cooperation last week with the president of the Industrial Designers Society of America.


Youths' Cultural Baedeker to New York
LEAD: Like many city parents, Nancy Goldstein, a receptionist at Grace Church School in Manhattan, finds that keeping her two elementary school-age daughters entertained means constant rounds of tennis lessons, bowling alleys and movie matinees and an ever-growing pile of museum brochures, workshop information and performance schedules.


Bankers Held in Case Tied to Restaurant Slaying
LEAD: The president of a bank, its former president and two New York State tax agents have been arrested as part of a Federal investigation into the tangled financial affairs of Irwin Schiff, an enigmatic millionaire businessman who was slain in a Manhattan restaurant.


FIRST WYOMING BANCORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST WYOMING BANCORPORATION (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
708,000
b754,000
Per share
.15
-
Yr net loss
7,300,000
c1,700,000
Per share
-
.37
b-Net loss  c-Net income


Music: St. Thomas Choir
LEAD: BAD weather can throw an instrument out of tune, and perhaps a choir as well.


Talking Deals; Questions Raised On E-II's Strategy
LEAD: WHEN Donald P. Kelly, the crafty, 65-year-old chairman of E-II Holdings Inc., acquired a large stake in American Brands Inc. late last year, it set the stage for a takeover that has left questions about whether he was preparing to set up American Brands to take a problem off his hands.
The deal also raises questions about some managements' desire to stay independent - often at shareholders' expense.


The Basic Speech: George Bush; A Call for a New Emphasis on Education, Its Leaders and Its 'Four R's'
LEAD: Candidates seeking the Presidential nomination make dozens of speeches in their campaigns.
Some address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
But more often the candidate uses a ''basic speech.'' It summarizes, with little variation from one occasion to the next, how the candidate wants to present himself to the voters.


Thieves Stab Boy and Get $1,000
LEAD: A 14-year-old boy who was carrying $1,000 in cash and a quantity of crack was stabbed and seriously wounded yesterday by three robbers in a midtown Manhattan welfare hotel, the police and hotel residents said.


Bridge: Play From National Event Showed Exception to a Rule
LEAD: When both sides have a fit in two suits, aggressive bidding is usually indicated and forthcoming.
But exceptions arise when much of the high-card strength is located defensively, in the opponents' suits.


Francis J. Sorg, Printing Executive, 88
LEAD: Francis J. Sorg, former chairman of the Sorg Printing Company, died Saturday at the Imperial Point Medical Center in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 88 years old and lived in Fort Lauderdale.


CPC INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CPC INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,061,274,000
1,201,837,000
Net inc
77,022,000
73,480,000
Share earns
.96
.80
Shares outst
80,231,000
91,393,000
Yr sales
4,903,035,000
4,548,789,000
Net inc
b354,809,000
219,182,000
Share earns
4.34
2.30


COMFED SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMFED SAVINGS BANK (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,452,000
7,177,000
Per share
.17
.84
9mo net loss
2,444,000
b17,587,000
Per share
-
2.07
b-Net income  The latest quarter included a pre- tax gain of $1.8 million from the sale of servicing rights on loans serviced for other investors.


Western Co. In Chapter 11
LEAD: The Western Company of North America, weakened by the oil industry's slump, has filed for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


UPJOHN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UPJOHN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
651,565,000
591,996,000
Net inc
70,986,000
64,329,000
Share earns
.38
.34
Yr rev
2,529,579,000
2,291,448,000
Net inc
305,039,000
252,646,000
Share earns
1.63
1.35


Ronald Bladen, 69, Sculptor Famed for Stark, Poetic Images
LEAD: Ronald Bladen, a sculptor born in Canada and known for his austere poetic imagery in steel, wood and aluminum, died of cancer yesterday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.


A Correction
LEAD: A letter Tuesday from Rhoda S. Jacobs, member of the New York State Assembly, gave an incorrect deadline for registration to vote in the New York State primary.
The correct date is Feb. 19.


Arkansas Savings Unit Finds Few Preferred Stock Buyers
LEAD: The largest savings and loan organization in Arkansas stumbled on Wall Street yesterday when Prudential-Bache Securities could not arrange enough buyers at the Arkansas issuer's latest auction of preferred stock.


RELIGIOUS BROADCASTERS ADOPT STIFFER ETHICS CODE
LEAD: Religious broadcasters voted today to strengthen a financial and fund-raising code of ethics that they hope will restore credibility to an industry shaken by the scandal involving the PTL television ministry.


New Products Set By Sun and Sony
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. has introduced a new work station, the Sun-4/110, which it said would offer users many times the power currently available from competing machines in such applications as artificial intelligence and computer-aided software engineering.
The new machine is the latest to use Sun's high-speed chip, or


Corrections
LEAD: A headline in some copies on Tuesday on an article about the Finnish election misstated the method of choosing a president.
The choice will be made by an electoral college; there will be no runoff.


TV Review; 'THE GOLDEN YEARS'
LEAD: AMONG the dividends in some basic cable hookups in the New York area is access to CUNY, the cable-television station of the City University of New York.
CUNY is carried on cable channel A/ 14 in Manhattan and on 33 in Brooklyn and on Staten Island.
The station has been especially adventurous in acquiring programs from abroad.


Futures Board Accuses Kidder on Index Trades
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission has filed a five-count complaint against Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company and a vice president at the firm, as well as a Chicago futures trading firm and two of its traders.


Separating Joseph Legends From History
LEAD: To the Editor:


Michigan Law on South Africa Investments Upset
LEAD: The Michigan Court of Appeals has declared unconstitutional a state law forcing public colleges to get rid of investments in companies operating in South Africa.


A Secret Emperor of Oil and Shipping
LEAD: In his 30 years in this lakeside city, Bruce Rappaport, the Swiss business executive who was involved in the Iraqi pipeline project, has developed a reputation for both openness and secrecy.


Note and Bond Prices in Retreat
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices fell modestly yesterday as securities dealers absorbed $9 billion of new 10-year notes and prepared to bid today for $8.75 billion of new 30-year bonds.


Meager Arms Progress by Britain and France
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand and Prime Minister Jacques Chirac returned from a summit gathering in London last week disappointed by the meager progress achieved in intensifying military cooperation between Western Europe's two nuclear powers, according to officials and diplomats.


RAYCHEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAYCHEM CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
278,066,000
230,133,000
Net inc
26,876,000
b15,812,000
Share earns
.80
.48
6mo sales
504,119,000
432,201,000
Net inc
43,481,000
27,309,000
Share earns
1.29
.84


BOOLE &amp; BABBAGE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOOLE &amp; BABBAGE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,307,000
9,259,000
Net inc
b3,942,000
410,000
Share earns
1.20
.13
b-Includes a gain of $3,256,000, or 99 cents a share, from the sale of a product family.


Mild-Mannered Buyers Tame Wild Tabloids!
LEAD: Now the shocking inside story can be told!


Former Officials Propose Changes in Missile Pact
LEAD: Richard N. Perle, a former defense official in the Reagan Administration, said today that the treaty banning land-based medium- and shorter-range missiles contained ''deficiencies'' that the Senate should correct.


Tyson-Spinks Accord Reached
LEAD: The heavyweight showdown between Mike Tyson, the undisputed champion, and Michael Spinks appears close to becoming a reality.


Experts Are Strong for Tyson
LEAD: When Michael Spinks surprised the boxing world by knocking out Gerry Cooney last June in Atlantic City, many regarded him as a fighter who had the guile to confound a slugger type like Mike Tyson.


Events: Craft Making and Sky Watching
LEAD:  Craft Workshops


Silver: Care and Repair
LEAD: ''THE more you use it, the better it looks,'' said Robert Routh, the president of Thome Silversmiths.
He explained that frequent use gives silver a patina ''with a soft, beautiful luster to it.''


AMERICAN FILTRONA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FILTRONA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
30,632,000
27,938,000
Net inc
1,453,000
1,909,000
Share earns
.40
.50
Yr sales
121,946,000
114,358,000
Net inc
b5,517,000
6,434,000
Share earns
1.50
1.70


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.48
6.78
5.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.69
5.63
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.09
6.08
5.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.02
7.96
7.05
30-YR.


BELO, A H CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELO, A H CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
102,082,000
108,141,000
Net inc
b5,142,000
c8,098,000
Share earns
.50
.74
Yr rev
381,776,000
397,233,000
Net inc
b22,315,000
c20,268,000
Share earns
2.08
1.80


CONSTAR INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSTAR INTERNATIONAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
130,788,000
100,250,000
Net inc
2,624,000
b782,000
Share earns
.41
.09
Shares outst
5,804,000
6,536,000
Yr sales
454,650,000
396,330,000
Net inc
9,650,000
b9,430,000
Share earns
1.46
1.32
Shares outst
6,159,000
6,215,000


Many Donors to the Neediest Share Fruits of Their Success
LEAD: Peter Johnson, a carpenter in Rockland County, N.Y., had a prosperous 1987, so he sent $50 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund for ''those who need it more than I.''


Stage: Gurney's 'Scenes From American Life'
LEAD: In ''Scenes From American Life,'' A. R. Gurney Jr. journeys through the midcentury to a prophetic future, which, in the revival of the 1971 play at the Long Wharf Theater, turns out to be today.
The view is wry and satiric, sometimes wistful and, eventually, mordant.
Despite the often cheerful surface, in


Connecticut Governor Proposes a $6.3 Billion Budget Plan With No New Taxes
LEAD: Gov.
William A. O'Neill, center, before delivering his budget message in Hartford.
With him were, from the left, Representative David Lavine, House Speaker Irving J. Stolberg, Senator John B. Larson, and Lieut.
Gov.
Joseph J. Fauliso.
Page B2. (NYT/Steve Miller)


CMS ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CMS ENERGY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
801,910,000
872,622,000
Net inc
68,723,000
25,997,000
Share earns
.83
.30
Shares outst
82,555,000
87,996,000
Yr rev
2,800,540,000
3,108,751,000
Net inc
183,800,000
65,052,000
Share earns
2.15
.74
Shares outst
85,371,000
88,005,000


BOSTON EDISON CO reports earnings for 12mo Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOSTON EDISON CO (NYSE)
12mo Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,181,097,000
1,105,367,000
Net inc
b97,686,000
b111,286,000
Share earns
2.27
2.72
b-Includes gains from discontinued operations of $10,965,000 and $1,217,000 for the latest 12 months and year-earlier period, respectively.


FLORIDA EAST COAST INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA EAST COAST INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
42,272,000
46,785,000
Net inc
8,123,000
13,719,000
Share earns
.88
1.47
Yr rev
159,497,000
156,362,000
Net inc
26,297,000
30,625,000
Share earns
2.84
3.30


Super Bowl's Ratings Spur Questions About Ad Costs
LEAD: To the dismay of some advertisers who bought spots during this year's Super Bowl, the match between the Washington Redskins and the Denver Broncos received the lowest Nielsen ratings in 14 years.


SURROGATE DEALS FOR MOTHERS HELD ILLEGAL IN JERSEY
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled today that commercial surrogate-motherhood contracts were illegal but it allowed custody of Melissa Elizabeth Stern, the child at the center of the Baby M case, to remain with her father, William Stern, and his wife, Elizabeth.


FARMER BROS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FARMER BROS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
48,454,212
57,969,683
Net inc
3,573,298
4,649,392
Share earns
1.85
2.41
6mo sales
93,710,931
111,765,526
Net inc
8,188,227
9,008,585
Share earns
4.25
4.68


Campaign '88: Lever a Winner
LEAD: Lafayette Lever averaged 18.9 points a game last season, had 654 assists, 729 rebounds, 201 steals, made only 167 turnovers and led the league in triple doubles with 16.


A-PLANT'S CLOSING GAINS IN CAPITAL
LEAD: The largest Government plant that makes plutonium for nuclear bombs, closed and under intense scrutiny in recent months because of its resemblance to the Chernobyl reactor in the Soviet Union, will not be reopened, the Department of Energy has told some legislators on Capitol Hill.


The Great Garage Sale of Life
LEAD: We are seeing the garage sales of the rich and famous - or at least of the once rich and famous.
John Connally, Ivan Boesky and Eldridge Cleaver have been selling off cutlery.
That some of these sales have taken place in penthouses and ranches shouldn't confuse us.
They are still essentially garage sales.


Crisis Deepens for South Korea's Riven Opposition
LEAD: Divided, dispirited and lacking direction, South Korea's political opposition is struggling to pull itself out its deepest crisis in years.


NORTHERN INDIANA PUBLIC SERVICE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHERN INDIANA PUBLIC SERVICE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
392,651,000
399,038,000
Net inc
14,222,000
22,235,000
Share earns
.11
.21
Yr rev
1,451,629,000
1,626,127,000
Net inc
64,965,000
b13,209,000
Share earns
.53
-


SCIENTIFIC-ATLANTA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCIENTIFIC-ATLANTA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Sales
123,956,000
126,059,000
Net inc
7,890,000
5,830,000
Share earns
.33
.25
6mo sales
252,231,000
233,633,000
Net inc
13,775,000
9,636,000
Share earns
.58
.41


The Office Fleet Is Fleeting, So Will Russians Go on Foot?
LEAD: The office car, an omnipresent perquisite among the Soviet elite, is about to become a perk of the past for thousands of middle-level bureaucrats and factory executives.


Anne-Marie Goelet, Legion of Honor Officer
LEAD: Anne-Marie Goelet, who was named an officer of the French Legion of Honor for her services in World War II, died Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 88 years old and also lived in Newport, R.I.


KANSAS CITY SOUTHERN INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Revenue
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KANSAS CITY SOUTHERN INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Revenue
135,320,000
124,182,000
Net inc
5,951,000
cd38,089,000
Share earns
.61
-
Yr rev
507,647,000
464,739,000
Net inc
b17,688,000
ce42,242,000
Share earns
1.82
-


SEPARATING JOSEPH LEGENDS FROM HISTORY
LEAD: To the Editor:


Belgique's Stock Is Active
LEAD: More than $700 million worth of shares in Societe Generale de Belgique apparently changed hands in fevered trading that began Tuesday night, deepening the uncertainty about the future of Belgium's largest company.


A Film Maker Reflects On a 12-Year Project
LEAD: Recent successes are encouraging young independent black film makers.


Holmes a Court Ends Agreement
LEAD: The Australian financier Robert Holmes a Court has withdrawn from an agreement to buy several national newspapers in Australia and New Zealand from John Fairfax Ltd.
The cancellation, made by mutual consent, comes as Mr.
Holmes a Court continues to recover from the effect of the October stock market plunge on his international holdings.


Excerpts From Decision by New Jersey Supreme Court in the Baby M Case
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the New Jersey Supreme Court decision ''In the Matter of Baby M'':


Robert S. Salzer, Retired Vice Admiral, 68
LEAD: Robert S. Salzer, a retired Navy vice admiral, died last Saturday of heart failure at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.
He was 68 years old and lived in McLean, Va..


Exchanges' Battle Ends
LEAD: A dispute that would have kept the New York Futures Exchange from moving to the Commodity Exchange Center at 4 World Trade Center on Monday was resolved yesterday, as quickly as it blew up.


EXCELAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXCELAN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,371,000
6,832,000
Net inc
1,113,000
b686,000
Share earns
.12
.10
Yr rev
38,999,000
22,824,000
Net inc
4,079,000
b2,395,000
Share earns
.46
.34


ELMIRA SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELMIRA SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
204,593
421,131
Per share
.52
1.05
Yr net inc
1,060,000
1,340,000
Per share
2.67
4.50
Shares outst
397,668
297,668


St. John's Suffers A Crushing Defeat
LEAD: The final statistics won't show it, the final score doesn't fully reveal it and players are too proud to admit it, but St.
John's took a beating last night that neither the Redmen nor the overflow crowd will soon forget.


Yields Are Down
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were all down for the week ended yesterday.


CITIZENS SAVINGS FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITIZENS SAVINGS FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
728,000
c897,000
Per share
.36
-
Yr net inc
b4,576,000
c8,940,000
Per share
2.29
-
b-After a tax credit of $1,305,000.
c-After tax credits of $269,000 for the quarter and $3,594,000 for the year; the year also included a pre-tax gain of $4,824,000 on sale of mortgage banking entities.


Limit Single Trades
LEAD: To the Editor:


SUFFOLK BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUFFOLK BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,484,000
1,380,000
Per share
.45
.50
Shares outst
3,275,386
2,766,130
Yr net inc
5,173,000
4,812,000
Per share
1.71
1.82
Shares outst
3,030,059
2,642,436


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 4, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-17


NEWPORT NEWS SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWPORT NEWS SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
477,000
870,000
Per share
.35
.63
6mo net inc
910,000
1,700,000
Per share
.66
1.25


COPELCO FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COPELCO FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,574,000
6,539,000
Net inc
1,138,000
920,000
Share earns
.21
.22
Shares outst
5,549,000
4,000,000


Campaign Trail
LEAD:  Allegiance to Firearms


FLORIDA COMMERCIAL BANKS INC (MIAMI) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA COMMERCIAL BANKS INC (MIAMI) (O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,421,000
2,529,000
Per share
.37
.68
Yr net inc
8,948,000
9,228,000
Per share
2.33
2.45


Sales of New Vehicles Rose 27.2% in January
LEAD: January sales of passenger vehicles were up 27.2 percent from the comparable period a year earlier, when the market was unusually weak.


Sears Profit Up 3.5% in Period
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company today reported a 3.5 percent rise in its fourth-quarter profit, although net income was helped by several one-time gains.


Sports People; Yankees Bow Out
LEAD: The Yankees told Donnie Moore yesterday that they were no longer interested in him.
Moore, a relief pitcher who was declared a free agent Jan. 22, had been scheduled to be in New York today for a physical examination, but the Yankees canceled the appointment.
Moore, who has one year left on his contract with the California Angels, was one of seven players included in the ruling by Thomas Roberts, an arbitrator.


Chicago Board Offers System
LEAD: As a result of the Brady commission's recommendation about the October market collapse, the Chicago Board of Trade has offered its computerized audit trail system to the New York Stock Exchange.
In a letter dated Feb. 2, the


Musicians Vote to End Strike in San Francisco
LEAD: The musicians of the San Francisco Symphony voted, 71 to 18, over the weekend to ratify a new contract and end a 12-day strike.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: Say ''root canal'' and most people shudder with imagined pain and apprehension.
But ask the millions of Americans who have had root canal treatments in recent years and you will hear a far happier tale.
In a 1985 survey of 1,019 adults, 80 percent said the procedure was painless and far less complicated and uncomfortable than they had expected.


Car Plant Shift Seen in Japan
LEAD: Japanese auto makers will probably increase their annual production capacity at their United States and Canadian plants to 2.2 million vehicles by early 1990, from 300,000 in 1985, the Confederation of Japan Automobile Workers Unions said today.


MESA LIMITED PARTNERS reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MESA LIMITED PARTNERS (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
315,343,000
359,638,000
Net inc
31,907,000
70,605,000
Share earns
.44
.98


BIOCRAFT LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOCRAFT LABORATORIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
22,116,000
11,162,000
Net inc
3,293,000
1,890,000
Share earns
.24
.14
9mo sales
80,124,000
30,955,000
Net inc
12,851,000
4,268,000
Share earns
.92
.32


ANDERSON JACOBSON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANDERSON JACOBSON INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,574,000
9,765,000
Net loss
892,000
1,174,000
9mo rev
28,683,000
28,296,000
Net loss
2,297,000
3,498,000


AMERICAN INDEMNITY FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN INDEMNITY FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b521,732
624,118
Yr net inc
b942,431
1,118,351
Share earns
.49
.58
b-Includes a charge of $11,254 for the quarter and a gain of $1,688,746 for year.


FRANK GEHRY'S CHAIRS: HE CAN'T GIVE THEM UP
LEAD: PEOPLE who see Frank Gehry's cardboard furniture in 1988 may think they've seen it before.
And they may have.
Mr.
Gehry, the iconoclastic architect based in Venice, Calif., introduced Easy Edges, a seating collection made from corrugated cardboard, in 1971.
Because of their imaginative and experimental nature, the chairs continue to stand out in the crowd of architect-designed furniture.


2 Amateurs Succeed in the Toy Jungle
LEAD: FOR many amateur inventors, the original idea came as a fluke.
Consider two nonprofessionals who successfully brought their toy concepts to market.


Marcel Bozzuffi, Actor In Bad-Guy Roles, 59
LEAD: Marcel Bozzuffi, a French actor known to the moviegoing public for his roles as a bad guy, died today after a long illness, family members said.
He was 59 years old.


FAMILY STEAK HOUSES OF FLORIDA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAMILY STEAK HOUSES OF FLORIDA
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,144,784
4,121,173
Net inc
336,302
142,319
Share earns
.03
.01
Yr rev
23,005,262
13,805,175
Net inc
1,488,290
718,677
Share earns
.14
.08
Shares outst
10,881,000
9,146,580


6 Areas to Get Water Meters
LEAD: The Koch administration yesterday named the first six areas of New York City in which water meters will be installed in residences under a two-year-old water conservation plan.


Decision Could Hinder Surrogacyt Across Nation
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court's decision in the Baby M case is not binding beyond the state's borders, but experts say it could deal a death blow to the commercial practice of surrogate motherhood in many other states.


East Germany Faces Unrest Among Youth
LEAD: East Germany, long insulated from critical calls for change, is facing an increasingly assertive human rights movement among the young.


HAUSERMAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAUSERMAN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
37,900,000
31,363,000
Net loss
968,000
714,000
6mo sales
71,174,000
60,302,000
Net loss
3,460,000
b686,000
Share earns
-
.30
b-Net income


Profitable Chrysler Unit
LEAD: The American Motors Corporation would have earned about $200 million last year if it had not been acquired by the Chrysler Corporation in August, according to Automotive News.
The trade publication cited a study by Chrysler's financial staff.


LA GEAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LA GEAR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
22,550,000
8,158,000
Net inc
1,218,000
244,000
Share earns
.30
.06
Yr sales
70,575,000
36,299,000
Net inc
4,371,000
1,745,000
Share earns
1.08
.56


Art Comes to Life
LEAD: Stephen Taylor Woodrow, the originator of ''The Living Paintings'' program, reaching to greet a visitor and, above, moving his arms, as he hung from the wall at the New Museum of Contemporary Art at 583 Broadway in lower Manhattan.
The paintings are meant to explore the relationship between reality and illusion as the artists interact with observers.


Domingo Cancels
LEAD: Placido Domingo has canceled his scheduled appearances in the Metropolitan Opera production of ''Luisa Miller'' on Feb. 10 and 13, saying he has a cold.
The tenor Ermanno Mauro will sing the role of Rodolfo at those performances.


F.D.A. Issues Advice on Children's Ear Infections
LEAD: Visit a pediatrician's waiting room these days, and chances are that one patient in three is suffering an ear infection, according to estimates by the Food and Drug Administration.


Pan Am to Pay Retired Pilots In Age Bias Suit
LEAD: Pan American Airways Inc. has agreed to pay $17.2 million to a group of former pilots who were not allowed to work as flight engineers after they were required to retire as pilots at the age of 60, a Federal agency announced today.


Dance: Limon Troupe's 'Poems'
LEAD: THE Limon Dance Company, which began the final week of its season at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night, has maintained a special relationship with Anna Sokolow since Jose Limon, the troupe's founder, died in 1972.
Both choreographers belonged to the second generation in American modern dance, although they could be classed as pioneers in their own right.


A Sentence and 3 New Arrests in San Juan Fire
LEAD: A maintenance worker who admitted he set the fire that killed 97 people at the DuPont Plaza Hotel here on New Year's Eve, 1986, was sentenced to 30 years in prison today and three other members of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters were charged in the case.


CENTEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTEX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
354,088,000
302,126,000
Net inc
6,093,000
9,646,000
Share earns
.40
.54
Shares outst
15,217,646
17,900,916
9mo rev
1,072,603,000
1,001,035,000
Net inc
b69,158,000
37,228,000
Share earns
4.23
2.08
Shares outst
16,339,456
17,890,660


SEARS, ROEBUCK &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEARS, ROEBUCK &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,050,000,000
12,970,000,000
Net inc
b562,100,000
c543,000,000
Share earns
1.49
1.45
Yr rev
48,440,000,000
44,280,000,000
Net inc
b1,650,000,000
c1,350,000,000
Share earns
4.35
3.62


AME INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AME INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,928,623
8,163,746
Net inc
1,252,956
671,638
Share earns
.25
.17
Shares outst
5,042,667
4,000,000


OHIO EDISON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OHIO EDISON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
417,935,000
424,805,000
Net inc
72,848,000
102,211,000
Share earns
.40
.60
Shares outst
152,386,000
148,981,000
Yr rev
1,779,556,000
1,741,900,000
Net inc
b412,920,000
410,828,000
Share earns
2.40
2.47
Shares outst
151,770,000
145,527,000


Jazz: John Carter Group
LEAD: THE clarinetist John Carter ended his first set at Carlos 1 on Tuesday with a quiet climax.
Given Mr.
Carter's ease with the unexpected - his compositions hop around registers, while his improvisations set up contrasting section after section - it makes sense he finished the show with a ballad instead of the obligatory sweat-pourer.


Desperately Seeking Iowa
LEAD: Three cheers for the television networks for refusing to broadcast President Reagan's predictable speech urging Congress to vote further aid for the contras in Nicaragua.
But don't expect the networks and the rest of the press to be as independent in giving next week's Iowa caucuses the coverage they deserve - which is not much.


Over a Philosophic Temple, Shadow of a Swastika
LEAD: Is the cultural legacy of one of the most powerful and influential thinkers of the 20th century poisoned at its roots?
The Nazi past of the German philosopher Martin Heidegger has become the focus of a roiled debate among French intellectuals, one that is belatedly spilling over into West Germany as well.


Results Plus
LEAD:  N.B.A.


Iowa Becomes a Test of Organization
LEAD: At Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's headquarters here, staff members in a second-floor room that is barred to outsiders have been exhorting precinct workers this week to increase the turnout of Dukakis supporters at Monday night's caucuses.


PEOPLES SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEOPLES SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
453,000
967,000
Per share
.20
-
6mo net inc
1,103,000
1,816,000
Per share
.50
-
The company converted to stock form in May 1987, therefore per share earnings for the year-ago periods are not available.


Nurses Strike British Hospitals
LEAD: London police officers stopping nurses from marching to Parliament yesterday as the Royal College of Nursing, Britiain's largest nurses' union, began its first nationwide walkout in the 40 years of the National Health Service.
No major disruptions were reported, but many hospitals postponed non-urgent admissions and surgery.


Tenacious Purslane Returns, Prettier and Good Enough to Eat
LEAD: AONG the chief pleasures of gardening are the unpredictable discoveries and surprises that occur almost constantly.
Even a very long lifetime is not sufficient to contain them all.
We gardeners need to wear our knowledge lightly, for it is always subject to correction.


WESTMORELAND COAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTMORELAND COAL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
139,228,000
146,130,000
Net loss
b54,190,000
c1,444,000
Yr rev
616,746,000
598,612,000
Net loss
b43,059,000
d13,045,000
Share earns
-
1.59
b-Includes a charge of $48.9 million and $61.6 million for the quarter and year, respectively, from a writedown of assets; a charge of $733,000 and $1,794,000 for the same periods, respectively, from early extinguishment of debt; the quarter also includes a reversal of a tax credit of $2,535,000.


ATLAS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLAS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,518,000
5,351,000
Net inc
b2,628,000
c917,000
Share earns
.84
-
6mo sales
19,256,000
9,158,000
Net inc
b2,611,000
c1,654,000
Share earns
.88
-
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $186,000 and $436,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, and a tax credit of $186,000 for both the quarter and 6 months.


Luge Racer at Center of Controversy
LEAD: The Calgary Winter Olympics, with 57 countries participating, more than ever before, is on the verge of losing one over the interpretation of a rule governing accreditation requirements for athletes.


ARCO Agrees to Buy Tricentrol
LEAD: ARCO said today that it had reached an agreement to acquire Tricentrol P.L.C., an independent British oil and gas company, in a deal that values Tricentrol at more than $330 million.


Gene Defect Pinpointed in Bad Reactions to Drugs
LEAD: An international team of scientists has discovered the genetic defect that makes as many as 10 percent of white Americans and Europeans suffer bad reactions to many drugs used to treat high blood pressure, disturbances of heart rhythm and other conditions.


HANNA, M A CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANNA, M A CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
219,263,000
26,604,000
Net inc
9,734,000
b104,188,000
Share earns
.56
-
Yr sales
459,385,000
130,352,000
Net inc
36,281,000
b104,515,000
Share earns
2.47
-


Iraq Fights a War at Home: Keeping Casualties Down and Enough Men at the Front
LEAD: For several days in January, police patrol cars toured the streets of Baghdad broadcasting an offer of amnesty to army deserters.


USG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USG CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
725,787,000
695,025,000
Net inc
b17,214,000
c56,466,000
Share earns
.33
.93
Yr sales
2,898,063,000
2,723,664,000
Net inc
204,289,000
c225,508,000
Share earns
3.96
3.54


Don't Wait for the Stock Market to Cure Itself
LEAD: To the Editor:


Canadian Growth Seen
LEAD: Canada's economy should shrug off any negative impact of the October stock market collapse and expand at a healthy rate, the Conference Board of Canada said today.
The board's assessment is that the economy will grow by 2.9 percent this year and 2.6 percent in 1989.


JUDGE QUESTIONS CASE ON NOFZIGER
LEAD: The Federal district judge in Lyn Nofziger's trial questioned today whether prosecutors had proved an essential element of the allegation that Mr.
Nofziger, a former adviser to President Reagan, illegally lobbied Edwin Meese 3d for the Wedtech Corporation.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''This is the sale of a child, or, at the very least, the sale of a mother's right to her child, the only mitigating factor being that one of the purchasers is the father.''  - Chief Justice Robert N. Wilentz of the New Jersey Supreme Court, in the unanimousBaby M decision.  [ B6:3.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


COHASSET SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COHASSET SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
161,000
b235,000
Per share
.16
-
Yr net inc
583,000
b785,000
b-Included a dividend of $193,000 from the Mutual Savings Central Fund of Massachusetts.
The per share earnings for the latest year and both year-ago periods were not applicable; the company converted to stock form of ownership in May 1987.


Gulf War Premiums Cut
LEAD: War risk insurance premiums have been cut, effective Thursday, for cargoes on ships sailing to and from many Persian Gulf ports, the War Risk Rating Committee said today.
The decision stemmed from what the committee said was a slightly less volatile situation in the Persian Gulf and a decline in attacks on shipping.


In New York's Decade of Child, Budget Pleases Child Advocates
LEAD: To the Editor:


COMPUGRAPHIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUGRAPHIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
94,888,000
86,945,000
Net inc
2,507,000
2,497,000
Share earns
.30
.30
Yr rev
367,081,000
341,082,000
Net inc
10,083,000
b3,385,000
Share earns
1.20
.41


FANSTEEL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FANSTEEL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
47,077,892
48,488,948
Net loss
934,278
1,563,165
Yr sales
176,335,385
210,126,760
Net loss
2,953,988
2,773,855


Cabaret: Peggy Lee
LEAD: THE indomitable Peggy Lee has not only surmounted the physical problems that have beset her recently - double heart-bypass surgery three years ago and a fall last year resulting in broken bones in her feet from which she has still not recovered - she has also adapted and, in the process, become an even more subtle and moving performer than she had been.


AMERICAN BUSINESS PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN BUSINESS PRODUCTS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
82,918,000
78,797,000
Net inc
b2,528,000
c2,180,000
Share earns
.44
.38
Yr sales
325,768,000
311,620,000
Net inc
b9,371,000
c7,935,000
Share earns
1.64
1.39


TRAVELERS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRAVELERS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b42,500,000
c185,200,000
Share earns
.37
1.86
Yr net inc
b374,400,000
c545,800,000
Share earns
3.56
5.52
b-Includes a realized loss of $55.9 million and $54.2 million for the quarter and year, respectively.


Forty Niner Upset By Perfect Spy, $19
LEAD: Perfect Spy, a Canadian gelding who began his career under a $40,000 claiming tag, scored a one-length upset victory over Forty Niner, the early favorite for the Kentucky Derby May 7, in the $98,025 Hutcheson Stakes today at Gulfstream Park.


Lawrence M. Rogin, Unionist, 79
LEAD: Lawrence M. Rogin, a labor educator for more than 50 years and national director of education of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. in the 1960's, died of cancer Jan. 26 at his home in Washington.
He was 79 years old.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Battle Over Fish
LEAD: Although the United States and Canada have signed a historic agreement to eliminate most trade barriers before the year 2000, they are still fighting over unprocessed fish.


JOHNSTOWN SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSTOWN SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
56,000
b604,000
Per share
-
.31
Yr net inc
1,161,000
1,452,000
Per share
.60
.75
b-Net income


Huxley Madeheim, Professor, 82
LEAD: Huxley Madeheim, an engineer and former professor of industrial management at Baruch College, died Jan. 25 at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.


LESCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LESCO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
31,820,000
24,600,000
Net inc
1,536,000
1,474,000
Share earns
.38
.36
Yr sales
88,759,000
69,258,000
Net inc
2,126,000
2,677,000
Share earns
.52
.65


MANVILLE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANVILLE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
522,486,000
493,211,000
Net loss
b59,977,000
c4,689,000
Yr sales
2,063,228,000
1,920,262,000
Net inc
b72,597,000
81,228,000
Share earns
1.98
2.34
b-After an extraordinary charge of $91,473,000, net of a $66,971,000 tax benefit, related to a personal injury settlement trust contribution, for both the quarter and year.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Saturday about the restoration of a hotel in Ho Chi Minh City identified it incompletely; it was the Continental Palace.
The family that owned the business until 1975 was named incorrectly; it was the Franchini family.


Sports People; Nilan Sidelined
LEAD: Chris Nilan, the Rangers' forward, will be out four to six weeks because of a sprained knee ligament suffered in Tuesday night's game against the Islanders.
The team said that Nilan had suffered a ''significant sprain'' in his right knee.
The Rangers acquired Nilan, a right winger, from Montreal on Jan.


Guerrillas in Colombia Step Up Their Attacks
LEAD: Coinciding with a new wave of drug-related violence, a surge of leftist guerrilla activity is convulsing the Colombian provinces before important municipal elections March 13.


HUNT, J B TRANSPORT SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUNT, J B TRANSPORT SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
80,100,000
57,733,000
Net inc
4,802,000
5,562,000
Share earns
.20
.24
Yr rev
286,419,000
203,786,000
Net inc
b25,971,000
24,738,000
Share earns
1.10
1.05


LEE ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEE ENTERPRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
65,533,000
61,162,000
Net inc
10,500,000
b19,793,000
Share earns
.42
.77
b-Included a gain of $11,160,000, or 43 cents a share, on sales of properties.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. My house is heated by steam and one radiator makes a banging sound when it is on.
What causes this, and can eliminate it?
A.
As the steam in a radiator dissipates, it condenses into water and runs through the radiator valve to the boiler for reheating.
If the water cannot run out easily and meets the incoming steam, a knocking sound sometimes results.


Robert S. Sturtevant, Advertising Executive, 56
LEAD: Robert S. Sturtevant, co-founder and chairman of a Manhattan advertising agency, Sturtevant and Hildt, died Saturday at the Norwalk (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 56 years old and lived in New Canaan, Conn.


Devils' Streak Ends at 3
LEAD: Esa Tikkanen scored three goals and Dave Hannan had two as the Edmonton Oilers outscored the New Jersey Devils, 8-5, tonight.


Nets Trounced, 115-87
LEAD: The Houston Rockets made a team-record 25 consecutive free throws tonight in a 115-87 rout of the Nets.


Dow Eases by One Point, to 1,923.57
LEAD: The stock market continued in its rut yesterday, as the Dow Jones industrial average fell one point, to 1,923.57, and other market gauges eked out small gains.


COASTAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COASTAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,057,000,000
1,854,700,000
Net inc
35,000,000
66,900,000
Share earns
.68
1.33
Yr rev
7,428,900,000
6,668,200,000
Net inc
113,100,000
71,600,000
Share earns
2.10
.84


'SIDNEY SHELDON'S WINDMILLS OF THE GODS,' ON CBS
LEAD: IF this is a CBS two-part dramatization starring Jaclyn Smith, it must be another Sidney Sheldon venture.
Sure enough, ''Sidney Sheldon's Windmills of the Gods'' (that's the official title) gets under way with Ms.
Smith this Sunday at 9 P.M. on CBS.
The second half of the four-hour production will be broadcast on Tuesday.


RUBBERMAID INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RUBBERMAID INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
255,790,000
195,551,000
Net inc
18,515,000
15,485,000
Share earns
.25
.21
Yr sales
1,015,007,000
795,184,000
Net inc
84,530,000
70,050,000
Share earns
1.15
.96


ATEK METALS CENTER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATEK METALS CENTER
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,444,000
8,744,000
Net inc
374,000
247,000
Share earns
.09
.08
Shares outst
3,675,000
2,625,000


CRAWFORD &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRAWFORD &amp; CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
65,780,000
61,508,000
Net inc
3,294,000
3,345,000
Share earns
.29
.29
Yr rev
265,093,000
243,617,000
Net inc
16,402,000
15,192,000
Share earns
1.41
1.31


INTERMET CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERMET CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
85,698,000
70,629,000
Net inc
5,179,000
4,167,000
Share earns
.24
.19
Yr sales
317,607,000
294,818,000
Net inc
21,445,000
19,092,000
Share earns
1.00
.90


Metro Datelines; Detective Testifies On Chambers Story
LEAD: Only a few hours before he admitted to the police that he had killed Jennifer Levin in Central Park, Robert E. Chambers Jr. denied being at the scene of her death and said his cat had left the red scratches that were visible across his face and chest, a police detective testified yesterday at Mr.
Chambers's murder trial.


Palestinian Raid Kills 2 Soldiers, Israelis Say
LEAD: Palestinian guerrillas crossed into Israel from Lebanon early today and killed two soldiers, the army said.
One Palestinian was reported killed in the raid, which the army said was a mission to seize civilian hostages.


Times to Introduce A Television Weekly
LEAD: The New York Times will introduce a new guide to broadcast and cable television programs on March 6.
The magazine, called Television, will offer four-color advertising and will be printed by rotogravure on premium calendered paper, 8 1/4 by 11 inches, press-stitched and trimmed.


3d Party Has 10% Stake In Belgian Company
LEAD: Compagnie Financiere de Suez said tonight that it had purchased a 10 percent stake in Societe Generale de Belgique, becoming the third major player in a struggle for control of Belgium's biggest company.


CRS SIRRINE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRS SIRRINE INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
98,589,000
82,506,000
Net inc
1,242,000
800,000
Share earns
.20
.13
6mo rev
182,535,000
163,425,000
Net inc
9,390,000
1,619,000
Share earns
1.54
.27


U.S. Studying Dutchess Assault
LEAD: The Justice Department is investigating the Tawana Brawley case in Dutchess County, N.Y., to determine whether civil rights laws were violated, a department spokeswoman said today.


Grecian Music
LEAD: Microcosmos is to play rebetika music from Greece Sunday at 8 P.M. at the Ethnic Folk Arts Center, 179 Varick Street (206-1050).
Tickets are $8; information, 691-9510.


ARROW AUTOMOTIVE INDUSRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARROW AUTOMOTIVE INDUSRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
25,733,000
28,938,000
Net loss
b577,000
c485,000
Share earns
-
.17
6mo sales
53,380,000
55,485,000
Net loss
b445,000
c570,000
Share earns
-
.20


2 New York Hospitals Plan To Start Liver Transplants
LEAD: Two of New York City's largest teaching hospitals will perform the first liver transplants in the state under a new plan designed to eliminate competition among hospitals for scarce donor organs.


EXPOSIAC INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXPOSIAC INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
54,089,000
39,752,000
Net inc
b1,642,000
b876,000
Share earns
.64
.34
b-After extraordinary tax credits of $287,000 for the latest first quarter and $172,000 for the year-ago period.


AVANT-GARDE ANTICS FOR FEARLESS AUDIENCES
LEAD: IS it possible anymore for an audacious theater artist to go ''too far''?
As experimental theater and performance activity reaches a peak of excitement around Manhattan this weekend, performers will be flinging down the gauntlet to fearless, inquiring audiences in work that tests as many different kinds of limits as there are artists willing to defy convention.


SECURITY FEDERAL SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SECURITY FEDERAL SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
52,219
89,050
Per share
.04
-
6mo net inc
318,316
620,038
Per share
.22
-
There were no per share earnings available because the company went public in November 1986.


Two Film Critics Quit Festival Panel in Protest
LEAD: The New York Film Festival is in turmoil this week after the resignation of two critics on the festival's selection committee to protest actions taken by the Film Society of Lincoln Center, the festival's parent organization.


Dining Out Guide: Bistros
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
CAFE UN DEUX TROIS, 123 West 44th Street (354-4148) - *(May 15, 1987) For its reliably animated atmosphere and straightforward bistro fare, this 10-year-old cafe continues to be one of the better bets for Broadway theater-district dining.


Navy Sale to Japan Meets Opposition
LEAD: A small group of lawmakers in the House of Representatives is trying to block the sale of the Navy's most sophisticated air defense system to Japan, an export that would be worth at least $500 million.


Related Referees
LEAD: Darell Garretson giving his son, Ron, some advice before they worked together in the game be-tween the 76ers and the Warri-ors Wednesday in Philadelphia. (AP)


Corrections
LEAD: A Company Earnings report in Business Day on Tuesday misidentified a company acquired by the MDT Corporation in July.
It was the Castle Company.


Police-Brutality Charges Are Found Unsupported
LEAD: After what it called an extensive investigation, the Manhattan District Attorney's office has concluded that there is no ''credible evidence'' to support allegations by an English professor that he was illegally arrested and unjustifiably injured by transit police officers.


GRENADA SUNBURST SYSTEM reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRENADA SUNBURST SYSTEM
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,700,000
b2,635,000
Share earns
.30
.31
Yr net inc
11,505,000
b14,324,000
Share earns
1.30
1.78
Shares outst
8,849,682
8,066,912
b-After tax credits of $570,000 for the quarter and $1,904,000 for the year.


The Law; Kaisers Taking Lawyers to
LEAD: Four members of the Kaiser family are waging a $2.8 million legal battle here against their longtime lawyers over what the four contend is the mismanagement of millions of dollars of stocks from their father's estate.


Retail Sales Were Lackluster in January
LEAD: The nation's largest general retailers reported yesterday that January sales were lackluster.
But store owners and Wall Street analysts read little of significance in the numbers.


ENERGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENERGEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
82,411,000
76,569,000
Net inc
2,045,000
460,000
Share earns
.46
.11


State Dept. Aide Pressing Meese To Delay Closing P.L.O. Mission
LEAD: The State Department's legal adviser is pressing Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d to delay application of a law closing the Palestine Liberation Organization's observer mission at the United Nations, according to American diplomats and United Nations officials.


BARRY WRIGHT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARRY WRIGHT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
54,470,000
49,019,000
Net inc
2,213,000
884,000
Share earns
.27
.11
Yr sales
205,694,000
195,142,000
Net inc
8,362,000
7,036,000
Share earns
1.02
.81


Advertising; 3 Giants To Unite In Giveaway
LEAD: In what is believed to be the biggest giveaway promotion in history, the McDonald'sCorporation, the General Motors Corporation and Sears Roebuck &amp; Company are planning to spend an estimated $70 million for a national advertising campaign that teams up the three corporate giants.


PHILADELPHIA SUBURBAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHILADELPHIA SUBURBAN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,772,000
26,762,000
Net inc
2,404,000
1,956,000
Share earns
.33
.27
Yr rev
103,919,000
99,438,000
Net inc
8,069,000
b7,985,000
Share earns
1.11
1.10


GENERAL RE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL RE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
848,600,000
926,600,000
Net inc
b133,700,000
c117,300,000
Share earns
1.35
1.14
Shares outst
98,944,000
102,822,000
Yr rev
3,448,400,000
3,175,200,000
Net inc
b510,800,000
c328,700,000
Share earns
5.04
3.22


KLEINERT'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KLEINERT'S INC
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
15,803,000
14,571,000
Net inc
b1,120,000
c1,129,000
Share earns
.76
.77
Yr sales
46,592,000
46,350,000
Net inc
b2,920,000
c2,597,000
Share earns
1.97
1.69


EIP MICROWAVE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EIP MICROWAVE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,467,000
5,584,000
Net loss
729,000
b92,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


U.S. Ends an Effort To Deport Teacher On Basis of Ideology
LEAD: The Immigration and Naturalization Service has abandoned its effort to deport Margaret Randall, an United States-born citizen of Mexico whose writings in praise of leftist revolutions led to a 1986 deportation order that became a cause celebre in the literary world.


On Stage
LEAD:  A Low-Budget Musical


THOMAS &amp; BETTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THOMAS &amp; BETTS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
112,598,000
93,961,000
Net inc
11,933,000
9,090,000
Share earns
.71
.54
Yr sales
436,463,000
385,801,000
Net inc
48,500,000
40,215,000
Share earns
2.88
2.40


Eleanor Marquand Delanoy, Rights Advocate, 91
LEAD: Eleanor Marquand Delanoy, a co-founder of the Princeton Committee of the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund Inc., died of heart disease Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 91 years old and lived in Hightstown, N.J.


ANADARKO PETROLEUM reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANADARKO PETROLEUM (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
66,300,000
50,100,000
Net inc
6,800,000
b792,000
Share earns
.13
-
Yr rev
230,000,000
206,000,000
Net inc
9,100,000
10,100,000
Share earns
.18
.21


HALE SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HALE SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,031,000
786,000
Net loss
178,000
498,000
9mo sales
3,286,000
3,015,000
Net loss
322,000
883,000


ENGELHARD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENGELHARD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
728,125,000
702,154,000
Net inc
b12,693,000
14,291,000
Share earns
.28
.35
Shares outst
44,739,000
40,495,000
Yr sales
2,479,230,000
2,289,531,000
Net inc
c69,816,000
53,268,000
Share earns
1.60
1.31
Shares outst
43,599,000
40,512,000


Productivity Up, but Rise Is Slower
LEAD: The nation's businesses continued to improve their productivity in 1987 but were less successful in squeezing out more efficiency gains than in the previous four years, the Government said today.


Film: 'Serpent and the Rainbow'
LEAD: IT'S a long way from a Harvard ethnobiologist's thoughtful account of his search for exotic Haitian medicinal potions to a film with the advertising slogan ''Don't bury me . . .
I'm not dead!'' But in fact these two sides of ''The Serpent and the Rainbow'' aren't as different as they sound.
Wade Davis's fascinating 1985 book is much more an adventure story than a scientific tract, and the film is the work of Wes Craven, whose horror credits (''A Nightmare on Elm Street,'' ''The Hills Have Eyes'') give an incomplete impression of his talents.


DAWSON GEOPHYSICAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DAWSON GEOPHYSICAL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,357,000
1,226,000
Net loss
1,796,000
367,000


Police Investigate Assault Charges for Minister in Queens Incident
LEAD: The Queens District Attorney's office and the police said yesterday that they were investigating an incident in which a black minister from Howard Beach, Queens, was charged with assaulting a white teen-ager who had purportedly thrown snowballs and rocks at the minister's car and called him racial names.


ECC INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ECC INTERNATIONAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,838,000
9,975,000
Net inc
1,153,000
886,000
Share earns
.26
.19
Shares outst
4,480,176
4,695,472
6mo sales
20,994,000
17,135,000
Net inc
b4,185,000
1,626,000
Share earns
.93
.35


INTERLEAF INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERLEAF INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
17,006,000
10,405,000
Net inc
b2,479,000
c353,000
Share earns
.21
.03
9mo rev
40,271,000
25,388,000
Net inc
b4,511,000
d1,052,000
Share earns
.38
-


VERMONT RESEARCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERMONT RESEARCH CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
999,000
1,563,000
Net loss
1,057,000
517,000


No Irregularity in Pipeline Memo to Meese
LEAD: To the Editor:


DIXON TICONDEROGA CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIXON TICONDEROGA CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,202,895
12,556,082
Net inc
180,092
b265,215
Share earns
.12
.17
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $181,230.


A Correction
LEAD: An editing error altered a sentence in Tuesday's article ''For Local Elections in the West Bank and Gaza.'' The sentence should have said that Arabs in Gaza have insisted that the killing of four Arabs ''was an act of retaliation for the knifing murder of an Israeli merchant.''


Iraq Denies That It Requested Guarantees for Pipeline Plan
LEAD: Iraq said today that it had not sought ''political guarantees'' from Israel or other parties in negotiations in 1984 over a projected oil pipeline to Jordan.


Gerald Knoff, 80, of Church Council, Dies
LEAD: The Rev.
Gerald E. Knoff, who served for 20 years as associate general secretary of the National Council of Churches, died of cardiac arrest Friday at the Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, Mass.
He was 80 years old and lived in East Sandwich, Mass.


Film: 'She's Having a Baby,' From John Hughes
LEAD: FOR John Hughes's Ferris Bueller, it was only a day off; for his Jefferson (Jake) Briggs, it may be an entire life.
In the first scene of ''She's Having a Baby,'' which opens today at the Paramount and other theaters, Jake is seen marrying a woman he can barely stand, and this is only the beginning of his half-heartedness and disenchantment.


Inside a 'Shooting Gallery': New Front in the AIDS War
LEAD: Amid the flicker of stubby one-inch candles, the only light in an abandoned building near the Williamsburg Bridge in Brooklyn, a 32-year-old man who calls himself Wollenski fidgeted as he watched another man glide a hypodermic syringe filled with cocaine and heroin effortlessly into his right biceps.


ODETICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ODETICS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,217,000
9,708,000
Net inc
155,000
b238,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
37,095,000
28,284,000
Net inc
656,000
b165,000
Share earns
.16
-
b-Net loss


Evolving Image for New Hampshire
LEAD: New Hampshire has a secret: year by year, bit by bit, it is reinventing itself.


MOUNTAIN MEDICAL EQUIPMENT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOUNTAIN MEDICAL EQUIPMENT CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,753,000
6,082,000
Net inc
125,000
b584,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
18,917,000
19,924,000
Net inc
234,000
b902,000
Share earns
.08
-


ZAPATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZAPATA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
40,300,000
35,900,000
Net loss
b24,200,000
20,300,000
b-Includes a writedown of $17.2 million of the company's Bolivian gas properties.


HARSCO CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARSCO CORP (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,169,225,000
1,130,253,000
Net inc
63,289,000
b46,401,000
Share earns
2.20
1.56
b-After an extraordinary charge of $3,212,000.


Sports of The Times; Remembering Flo Hyman
LEAD: THERE is only one thing wrong about the Flo Hyman Award: it came to be named for the Old Lady of volleyball much too soon.


Auctions
LEAD:  Folk-Art Portraits


EASTEK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTEK CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
230,710
-
Net loss
989,920
289,743
6mo rev
633,565
-
Net loss
1,864,906
345,925
The company ceased to be a development-stage company effective July 1.


IBP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IBP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
1,970,950,000
1,678,355,000
Net inc
15,478,000
13,122,000
Share earns
.35
.17
Yr sales
7,681,343,000
6,821,512,000
Net inc
67,881,000
66,762,000
Share earns
1.10
.95


Sarah Loening, 91; Began Biblical Garden
LEAD: Sarah Larkin Loening, a writer who founded the Biblical Garden at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, died Monday at Southampton (L.I.) Hospital.
She was 91 years old and lived for many years in Southampton.


Congress Unit Sees Federal '89 Deficit Far Beyond Target
LEAD: The Congressional Budget Office estimated today that next year's Federal budget deficit would be $176 billion, or $40 billion higher than the target stipulated in the budget-balancing law that Congress passed last year.


Fighting AIDS and Addiction: A Start
LEAD: After two years of foot-dragging, Governor Cuomo has taken a small step toward exploring whether sterile needles and syringes might slow the wildfire spread of AIDS among drug addicts.
The action, little and late, is nevertheless welcome.


John G. Brainerd, 83, Early Computer Expert
LEAD: John Grist Brainerd, an electrical engineer who served as director of a project that built Eniac, one of the first electronic computers, died Monday at his home in Kennett Square, Pa.
He was 83 years old.


MICHIGAN ENERGY RESOURCES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICHIGAN ENERGY RESOURCES CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
39,103,000
39,909,000
Net inc
2,817,000
2,130,000
Share earns
1.04
.80
Yr rev
127,393,000
140,792,000
Net inc
4,091,000
3,808,000
Share earns
1.52
1.43


A Magazine Shuts Down
LEAD: Changing Homes, a magazine issued by the Changing Homes Publishing Company of Valley Stream, L.I., announced that it had suspended publication because advertising did not meet rising postage and paper costs.


Exchanges Play Down S.E.C. Plan
LEAD: Trying to ward off cumbersome new regulations, the heads of two Chicago futures exchanges and two major stock exchanges today criticized a proposal to give the Securities and Exchange Commission broad powers to regulate stock-index futures.


Millrose Features Milers
LEAD: The men's and women's mile runs offer attractive matchups tonight in the 81st annual Panasonic Millrose Games, the first major metropolitan meet of the indoor track season.


CAPITAL CITIES/ABC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPITAL CITIES/ABC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Revenue
1,408,139,000
1,187,324,000
Net inc
116,984,000
80,324,000
Share earns
6.91
4.90
Yr rev
4,440,346,000
4,124,374,000
Net inc
279,078,000
b447,689,000
Share earns
16.46
27.55


Financial Job Cutbacks
LEAD: As many as 75,000 financial workers in London and New York may lose their jobs as a result of the Oct. 19 stock collapse, a banker told a conference today.
Hans-Joerg Rudloff, deputy chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston Ltd., said dismissals could total between 20,000 and 25,000 in London and up to 50,000 in New York.


ATWOOD OCEANICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATWOOD OCEANICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,048,000
12,811,000
Net loss
3,369,000
b2,515,000
Share earns
-
.66
b-Net income  The revenue for the year-ago first quarter included a gain of $8.3 million from the sale of securities.


A Jew Who Beat Jews in a Nazi Camp Is Stripped of His Citizenship
LEAD: A Polish-born Jew accused of wartime atrocities surrendered his United States citizenship before a Federal judge in Brooklyn yesterday and admitted that he brutalized Jewish prisoners in a Nazi forced-labor camp and later entered this country illegally.


One Step Forward
LEAD: The life or death, freedom or tyranny, peace or war talk that led up to the House of Representatives' vote against more aid to the Nicaraguan contras Wednesday sounds vastly overblown in Central America.


BIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIC CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
60,308,000
52,790,000
Net inc
6,420,000
b5,970,000
Share earns
.53
.49
Yr sales
290,616,000
267,624,000
Net inc
28,717,000
b26,193,000
Share earns
2.37
2.16


CHUBB CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHUBB CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b51,300,000
c62,600,000
Share earns
1.23
1.57
Yr net inc
b330,100,000
c267,900,000
Share earns
7.95
7.05
b-After realized investment losses of $36.7 million and $14.6 million for the quarter and year, respectively.


The Films Of Cinecitta In Festival
LEAD: Hercules displayed his strength there.
Gladiators battled, several generations of lovers quarreled, Italian troops defeated foreign armies, and Elizabeth Taylor conquered Richard Burton.
Great dramas have been enacted at Cinecitta, the cradle of Italian cinema, since its inception a half-century ago.


FOREMOST CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOREMOST CORP OF AMERICA (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b13,467,000
c8,788,000
Share earns
1.05
.68
Yr net inc
b47,674,000
c17,200,000
Share earns
3.71
1.42
b-After realized investment losses of $777,000 for the quarter and $1,924,000 for the year.


New York Seen As Biggest Loser In Redistricting
LEAD: New York State is likely to be the biggest loser and California and Texas the biggest winners when seats in the House of Representatives are reallocated after the 1990 census, a new study predicts.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


European G.N.P. Jumps
LEAD: Growth in the European Community accelerated in the third quarter of 1987, outpacing the United States but still lagging behind Japan, the European Community statistics office said today.
The community's gross national product surged by 5.4 percent in the quarter because of strong domestic demand and higher exports, the office said.


CHRYSLER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHRYSLER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,670,000,000
5,940,000,000
Net inc
350,200,000
324,200,000
Share earns
1.57
1.48
Yr sales
26,280,000,000
22,590,000,000
Net inc
1,290,000,000
b1,390,000,000
Share earns
5.90
6.25


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 1988
LEAD:  Markets


Court Rebuffs Joyce Brown, Citing Release
LEAD: New York State's highest court declined yesterday to rule on Joyce Brown's appeal of her involuntary hospitalization, saying the issue was moot because she has been released.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Uruguayan Front-Runner
LEAD: Uruguay's Foreign Minister, Enrique Yglesias, is emerging as a leading candidate for the presidency of the Inter-American Development Bank, a 44-nation Washington institution that makes development loans to Latin American countries.


SEOUL PLANS LINKS TO EASTERN BLOC
LEAD: South Korea, whose Government is as fiercely anti-Communist as any to be found, has mounted a full-scale diplomatic offensive to improve relations with Soviet-bloc countries and China.


Shift at Sports inc.
LEAD: Steven L. Isenberg, 46 years old, is giving up his post as interim publisher of Sports inc.
The magazine styles itself ''The Sports Business Weekly'' and is directed at decision makers in the sports business.
Scott Kabak, 33, will replace Mr.
Isenberg and will continue as president of the magazine, which is one of the Times Mirror Magazines.


First Fabulous Friday
LEAD: The Muir String Quartet - Peter Zazofsky and Bayla Keyes, violinists; Steven Ansell, violist, and Michael Reynolds, cellist - will perform works by Haydn and Brahms, and the New York premiere of Sofia Gubaidulina's String Quartet No. 3, tonight at 8 in Weill Recital Hall.
The concert is the first in a monthlong series called Fabulous Fridays.


Pianist Has Bartok At His Fingertips
LEAD: ''Bartok,'' said Zoltan Kocsis, who has specialized in his music and is currently performing his Third Piano Concerto with the New York Philharmonic, ''was very fond of French music, and he truly inherited something from Debussy.''


SAFETY-KLEEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAFETY-KLEEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
109,274,000
83,683,000
Net inc
10,474,000
9,501,000
Share earns
.31
.29
Yr rev
333,633,000
255,356,000
Net inc
35,083,000
28,254,000
Share earns
1.06
.86


HANNAFORD BROTHERS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANNAFORD BROTHERS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
270,097,052
255,010,846
Net inc
5,332,742
4,442,782
Share earns
.57
.48
Yr rev
1,033,418,351
910,202,154
Net inc
24,083,114
8,816,904
Share earns
2.60
2.05


PIONEER SAVINGS BANK (NC) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIONEER SAVINGS BANK (NC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
729,431
877,498
Per share
.40
.48


Brokers Play Down Surrogacy Case
LEAD: Prominent surrogate-mother brokers around the country said today that commercial surrogate contracts were legally risky but that the New Jersey Supreme Court's ruling banning the agreements did not extend to their clinics.


Concert: Muti Leads Philadelphians in Copland and Brahms
LEAD: AARON COPLAND began his Symphony No. 3 in 1944 when the outcome of World War II was still in doubt, and finished it two years later in a time of national euphoria.
Like other Copland works of the 1940's (''A Lincoln Portrait,'' for instance), it spoke in an optimistic, oratorical style that caught the upbeat mood of the times.


'Cop,' a Thriller
JAMES WOODS is more frequently seen eating on-camera than just about any other actor, but he's so edgy and thin that there's nothing voluptuous about this behavior.
If anything, it's borderline rude.
So are Mr.
Woods's smoking and his wisecracking; so is virtually everything else he does.
Combine this taunting manner with the fierce, obsessive dedication Mr.
Woods brings to almost any role and you have the makings of a perfect Elmore Leonard character, which Mr.
Woods is bound to play some day.
In the meantime, he has arrived as the detective hero of ''Cop,'' based on James Ellroy's crime novel ''Blood on the Moon.''
In ''Cop,'' which opens today at Loews Astor Plaza and other theaters, Mr.
Woods plays the extremely hard-boiled Detective Sgt.
Lloyd Hopkins, who is led by the long arm of coincidence onto the trail of a mass murderer.
The character is a reasonable embodiment of certain detective-movie conventions, but the plot leaves a lot to be desired, especially since it devotes no more than 30 seconds' thought to the killer's motive or his history.


Defeat of Contra Aid: The 219-211 Roll-Call Vote in the House
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote of 219 to 211 Wednesday night by which the House rejected President Reagan's request for at least $43 million in aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.
A ''yes'' vote was a vote in favor of the President's plan; a ''no'' vote was a vote against it.
Voting ''yes'' were 47 Democrats and 164 Republicans.


'Land Of Promise,' By Wajda
AT first glance, the mid-1970's seems like the least inventive phase in the career of Andrzej Wajda, the brilliant, prolific Polish director.
His trilogy from the 50's, ending with the masterly ''Ashes and Diamonds,'' assessed the emotional cost of World War II.
In 1976, he would tear down Stalinist icons in ''Man of Marble.'' But earlier in the decade, films such as ''A Wedding'' and ''Land of Promise,'' both set in the 19th century, seemed to signal, if not a retreat from the political wars, at least an escape from the pressure of recent events.
''Land of Promise,'' the 1975 film that will have its first commercial run in New York at Cinema Village today and tomorrow, offers only a visual rest from contemporary battle.
It has all the indirection you would expect of a defiant film maker whose work must pass Government censors and film boards (for years they rejected the idea for ''Man of Marble''), all the accomplishment of one adept at portraying the personal drama of history.


W. Marko Antich Investment Executive, 29
LEAD: W. Marko Antich, managing director of the Redwood Capital Group, a venture capital concern in Manhattan that specialized in the health care industry, died in a skiing accident Monday in Vail, Colo.
He was 29 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Metro Datelines; Accountant Is Slain In Midtown Building
LEAD: A 28-year-old accountant was found fatally stabbed in the throat in the hallway of his midtown office building yesterday, the police said.


VOW TO PRESS ON
LEAD: Nicaraguan rebel officials today bitterly criticized the House vote denying the contras further aid but vowed to continue fighting.


BERKLINE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BERKLINE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
20,021,000
23,595,000
Net inc
17,000
430,000
Share earns
.01
.28
6mo rev
42,206,000
43,656,000
Net inc
250,000
608,000
Share earns
.16
.40


GENERAL PUBLIC UTILITIES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL PUBLIC UTILITIES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
629,812,000
660,465,000
Net inc
48,207,000
45,807,000
Share earns
.77
.73
Yr rev
2,673,421,000
2,787,077,000
Net inc
259,097,000
210,947,000
Share earns
4.12
3.36


Sony Disk Players
LEAD: The Sony Corporation will begin marketing multidisk players able to play compact disks, compact disk videos and optical laser disks in the United States around May, a company spokesman said.
The models cost between $970 and $1,315 in Japan at current exchange rates, but United States pricing is still undecided.


GREAT WESTERN SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT WESTERN SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
895,000
7,134,000
Yr net loss
5,618,000
7,215,000


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article yesterday about supermarket tabloids, and a picture caption with it, misstated circulation figures for some of the papers.
The Star, published by News America, reports a circulation of 3.7 million.
Globe Communications says its three publications - The Globe, The National Examiner and The Sun - have a combined circulation of 3.2 million.


GUARDSMAN PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GUARDSMAN PRODUCTS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
32,811,000
26,720,000
Net inc
1,244,000
1,229,000
Share earns
.26
.25
Yr sales
127,559,000
107,014,000
Net inc
5,210,000
4,458,000
Share earns
1.06
.91


Senate Panel Approves Bill To Regulate Lie Tests on Job
LEAD: Legislation that would prevent employers from using polygraphs, or lie detectors, to screen job applicants was approved today by the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee and sent to the Senate floor for a vote.


Britain Drops a Barrier To B.P. Bid for Britoil
LEAD: The British Government indicated today that it was not worried that the British Petroleum Company's effort to acquire Britoil P.L.C. could be harmful by lessening competition, but it retained its veto power on Britoil's board.


MERCURY SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCURY SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
330,000
c84,000
Per share
.06
.02
Yr net inc
b5,133,000
9,401,000
Per share
.91
1.69
b-Includes a gain of $1,413,000 from the cumulative effect of the early application of FAS 96 accounting for income taxes.


AMERICAN GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN GENERAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,833,246,000
1,961,560,000
Net inc
b108,878,000
c236,422,000
Share earns
.81
1.57
Shares outst
141,638,215
151,230,697
Yr rev
7,157,663,000
6,891,670,000
Net inc
b563,800,000
c669,150,000
Share earns
3.88
4.47
Shares outst
146,923,604
151,558,445


How Great Were the Injustices of Arabs to Jews; Silence Is Golden
LEAD: To the Editor:


ESCAGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESCAGEN CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
627,798
-
Net loss
379,500
-
9mo rev
1,819,304
-
Net loss
924,499
-
The company went public in April 1987.


KROGER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KROGER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,408,305,275
4,376,257,013
Net inc
47,401,349
18,935,086
Share earns
.58
.20
Yr sales
17,659,730,487
17,122,518,490
Net inc
b246,643,588
c51,492,643
Share earns
2.93
.55


Citicorp Singing
LEAD: Cast members from the Off Broadway show ''Mama, I Want to Sing!'' are to perform songs from the show today at 1 P.M. in the first of a series of free performances at the Citicorp Center, Lexington Avenue and 53d Street.
The series, called Mardi Gras at the Market, will run through Feb. 27 and feature jazz performances at various times throughout each day.


Weicker Will Seek a 4th Term in the Senate
LEAD: Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr. announcing his candidacy for a fourth term yesterday in Farmington, Conn.
With him were his wife, Claudia, and other members of his family.
The liberal Republican, who is often at odds with his party's leadership, will probably face Joseph I. Lieberman, the state's Attorney General, who is expected to announce his candidacy for the Democratic nomination later this month.


Sports People; Madlock to Japan
LEAD: Bill Madlock, a four-time National League batting champion with a .305 career average, will play this season in Japan for the Lotte Orions, The Associated Press has reported.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about Brent Owens, a film maker, misstated the release date for Spike Lee's film ''School Daze.'' It is to be released nationally on Feb. 12.


Profit Rises At Parent Of ABC
LEAD: Capital Cities/ABC Inc. reported yesterday that its net income rose 46 percent in the fourth quarter because of higher revenues from its broadcast group and reduced costs.
The company also said that the ABC Television Network had returned to profitability during 1987.


TEXAS EASTERN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS EASTERN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
913,100,000
1,018,800,000
Net inc
35,300,000
c28,400,000
Share earns
.59
.46
Yr rev
3,572,500,000
4,074,100,000
Net inc
b111,300,000
c16,700,000
Share earns
1.80
.02


Market Place; Analysts Favor Tobacco Stocks
LEAD: PRODUCT liability lawsuits involving the effects of cigarette smoking have in recent years created a cloud over tobacco stocks.
But a number of Wall Street analysts believe that investor fears on this score are overblown.


Dumptruck at the Ritz
LEAD: A rock triple bill tonight at the Ritz, 119 East 11th Street (254-2800), is to include Love Tractor, Dumptruck and Pianosaurus.
The music begins about 11 P.M.; tickets are $10 in advance, $12 tomorrow.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-9


Japanese, Reacting to Allegations Of Illegal Fishing, Plan New Rules
LEAD: Japanese officials, reacting to allegations that their fishing fleet is involved in widespread ''pillaging'' in American waters in the Bering Sea, said today that they would seek new regulations to control the problem.


UNITED SAVER'S BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED SAVER'S BANCORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
12,651,000
b2,989,000
Per share
-
.73
Yr net loss
4,456,000
b10,034,000
Per share
-
2.80
b-Net income  The company said the losses in the latest periods resulted from writing down its equity portfolios by $15.5 million as of Dec.


Horse Racing Notebook; Changes Promised For Forty Niner
LEAD: The next time Forty Niner runs, he will be a horse of a different color, figuratively and literally.


TERMINAL DATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TERMINAL DATA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,673,000
6,076,000
Net inc
187,000
b935,000
Share earns
.04
.21
b-Includes a tax credit of $402,000, a gain after taxes of $1,844,000 from the sale of the Woodland Hills facility, and a provision for a loss of $770,000 on the sale of the Simi Valley facility to Gibraltar Savings.


INTERNATIONAL GAME TECHOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL GAME TECHOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,156,000
21,866,000
Net inc
b2,708,000
679,000
Share earns
.53
.08
b-After an accounting change gain of $1,650,000.


Metro Datelines; Koch Is Pessimistic On Estimate Board
LEAD: Legal arguments have convinced him, Mayor Koch said yesterday, that the Board of Estimate runs a serious risk of being abolished.


AIRBORNE FREIGHT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIRBORNE FREIGHT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
170,587,000
144,553,000
Net inc
1,718,000
5,849,000
Share earns
.25
.98
Yr rev
632,303,000
541,627,000
Net inc
5,898,000
13,215,000
Share earns
.90
2.23


Senate, by 51-48 Vote, Backs Reagan Aid Request for the Contras
LEAD: The Senate, giving President Reagan a surprising but only symbolic victory, voted tonight to support his request to provide at least $43 million in aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.


Gephardt Calls Simon Radio Ads In Iowa 'Negative Campaigning'
LEAD: In a tight Democratic Presidential contest where the candidates are searching for any advantage, the campaigns of Representative Richard A. Gephardt and Senator Paul Simon traded volleys today over whether Mr.
Simon was engaging in ''negative campaigning.''


Results Plus
LEAD:  Golf  Rizzo Ahead by a Shot: Patti Rizzo one-putted six holes yesterday on her way to a five-under-par 67 and the first-round lead in the Mazda Classic in Boca Raton, Fla., the opening tournament of the L.P.G.A. season.
Trish Johnson of England, playing in her first L.P.G.A. event, and Missie McGeorge were next at 68.


Inmates Assail Thai Prison Over AIDS Care
LEAD: Forty-eight Thai and foreign prisoners in an AIDS unit of a Bangkok prison have asked the country's leading human rights lawyer and a Thai-American anti-AIDS campaigner to help them get medical care and draw attention to jail conditions that they say could help spread the disease.


SYMBOLICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYMBOLICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Revenue
23,806,000
26,533,000
Net loss
b15,433,000
3,447,000
6mo rev
47,760,000
49,983,000
Net loss
b19,891,000
22,058,000
b-Includes unusual charges totaling $12,688,000 for corporate restructuring and for costs associated with restructuring for the quarter, and the 6 months include non-recurring charges of $12,688,000 from restructuring costs and the writedown of certain assets.


JENNIFER CONVERTIBLES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JENNIFER CONVERTIBLES
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
1,915,620
530,797
Net loss
10,863
b28,854
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income  The latest first quarter included results of 11 stores, compared with two stores in year-ago period.


CAROLINA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAROLINA POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
507,008,000
483,191,000
Net inc
65,631,000
73,715,000
Share earns
.71
.80
Yr rev
2,081,885,000
2,040,798,000
Net inc
343,408,000
357,774,000
Share earns
3.83
3.96


NERCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NERCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
151,700,000
169,400,000
Net inc
14,500,000
30,100,000
Share earns
.43
.90
Yr rev
632,300,000
594,700,000
Net inc
60,100,000
b57,500,000
Share earns
1.80
1.73


Letter on Pipeline Project Is Questioned
LEAD: Avoiding normal channels, a close friend of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d arranged for a letter to be sent directly to Mr.
Meese requesting a key legal opinion about a billion-dollar Iraqi oil pipeline project, according to past and present Government officials.


Economic Scene; Prognosticators' Diverse Methods
LEAD: DOES the decline of the Government's index of leading indicators for three months in a row mean a recession is just around the corner?


People
LEAD: *
Katherine O. Jose has been appointed vice president, director of advertising, at The National Enquirer.


Leon Schwartz
LEAD: Leon Schwartz, an 84-year-old violinist, is to give two klezmer concerts today at the Richmondtown Restoration, 441 Clarke Avenue, Richmondtown, S.I.
Mr.
Schwartz, who was born in the Ukraine, has been playing klezmer music since the age of 12.
Shows are at 8 and 9:30 P.M.
Tickets are $6.
Information: (718) 351-1617.


Film: 'Julia and Julia,' With Kathleen Turner
LEAD: ''JULIA AND JULIA,'' opening today at the Embassy 3 and other theaters, is minor movie making, but it does prove two things: that Kathleen Turner has become the kind of star who can carry even third-rate fiction without losing her beautiful, voluptuous cool, and that high-definition tape (on which this was initially shot) can be transferred to film and look as good as anything shot on film to start with.


CAVCO INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAVCO INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,176,108
4,900,453
Net inc
246,541
120,532
Share earns
.22
.11


ALLIED-SIGNAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIED-SIGNAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,954,000,000
2,529,000,000
Net inc
b136,000,000
c69,000,000
Share earns
.88
.38
Shares outst
154,421,201
174,249,393
Yr sales
11,116,000,000
9,888,000,000
Net inc
b655,000,000
c605,000,000
Share earns
3.90
3.26
Shares outst
167,743,099
175,674,387


Bush Reportedly Asked Cuba Deal on Grenada
LEAD: A former senior Panamanian official said today that Vice President Bush, on the eve of the American invasion of Grenada, asked Panama's leader to intervene with Fidel Castro so Cuban troops would not fire on American soldiers.


J &amp; J SNACK FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*J &amp; J SNACK FOODS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
15,020,400
7,858,300
Net inc
710,500
530,900
Share earns
.24
.18


SOUTHERN INDIANA GAS &amp; ELECRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN INDIANA GAS &amp; ELECRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
64,928,530
60,809,292
Net inc
3,111,505
4,393,929
Share earns
.30
.42
Yr rev
276,885,675
268,645,531
Net inc
33,320,817
31,822,420
Share earns
3.42
3.18


A Candidate's Delight: To Say, 'Hi, Neighbor'
LEAD: When Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts wants to reach the voters in New Hampshire, he can hold a news conference in his own office in Boston.


Pact Will Allow Agency to Hire Indicted Builder
LEAD: In a confidential agreement, a New York State agency has cleared the way for awarding a $57 million highway construction contract in Queens to a company under Federal indictment for bid-rigging.


NEW PROCESS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW PROCESS CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
103,723,371
94,627,107
Net inc
9,204,179
6,664,109
Share earns
.99
.71
Yr sales
362,576,600
359,609,041
Net inc
22,646,284
17,694,945
Share earns
2.42
1.89


Forget the Money And Bring On Art History
LEAD: Harry Rand, a curator with the Smithsonian's National Museum of American Art in Washington, gets three or four calls a week from undiscovered geniuses. ''They have masterpieces in their attics,'' said Mr.
Rand. ''Masterpieces in their closets.'' Maybe 1 in 200 times, it's actually something; maybe 1 in 1,000 will lead to an acquistion.


Sports People; Oquendo Loses
LEAD: Jose Oquendo, who hit a home run against San Francisco in Game 7 of the playoffs that helped St.
Louis win the National League pennant last fall, lost his salary arbitration case yesterday.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  As Ever, Peggy Lee


STARRETT, L S CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STARRETT, L S CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
45,114,498
36,614,825
Net inc
4,047,978
3,497,121
Share earns
1.17
1.00
6mo rev
84,183,633
67,504,246
Net inc
7,559,170
6,579,155
Share earns
2.18
1.87


Japan Car Imports Rise
LEAD: Sales of foreign cars in Japan rose 42.9 percent in January, to 5,957, the Japan Automobile Importers Association said today.


FOSTER, L B CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOSTER, L B CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
51,822,000
64,043,000
Net inc
2,365,000
c39,034,000
Share earns
.24
-
Yr sales
211,291,000
288,876,000
Net inc
b21,704,000
c55,501,000
Share earns
2.21
-


KNIGHT-RIDDER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KNIGHT-RIDDER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
556,756,000
516,672,000
Net inc
50,048,000
43,698,000
Share earns
.86
.75
Yr rev
2,072,648,000
1,910,650,000
Net inc
155,163,000
140,039,000
Share earns
2.65
2.41


FONAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FONAR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,678,000
10,303,000
Net inc
b1,006,000
c557,000
Share earns
.05
.03
6mo rev
26,707,000
19,395,000
Net inc
b1,894,000
c907,000
Share earns
.09
.05
Shares outst
21,835,000
20,162,000


Hearts - and Minds - on Nicaragua
LEAD: By an eight-vote margin, the House has given a deserved rebuke to President Reagan's failed policy toward Central America.
The majority told Mr.
Reagan, in effect, that they and the people they represent believe he has been pursuing a war without end in Nicaragua, not peace.
Accordingly, the legislators disapproved the Administration's plan for renewed aid to the contras.


G.S.A., Citing Report, May Fight A.T.&amp;T. Bids
LEAD: The General Services Administration said today that, if the American Telephone and Telegraph Company received secret bid prices of its competitors for Federal Government telephone switch contracts, as said in a news report, it would seek to prevent the company from gaining the contracts.


3 Share Lead at 67 At Pebble Beach
LEAD: Jim Booros, who spent the last two years as the head pro at the municipal golf course in Allentown, Pa., decided that at 37 he would give the PGA Tour one more shot.
He had not been too successful in five years on the circuit - 1977 and 1981, as well as 1983-85.


ROYAL INTERNATIONAL OPTIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROYAL INTERNATIONAL OPTIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
22,135,000
19,172,000
Net inc
829,000
b301,000
Share earns
.12
-
9mo rev
70,196,000
62,520,000
Net inc
3,293,000
1,351,000
Share earns
.48
.20


Soderstrom Recital
LEAD: The soprano Elisabeth Soderstrom will sing songs by Rachmaninoff, Schubert, Mendelssohn, Chopin, Tchaikovsky, Copland and Bartok and several Scandinavian melodies, Sunday at 3 P.M. in Alice Tully Hall.
Tickets are $17.50.
Information: 874-6770.


Dollar Retreats With Bonds As Gold Rises in New York
LEAD: The dollar retreated with bond prices yesterday, as disappointment with this week's Treasury refunding auctions appeared even before the sales ended late in the New York trading session.


BNH BANCSHARES reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BNH BANCSHARES
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,713,000
2,245,000
Per share
.90
.81


HOUGHTON MIFFLIN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOUGHTON MIFFLIN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
61,607,000
55,706,000
Net loss
3,257,000
5,157,000
Yr sales
343,416,000
321,347,000
Net inc
23,616,000
22,612,000
Share earns
1.66
1.61
The latest year included a $2.4 million gain from the purchase of annuities in the company's pension plan.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  In the Taylor Way


Panel in Inquiry on Pipeline To Review Secrecy Listings
LEAD: The independent prosecutor who has been investigating Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d said today that the White House would form an interagency panel to review the classification of any information involving his investigation into an Iraqi oil pipeline deal.


Eastwood Rules Out Running For 2d Term as Carmel Mayor
LEAD: Clint Eastwood, the film star who was elected Mayor two years ago, says he will not seek a second two-term term as chief executive of this resort town of 4,700 people.


Ortega Says Contra Aid Rebuff Won't Stop U.S. 'War Against Nicaragua'
LEAD: Despite the Congressional rejection of new aid for the contras, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said today that the six-year-old civil conflict here was far from over.


AUTOMATED SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUTOMATED SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,923,000
3,448,000
Net loss
445,000
b240,000
Share earns
-
.07
6mo sales
5,449,000
5,700,000
Net loss
936,000
b168,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


Rangers Lack Punch
LEAD: The Rangers were not inspired enough tonight to make Coach Michel Bergeron's return to this city a success.


Talk With Rabin: Roots of the Conflict
LEAD: Palestinian rioters have been winning the public relations battle against Israel in the world press, Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin conceded today, stressing that the army is confronting something new and complex: a widespread uprising born of decades of Palestinian frustrations.


DUQUESNE LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DUQUESNE LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
218,922,000
222,533,000
Net inc
44,305,000
25,015,000
Share earns
.55
.27
Shares outst
72,029,000
73,119,000
Yr rev
888,004,000
896,263,000
Net inc
151,316,000
151,426,000
Share earns
1.81
1.79


HEALTH MANAGEMENT ASSOCITES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTH MANAGEMENT ASSOCITES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
42,355,000
23,750,000
Net inc
876,000
674,000
Share earns
.17
.13


The Law; For Complex Case, a Singular Mediation Effort
LEAD: The separate legal worlds of the Federal and Connecticut courts are coming together in an unusual joint effort to handle a flood of lawsuits expected from the collapse of a new apartment building here last April 23 that killed 28 construction workers.


VERMONT AMERICAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERMONT AMERICAN CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
73,604,000
66,177,000
Net inc
4,157,000
4,142,000
Share earns
.41
.40
Yr sales
292,701,000
255,427,000
Net inc
18,360,000
13,548,000
Share earns
1.80
1.29


Photo of Jean-Honore Fragonard's ''Self-Portrait in Three-Quarter View, Facing Left'' THE GLORY OF FRAGONARD AT THE MET
LEAD: THE adorable genius of Jean-Honore Fragonard looks perfectly at home in the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Washington Talk: The Justice Department; Despite Meese's Woes, Agency Muddles Through
LEAD: ''Look at this,'' said a Justice Department official, pulling a yellowed newspaper clipping from his wallet. ''Words to live by.''


LEE PHARMACEUTICALS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEE PHARMACEUTICALS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,984,000
9,329,000
Net inc
41,000
835,000
Share earns
.01
.20


KEY RATES
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.50
6.55
5.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.65
5.69
5.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.05
6.09
5.58
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.08
8.02
6.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.44
8.37
7.42
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.42
9.34
8.62
MUNICIPAL BONDS*
7.93
7.92
6.99


Plan for Savings Units
LEAD: Savings industry regulators held talks today with four retail brokerage firms to determine their interest in selling certificates of deposit issued by savings and loans.


FIRST NATIONAL BANK CORP (MICH) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST NATIONAL BANK CORP (MICH)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
155,000
542,000
Per share
.15
.60
Shares outst
1,045,536
905,536
Yr net inc
2,214,000
2,008,000
Per share
2.23
2.22
Shares outst
994,203
905,536


IE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IE INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
97,084,000
102,855,000
Net inc
3,313,000
6,513,000
Share earns
.24
.48
Yr rev
412,778,000
429,245,000
Net inc
b34,076,000
28,536,000
Share earns
2.48
2.13


MARRIOTT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARRIOTT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Sales
2,117,400,000
1,850,200,000
Net inc
61,700,000
56,200,000
Share earns
.48
.41
Shares outst
128,600,000
135,400,000
Yr sales
6,522,200,000
5,266,500,000
Net inc
223,000,000
191,700,000
Share earns
1.67
1.40
Shares outst
133,800,000
136,700,000


Uncle Sam Practices Funny Bookkeeping
LEAD: To the Editor:


MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,114,000
1,905,000
Net loss
430,000
832,000
9mo rev
4,318,000
5,995,000
Net loss
b5,775,000
b2,650,000
b-Includes a charge of $2,250,000 from lawsuit settlement for the latest period, and includes a charge of $1,051,000 for product withdrawal for the year-ago period.


CHICAGO PACIFIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHICAGO PACIFIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
445,451,000
349,043,000
Net inc
b13,039,000
c10,501,000
Share earns
1.37
1.05
Yr sales
1,411,931,000
954,936,000
Net inc
b34,874,000
c28,788,000
Share earns
3.61
3.34


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net incxome
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Allied-Signal Inc.
$136,000,000
+97.1
Avon Products Inc.
72,300,000
+3.0
Beverly Enterprises
(22,400,000)
-
Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
117,000,000
+45.7
Chrysler Corp.


L.I. Power Authority Upheld
LEAD: A state law that created the Long Island Power Authority is constitutional, Justice Eli Wager of State Supreme Court ruled today.
The decision clears the way for a takeover by the authority of the Long Island Lighting Company and the closing of the $5 billion Shoreham Nuclear Power Station.


GANNETT CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GANNETT CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
835,400,000
781,500,000
Net inc
106,600,000
88,800,000
Share earns
.66
.55
Yr rev
3,080,000,000
2,800,000,000
Net inc
319,400,000
276,400,000
Share earns
1.98
1.71


Singer Offer Ends
LEAD: The company established by Paul A. Bilzerian to acquire the Singer Company said it had accepted more than 17 million shares in response to its tender offer of $50 a share, which expired Wednesday.
The Singer Acquisition Company said it now owned about 90 percent of the aerospace and military electronics company.


Accord Said to Be Near On the Sale of The Post
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch is close to a deal to sell The New York Post to Peter S. Kalikow, a New York real-estate entrepreneur, sources familiar with the negotiations said last night.


ADVERTISING;
LEAD: Ketchum Advertising, Pittsburgh, part of Ketchum Communications, has won the Cullinet computer software business-to-business account, beating out five other agencies.
The budget is $5 million.


LODGISTIX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LODGISTIX INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,672,000
4,886,000
Net inc
48,000
b136,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
12,563,000
8,994,008
Net loss
32,000
591,000
b-Net loss


ARROW BANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARROW BANK CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,180,000
1,098,000
Per share
.54
.54
Shares outst
2,178,825
2,020,415
Yr net inc
4,188,000
3,658,000
Per share
1.92
1.82


DOMTAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOMTAR INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
656,000,000
605,000,000
Net inc
38,000,000
b39,000,000
Share earns
.41
.42
Yr sales
2,568,000,000
2,327,000,000
Net inc
161,000,000
b145,000,000
Share earns
1.73
1.60


DETECTION SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DETECTION SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,269,000
3,349,000
Net inc
302,000
234,000
Share earns
.12
.09
9mo sales
12,481,000
9,167,000
Net inc
941,000
374,000
Share earns
.36
.15


MIDWEST ENERGY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDWEST ENERGY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
153,364,000
157,810,000
Net inc
11,312,000
9,934,000
Share earns
.52
.46
Yr rev
537,820,000
592,591,000
Net inc
33,063,000
34,780,000
Share earns
1.53
1.61


ORIENTAL FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORIENTAL FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
344,000
581,000
Per share
.26
-
6mo net inc
784,000
963,000
The bank converted from a mutual savings bank to a stock savings bank in April 1987.


REPUBLIC GYPSUM CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REPUBLIC GYPSUM CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,543,000
16,434,000
Net inc
761,000
1,654,000
Share earns
.08
.16
6mo sales
27,417,000
30,556,000
Net inc
1,186,000
2,873,000
Share earns
.12
.27


Restructuring For Polysar
LEAD: The Polysar Energy and Chemical Corporation, a Toronto-based holding company, told stock analysts yesterday that a restructuring plan it announced on Wednesday was in the works even before it received an unsolicited takeover bid from the Nova Corporation of Alberta.


FIELDCREST CANNON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIELDCREST CANNON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
384,374,000
335,980,000
Net loss
9,450,000
b10,700,000
Share earns
-
1.12
Yr sales
1,399,763,000
1,083,236,000
Net loss
3,658,000
b17,389,000
Share earns
-
2.11


SAG HARBOR SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAG HARBOR SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b726,000
c441,000
Per share
.54
-
Yr net inc
b2,872,000
c2,005,000
Per share
2.13
-
b-After tax credits of $317,000 for the quarter and $1,036,000 for the year.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: THE roadside diner, that stainless-steel citadel of all-American cuisine, is making a comeback in Manhattan.
Recent examples include the spiffy Broadway Diner (two locations, 1726 Broadway, at 55th Street, 765-0909, and 590 Lexington Avenue, at 52d Street, 486-8838), Ellen's Stardust Diner (1377 Avenue of the Americas, at 56th Street, 307-7575), and now, the month-old Horn &amp; Hardart Dine-o-Mat, at 942 Third Avenue, between 56th and 57th


NORIEGA ORDERED COLOMBIA SLAYING, PREDECESSOR SAYS
LEAD: As Panama's military leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, awaits the formal announcement of his indictment on drug-trafficking charges in the United States, he and the military-dominated Government have been rocked by accusations made public here.


4 Die in Colombian Clash
LEAD: One policeman and three leftist guerrillas were killed today in a clash at a police station in this northwestern Colombian city.
A police spokesman said the clash occurred when the guerrillas, apparently from the pro-Cuban National Liberation Army, unsuccessfully tried to seize the station.


CENTURY PAPERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTURY PAPERS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
32,846,000
30,788,000
Net inc
613,000
407,000
Share earns
.52
.35
9mo sales
99,667,000
93,079,000
Net inc
1,611,000
795,000
Share earns
1.37
.68


GARTNER GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GARTNER GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,880,000
6,349,000
Net inc
101,000
537,000
Share earns
.02
.14
9mo rev
28,347,000
18,061,000
Net inc
1,188,000
1,294,000
Share earns
.30
.35


TBC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TBC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
119,774,000
97,423,000
Net inc
3,851,000
2,104,000
Share earns
.36
.18
Yr sales
455,942,000
391,584,000
Net inc
12,197,000
6,525,000
Share earns
1.15
.55


Sports People; One at a Time
LEAD: Butch van Breda Kolff ran up some impressive numbers in his career Wednesday night when his Lafayette College Leopards defeated Towson State, 73-60, at Easton, Pa.
For van Breda Kolff, 64, the victory was the 700th in 1,200 games that he has coached in high school, college, the National Basketball Association and the American Basketball Association during the last 33 years.


Robert Fitzsimmons, Actor, 73
LEAD: Robert Fitzsimmons, an actor and union leader, died of cardiac and pulmonary arrest on Jan. 31 at Mt.
Sinai Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.


THOMAS NELSON PUBLISHERS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THOMAS NELSON PUBLISHERS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,663,523
13,575,076
Net inc
543,557
c66,771
Share earns
.10
.02
9mo rev
33,888,342
38,499,636
Net inc
b1,730,329
c459,701
Share earns
.32
.09


JORGENSEN, EARLE M CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JORGENSEN, EARLE M CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
95,427,000
68,652,000
Net inc
b2,658,000
c15,801,000
Share earns
.42
-
Yr sales
341,467,000
285,171,000
Net inc
4,903,000
c14,812,000
Share earns
.78
-


Baby M Ruling Welcomed at Meeting of Surrogacy Experts
LEAD: Lawyers and others participating in a workshop on surrogate motherhood today praised the New Jersey Supreme Court decision that restored parental rights to the mother of Baby M and said they expected it to influence lawmakers around the country.


FRANKLIN ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRANKLIN ELECTRIC CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
34,000,000
29,700,000
Net inc
1,400,000
800,000
Share earns
.37
.22
Yr sales
145,400,000
130,500,000
Net inc
9,500,000
7,700,000
Share earns
2.56
2.08


Struggle for Recovery Altering Rural America
LEAD: On the day in 1982 when Jack Briggs opened Macon County's economic development office, the local Dairy Queen announced it was shutting down.
That is just about the ultimate in despair for a dying small town in rural America.


Europe Research Plan
LEAD: The European Community said it was willing to spend 550 million European Currency Units, or about $670 million, to co-finance research projects in advanced telecommunications to help companies enter a world market estimated to be worth more than $600 billion.
The projects involve transmitting voice, data and images quickly and cheaply.


Mortgage Rates Down; Buyers Wary
LEAD: The recent steep decline in interest rates has pushed mortgage lending rates in most areas of the nation to their lowest levels in more than six months.
Yet consumers seem to be reacting cautiously to the decline.


Mets and Gooden Are Stalled
LEAD: With less than two weeks to go to arbitration, the Mets and Dwight Gooden were hardening their positions yesterday over the issue of the two months that the star pitcher lost in drug therapy last season.


EMPIRE DISTRICT ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMPIRE DISTRICT ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
33,946,000
34,405,000
Net inc
2,190,000
3,618,000
Share earns
.37
.63
Yr rev
150,148,000
132,490,000
Net inc
16,835,000
16,301,000
Share earns
2.95
2.86


Fire Hits Country Club in Upstate New York
LEAD: Firefighter hosing a fire early yesterday at the Lafayette Country Club in Onondaga.
Firefighters, hindered in responding to the fire by heavy snow and unplowed roads, fought the blaze for almost four hours before they were able to bring it under control.
The fire destroyed the main building of the club, one of the oldest golf clubs in the area.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''People deserve better than this kind of low-down, nasty, mean politics.
What kind of a candidate would put out a statement attacking another candidate and his wife without reading it.'' - Senator Bob Dole.  [ A12:6. ]


Senators Told of Mistakes in Oil Spill
LEAD: The chairman of Ashland Oil Inc. conceded today that ''mistakes were made'' by company employees responsible for the tank that ruptured on Jan. 2, spilling nearly a million gallons of diesel fuel into the Monongahela River.


Manes Had Stake in Collection Agency, U.S. Says
LEAD: A new Federal indictment against a Queens lawyer and his son has charged that the late Donald R. Manes was a secret partner in a private agency ''corruptly'' set up to collect overdue parking fines for the city.


INTERNATIONAL RECOVERY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL RECOVERY (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,361,392
846,055
Net inc
183,410
b8,234
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
27,950,937
3,008,109
Net inc
697,904
3,395
Share earns
.21
-
b-Net loss


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


How Great Were the Injustices of Arabs to Jews; French-German Way
LEAD: To the Editor:


Expose Albany's Secret Spending
LEAD: New York State's Legislature has budgeted a generous $167 million for its own operations in 1988, but how the money is being spent remains known only to the Assembly and Senate majority leaders, Mel Miller and Warren Anderson.
Minority-party lawmakers, fed up with second-class treatment, justly complain.


Music Benefit For Troupe Of Veterans
LEAD: Several musical forms - jazz, choral singing, movie music and new music - by Dizzy Gillespie, Dave Brubeck, Anthony Davis, Philip Glass, Tania Leon and the Gregg Smith Singers will be presented in a benefit Sunday for the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company and the three-month-old Borden Avenue Shelter in Queens, the only shelter in New York specifically for homeless veterans.


Film: 'Lightness of Being,' From Novel by Kundera
LEAD: PHILIP KAUFMAN'S ''Unbearable Lightness of Being'' begins with much promise, as if it were a ribald fairy tale. ''In Prague in 1968,'' says a title card, ''there lived a young doctor named Tomas.'' Tomas (Daniel Day-Lewis) comes out of the operating room and goes straight to a pretty nurse waiting in the supply room.


HELMERICH &amp; PAYNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HELMERICH &amp; PAYNE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
38,487,000
41,278,000
Net inc
b4,913,000
b10,499,000
Share earns
.20
.43
b-Included $1,037,000, or 4 cents a share, for the latest quarter and $6,646,000, or 27 cents a share, for the year-ago period from securities gains.


Japan Posts A Trade Deficit
LEAD: Japan posted a trade deficit for the first 20 days in January, but Government officials and economists said today that the unusual shortfall probably did not indicate a trend.


Breland Fights to Rebuild Reputation
LEAD: From the start of his pro career, Mark Breland has been a special case.


'Die Winterreise'
LEAD: Marian Thompson, a soprano, will sing Schubert's ''Winterreise'' on Sunday at 8 P.M. in Merkin Concert Hall (129 West 67th Street).
Alexander Valery Ryvkin will be the pianist.
Tickets are $10, or $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: 362-8719.


Luge Racer Must Obtain A Passport
LEAD: Raymond Ocampo's attempt to retain his Olympic accreditation and represent the Philippines hinges on his ability to get a Philippine passport before the Games begin, a week from Saturday.


Newark Man Fatally Stabs A Woman in a Bus Terminal
LEAD: A 21-year-old woman died today after a man, apparently unprovoked, stabbed her in the back with a 12-inch butcher knife in a Penn Station waiting room, the N.J.
Transit police said.
Thomas J. Rouse, 33 years old, of Newark, was charged with homicide and criminal possession of a weapon, said Kevin Moran, a transit officer.


U.N. Aide to Go to Mideast
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar is sending a special envoy to Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria to seek ways of achieving peace in the Middle East, a spokesman said today.
The envoy, Under Secretary General Marrack Goulding, will also meet with Palestine Liberation Organization officials, probably in Tunis, said the spokesman, Francois Giuliani.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 417 money market mutual funds increased $326.1 million, to $275.24 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 113 institutional funds increased $426.5 million, to $80.68 billion.
Assets of the 207 general purpose funds were down $177.3 million, to $81.06 billion.


IN SEARCH OF TOOTS SHOR: MANTLE'S BACK
LEAD: The dreams of banishment he had every night, when he would wake up startled and sweating, are gone now.


A City in Misery, Betrayed by a Taste for Clams
LEAD: Lu Guiying, a portly woman in a white apron and cap, stood glumly outside her restaurant, her arms folded across her chest.


Art: 'Committed to Print,' on Political Themes
LEAD: WITH its new exhibition, ''Committed to Print,'' the Museum of Modern Art, defender of a relatively pure modernist faith, treads cautiously but deliberately where it doesn't often go: into the terrain where art and overt political sentiment mingle and sometimes fuse.
The title invites two readings, and Deborah Wye, the organizer of the exhibition, makes good on both of them.


Brooklyn Arts Council Holding Film Festival
LEAD: The actor and director Danny DeVito once had a film shown there.
So did Ira Wohl, who made ''Best Boy,'' winner of the 1980 Academy Award for best feature-length documentary.


SCI SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCI SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
173,153,000
134,613,000
Net inc
3,962,000
3,454,000
Share earns
.19
.17
6mo sales
324,839,000
263,012,000
Net inc
7,838,000
6,768,000
Share earns
.38
.33


EAGLE TELEHPONICS reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EAGLE TELEHPONICS (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,505,533
12,684,757
Net inc
b314,844
c689,900
Share earns
.02
.05
Yr sales
34,415,113
30,218,637
Net inc
b2,610,310
c1,609,000
Share earns
.17
.11


Margin Raised In Chicago
LEAD: Reacting to suggestions from various commissions that have examined the October stock market collapse, directors of the Chicago Board of Trade have voted to raise the minimum margins, or down payments, on purchases of the Major Market Index futures contract.


THERMO INSTRUMENT SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THERMO INSTRUMENT SYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
24,105,000
19,663,000
Net inc
1,844,000
1,441,000
Share earns
.12
.09
6mo rev
45,733,000
39,081,000
Net inc
3,697,000
2,544,000
Share earns
.24
.17


DELPHI INFORMATION SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELPHI INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,184,000
5,755,000
Net loss
848,000
b297,000
Share earns
-
.09
9mo rev
14,295,000
13,882,000
Net loss
929,000
c425,000
b-Net income  c-Includes a loss of $50,000 from discontinued operations.


3 Masters Have a Kick Left
LEAD: In their prime, they were the best.
Peter Snell of New Zealand won three Olympic gold medals and set world outdoor records for the mile of 3 minutes 54.4 seconds in 1962 and 3:54.1 in 1964.
Jim Ryun, still a teen-ager, lowered the world record to 3:51.3 in 1966 and 3:51.1 in 1967.
Frank Shorter's fastest mile was only 4:02.6, but he won Olympic medals in 1972 (gold) and 1976 (silver) in the marathon.


College Basketball; No. 1 Arizona Is Upset by Stanford, 82-74
LEAD: Todd Lichti scored 23 points and Howard Wright 22 as Stanford scored the final 10 points of the game tonight to upset No. 1-ranked Arizona, 82-74, ending the Wildcats' eight-game winning streak.


CP NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CP NATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
69,824,000
64,318,000
Net inc
b2,624,000
6,968,000
Share earns
.34
.93
Yr rev
246,050,000
241,210,000
Net inc
17,658,000
21,810,000
Share earns
2.31
2.92


Cineplex Film Deal
LEAD: The Cineplex Odeon Corporation said it had formed a joint venture with the New Century Entertainment Corporation to finance and distribute 25 to 30 New Century films in the next five years.
The venture follows an agreement last week by which New Century acquired the independent film maker New Visions Inc.


WICAT SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WICAT SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
11,304,000
4,614,000
Net inc
68,000
b3,808,000
9mo rev
31,019,000
20,456,000
Net loss
1,401,000
6,640,000
b-Net loss


New Rorer Campaign To Promote Aspirin
LEAD: The Rorer Group, a pharmaceutical company based in Fort Washington, Pa., has joined other drug makers in stepping up advertising featuring a recent study that found that taking an aspirin every other day reduced a man's risk of heart attack by nearly half.


ROTO-ROOTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROTO-ROOTER INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
15,124,000
13,458,000
Net inc
1,382,000
1,073,000
Share earns
.28
.22
Yr sales
55,233,000
45,292,000
Net inc
4,516,000
3,594,000
Share earns
.93
.74


AIDS Virus, for First Time, Is Proved to Infect Colon Cells Directly
LEAD: The AIDS virus can directly infect cells of the colon and rectum, a group of scientists reports, a finding that may answer questions about the transmission of AIDS and about why many of its victims have chronic unexplained diarrhea.


WARREN FIVE CENTS SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARREN FIVE CENTS SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
759,000
1,012,000
Per share
.22
.29
Yr net inc
3,346,000
3,057,000
Per share
.97
-
Warren converted to stock form of ownership in July 1986.


EQUITY OIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EQUITY OIL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,759,158
2,863,508
Net inc
b1,864,464
c1,102,592
Share earns
.15
-
Yr rev
12,980,545
10,818,618
Net inc
b2,157,248
c789,300
Share earns
.18
-
b-Includes a one-time cumulative deferred tax benefit resulting from the adoption of FAS No.96 of $1,308,770 for both the quarter and year.


New Bausch Shield
LEAD: Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc., based in Rochester, said marketing of the first collagen corneal shield, which would deliver medication to the eye without blocking vision, would begin immediately, after approval last week by the Federal Food and Drug Administration.
The lens has a potential yearly market value of $50 million for the company once improvements in the shield are cleared by the F.D.A., said Frank Jepson, a corporate vice president at Bausch &amp; Lomb.


Sports People; Molitor Honored
LEAD: Paul Molitor, whose 39-game hitting streak during the 1987 season was the fourth longest in American League history, has been named the winner of baseball's Hutch Award by a panel of broadcasters and writers covering the major leagues.


Malfunction of Rocket Stalls Anti-Missile Test
LEAD: A major test of President Reagan's proposed anti-missle system was delayed today after a Delta rocket meant to launch a three-ton military satellite developed a problem with a fuel tank.


LONE STAR INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LONE STAR INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
199,510,000
227,024,000
Net inc
35,965,000
88,183,000
Share earns
2.08
5.81
Yr sales
760,780,000
883,415,000
Net inc
57,200,000
117,370,000
Share earns
3.04
7.01


GRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,425,000
5,704,000
Net inc
546,000
318,000
Share earns
.19
.11
6mo sales
11,943,000
10,994,000
Net inc
1,057,000
729,000
Share earns
.37
.25


PATTEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PATTEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
27,300,000
22,100,000
Net inc
3,600,000
2,100,000
Share earns
.21
.14
9mo rev
85,800,000
60,300,000
Net inc
11,400,000
7,600,000
Share earns
.66
.54


At the Movies
LEAD:  Lighting a 'Bonfire'


First Boston Official Quits
LEAD: The First Boston Corporation suffered another high-level defection yesterday with the announcement that Yves-Andre Istel, co-head of its international operations, had resigned to join a new firm being formed by other former senior First Boston executives.


Orange Juice Falls by Limit; Grain and Soybeans Gain
LEAD: Orange juice futures prices retreated as far as they could go yesterday as fears of a Florida freeze melted away.


DOFASCO INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOFASCO INC
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,191,200,000
1,981,700,000
Net inc
154,000,000
135,900,000
Share earns
2.30
2.00
Results are in Canadian dollars.


BARRISTER INFORMATION SYSEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARRISTER INFORMATION SYSEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Revenue
9,250,000
8,583,000
Net loss
75,000
b302,000
Share earns
-
.10
9mo rev
26,796,000
22,298,000
Net inc
346,000
c256,000
Share earns
.11
-


Gannett Profit Increases 20%
LEAD: The Gannett Company, the newspaper and broadcast concern, said yesterday that its profits grew 20 percent in the final quarter of 1987 on the strength of its local newspapers and USA Today, its national newspaper.
Gannett, based in Arlington, Va., outside Washington, reported fourth-quarter earnings of $106.6 million, or 66 cents a share, up from $88.8 million, or 55 cents a share, in the corresponding period in 1986.


F.B.I. Had File on Knopf
LEAD: Two agencies of the United States Government, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation, maintained dossiers on Alfred A. Knopf, one of the country's most distinguished publishers, according to a book being published this spring.


KEYSTONE CONSOL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEYSTONE CONSOL INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Sales
57,752,000
49,320,000
Net loss
b1,656,000
c434,000
6mo sales
117,948,000
103,420,000
Net loss
1,076,000
d957,000
Share earns
-
.51
b-After a tax charge of $197,000.


LYPHOMED INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LYPHOMED INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
49,173,000
38,147,000
Net inc
5,686,000
4,632,000
Share earns
.19
.16
Yr sales
172,732,000
129,298,000
Net inc
21,006,000
15,730,000
Share earns
.70
.54


Matra Offering Oversubscribed
LEAD: The French Government's public offering of its 51 percent stake in Matra S.A., a military and electronics company, was oversubscribed almost fivefold, the Finance Ministry said today.


JOULE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOULE INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Revenue
8,931,000
7,800,000
Net inc
398,000
375,000
Share earns
.11
.10


HOME OFFICE REFERENCE LABORATORY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME OFFICE REFERENCE LABORATORY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,680,150
5,335,490
Net inc
4,819,564
1,116,090
Share earns
.32
.07
Yr sales
39,146,496
16,522,227
Net inc
12,434,837
3,087,770
Share earns
.83
.21


Rapid Rate Drop Seen Slowing
LEAD: Interest rates are still far lower than a month ago, but as the Treasury concluded three consecutive days of note and bond auctions totaling $27 billion yesterday, there were signs that the rapid decline in rates had leveled off.


Dole Confronts Bush in Senate; Voices Anger at Criticism of Wife
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole confronted Vice President Bush on the Senate floor twice today to denounce him for campaign statements that the Senator said were unfair to him and his wife.


Rose Bird a Commentator
LEAD: Rose Bird, who was ousted by the voters as California's Chief Justice, will become a commentator for television stations KABC in Los Angeles and KGO in San Francisco, which are owned by Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
Ms.
Bird will begin work within the next few days, a spokesman for KABC said.


AMETEK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMETEK INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
164,375,000
142,005,000
Net inc
10,598,000
b9,895,000
Share earns
.25
.23
Yr sales
620,121,000
568,493,000
Net inc
41,175,000
b36,584,000
Share earns
.94
.83


GALILEO ELECTRO-OPTICS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GALILEO ELECTRO-OPTICS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,087,000
7,948,000
Net inc
b9,000
599,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-After a gain on accounting adjustments of $200,000.


Jewish Group Calls Security Of Israel a 'Prime Concern'
LEAD: A coalition of Jewish groups declared yesterday that concern among American Jews over the violent clashes in Israeli-occupied territories had not diminished the Jewish community's ''prime concern'' for Israel's security.


FLORIDA PROGRESS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA PROGRESS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
480,800,000
423,700,000
Net inc
29,500,000
30,900,000
Share earns
.58
.63
Yr rev
1,957,600,000
1,898,900,000
Net inc
187,800,000
181,200,000
Share earns
3.74
3.71


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  AN ORTON BLACK COMEDY


Washington Lobbyists Find Skies Over Iowa Are Friendly
LEAD: Representative Richard A. Gephardt has campaigned for President on a populist theme, but when he flew a planeload of supporters to Iowa last week he took along the most inside of Washington insiders: about a dozen registered lobbyists.


Restaurants
LEAD: AFTER four visits to Aquavit, the dramatic new Scandinavian restaurant in the former John D. Rockefeller town house on West 54th Street, I'm still hard-pressed to define this northern cuisine.
Indeed, some of the ingredients are exotic - cloudberries, bleak roe, snow grouse - but the style of cooking, at least in this urbane establishment, is unmistakably French.


Mideast Tightrope: Clashes Stirring Call for Talks
LEAD: In reviving some old ideas about Middle East peace and giving them new twists, the Reagan Administration is counting on a change in atmosphere, created by the recent clashes between Palestinians and Israelis, to remove the old obstacles to negotiations on the future of the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Net Soars At Warner
LEAD: With record results in its films, records and cable television divisions, Warner Communications Inc. reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter net income rose 48.4 percent.


Corrections
LEAD: A table in Business Day on Jan. 22, showing uncovered short sales for the New York Stock Exchange for the month ended Jan. 15, carried incorrect figures supplied by the Orion Pictures Corporation for its stock.
As a result, the total Big Board short interest and the decline for the month were also incorrect.


Chrysler Profit Up, but Less Than Expected
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation reported today that its fourth-quarter earnings rose 8 percent, but the results were below the forecasts of many analysts.


Bridge: Series of Conditions Makes 4-3 Trump Fit Appropriate
LEAD: Standard bidding methods often have trouble finding the right game contract when a 4-3 trump fit is appropriate.


GIBSON GREETING CARDS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GIBSON GREETING CARDS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
145,381,000
120,962,000
Net inc
11,279,000
9,279,000
Share earns
.72
.59
Yr rev
359,583,000
323,206,000
Net inc
24,100,000
22,623,000
Share earns
1.53
1.43


INDEPENDENT BANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDEPENDENT BANK CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b404,000
c355,000
Per share
.25
.21
Yr net inc
b1,942,000
c1,762,000
Per share
1.24
1.12
b-After tax credits of $80,000 for the quarter and $457,000 for the year.


Washington Talk: Briefing; High-Level Gathering
LEAD: In March, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization will convene a rare summit meeting of Western heads of state.
But on Thursday an unusally high-level delegation of Congressional leaders and Reagan Administration officials left for a more informal meeting with European counterparts in Munich.


LECTEC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LECTEC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,474,000
1,084,000
Net inc
210,000
174,000
Share earns
.07
.08
Shares outst
3,182,000
2,090,000
6mo rev
2,852,000
2,374,000
Net inc
404,000
271,000
Share earns
.13
.13
Shares outst
3,211,000
2,073,000


Martha Love McCagg Snow Architect, 83
LEAD: Martha Love McCagg Snow, an architect, died of colon and stomach cancer Wednesday at her daughter's home in Edison, N.J.
She was 83 years old and lived in Bronxville, N.Y.


BEVERLY ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEVERLY ENTERPRISES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
499,630,000
526,394,000
Net loss
b22,439,000
1,643,000
Yr rev
2,093,614,000
2,019,262,000
Net loss
b30,521,000
c44,943,000
Share earns
-
.71
b-After extraordinary gains of $1,602,000 for the quarter and $2,259,000 for the year.


How Great Were the Injustices of Arabs to Jews; 'Pacification' of Gaza
LEAD: To the Editor:


450 LTV Layoffs
LEAD: LTV Aircraft Products Group said it would lay off about 450 Dallas-area workers in the next two months and would slash its work force by 1,000 by the end of the year.
The company said it was cutting back because of lower spending planned by the Defense Department.
LTV Aircraft, a subsidiary of the LTV Corporation, said the layoffs would reduce the work force to about 10,000.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Amax, Inc., Greenwich, Conn., a minerals and energy concern, elected Stephen C. Knup senior vice president and chief financial officer, succeeding Martin V. Alonzo, who resigned last year.


A Poem for Seven Judges
LEAD: Most of the important news stories journalists deal with are sad or dreary.
People are killed, hijacked, swindled.
Nations go to war, or spend their energies and fortunes preparing for it.
Earthquakes, explosions, plagues.
Everybody is always saying something nasty about somebody else.
That's the way things are in the world - or that is how it comes out by the time we are finished slicing it up into words or pictures.


Sports People; Manager Charged
LEAD: Manager Cal Ripken of the Baltimore Orioles, was charged with drunken driving after he was pulled over for speeding, the Baltimore County police said yesterday.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allied-Signal Inc., Morristown, N.J., said it had repurchased 27.4 million shares last year for $1.1 billion.


FLIGHTSAFETY INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLIGHTSAFETY INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
36,411,000
28,517,000
Net inc
11,199,000
8,093,000
Share earns
.50
.36
Yr rev
135,934,000
107,912,000
Net inc
41,813,000
29,496,000
Share earns
1.87
1.32


CANCER CLUSTERS PROMPT U.S. STUDY
LEAD: The National Institutes of Health have quietly initiated a study of cancer deaths among populations near nuclear power plants, according to a letter released today by Senator Edward M. Kennedy.


BANKWORCESTER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANKWORCESTER
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,628,000
2,210,000
Per share
.32
.27
Yr net inc
9,954,000
7,648,000
Per share
1.22
.94
The year-ago periods' nets included a one-time dividend of $447,000 paid to the company by Central Fund Dividend.


AVON PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AVON PRODUCTS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
903,100,000
746,800,000
Net inc
b72,300,000
c70,200,000
Share earns
1.03
1.00
Yr sales
2,762,500,000
2,328,200,000
Net inc
b159,100,000
c158,700,000
Share earns
2.26
2.23


Crime Figure Given Exile, Not Prison
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday banished a reputed organized-crime figure from much of the New York metropolitan region for five years as a condition of his probation.


Soviet Freedom, Soviet Fear
LEAD: The West wonders how long Mikhail Gorbachev and his policy of perestroika, or restructuring, will last.
Russians ask, too, even more fervently.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  JUDAH P. BENJAMIN: The Jewish Confederate.
By Eli N. Evans. 469 pages.
Illustrated.
The Free Press. $24.95.


ANTHEM ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANTHEM ELECTRONICS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
56,906,000
40,683,000
Net inc
1,887,000
447,000
Share earns
.17
.05
Shares outst
11,183,000
9,613,000
Yr rev
196,899,000
132,317,000
Net inc
5,007,000
2,845,000
Share earns
.50
.30
Shares outst
10,044,000
9,613,000


A Burglary Suspect, 15, Is Shot in Brooklyn
LEAD: A 15-year-old burglary suspect was shot in the neck yesterday during a confrontation with four police officers in the stairway of an apartment building in Brooklyn, officials said.


ARX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARX INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,628,000
12,809,000
Net inc
1,481,000
1,137,000
Share earns
.20
.19
6mo sales
26,360,000
23,250,000
Net inc
b2,130,000
2,076,000
Share earns
.31
.34


TRW INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRW INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,740,000,000
1,550,000,000
Net inc
67,000,000
45,000,000
Share earns
1.10
.74
Yr sales
6,820,000,000
6,040,000,000
Net inc
243,000,000
218,000,000
Share earns
4.01
3.62


AMERICAN SCIENCE &amp; ENGINEERING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN SCIENCE &amp; ENGINEERING (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 30
1987
1986
Sales
4,659,000
4,381,000
Net loss
161,000
277,000
9mo sales
13,411,000
14,211,000
Net loss
1,055,000
455,000


KENAN TRANSPORT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENAN TRANSPORT
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,590,000
10,283,000
Net inc
869,000
906,000
Share earns
.37
.39
Yr rev
50,011,000
40,289,000
Net inc
2,976,000
2,746,000
Share earns
1.27
1.17


DATRON SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATRON SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,340,000
5,473,000
Net inc
523,000
271,000
Share earns
.19
.10
9mo sales
22,799,000
15,740,000
Net inc
1,353,000
940,000
Share earns
.49
.35


Knick Defense Stops Pistons
LEAD: Sidney Green was matched against Bill Laimbeer.
Patrick Ewing was guarding Rick Mahorn.
And Ewing and Bill Cartwright were in the lineup at the same crucial time, in the final minutes of the third period.


FLOW GENERAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLOW GENERAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
58,550,000
49,668,000
Net inc
2,409,000
563,000
Share earns
.27
.06
6mo rev
112,748,000
96,766,000
Net inc
1,541,000
100,000
Share earns
.17
.01


A Capitalist Innovator in Vietnam
LEAD: Le Cong Thanh's flashlight factory is not much of an industrial complex by most people's standards.
The parts are heaped in buckets on the ground, and the assembly line weaves around a tree in the courtyard of an old Vietnamese home.


Italy to Consider Basing of F-16's
LEAD: Italy is willing to consider accepting the F-16 fighter-bombers that the United States must withdraw from Spain, Defense Minister Valerio Zanone said today after consultations with Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci.


KANSAS CITY LIFE INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KANSAS CITY LIFE INSURANCE CO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b9,468,000
c7,166,000
Share earns
1.25
.93
Yr net inc
b26,346,000
c24,438,000
Share earns
3.46
3.17
b-After capital gains of $1,032,000 for the quarter and $2,654,000 for the year.


MOLSON COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOLSON COMPANIES
Qtr to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
600,707,000
572,349,000
Net inc
16,600,000
14,700,000
Share earns
.51
.47
9mo rev
1,905,040,000
1,770,438,000
Net inc
72,800,000
52,176,000
Share earns
2.22
1.66


Bankers Trust: Brash and Rich
LEAD: To many in the financial community, the Bankers Trust Company has become a commercial bank with a trading-room mentality - focusing on minute-to-minute profits instead of on long-term relationships.


Days in the Lives of Nursing-Home Patients
LEAD: To the Editor:


ARCO-Tricentrol
LEAD: ARCO said it had acquired a controlling interest in Tricentrol P.L.C. today, a day after the small British oil company agreed to a deal valued at about $330 million.
ARCO, which had held a 14.8 percent stake in Tricentrol, announced it had made additional stock purchases in the last two days that increased its interest to 54.5 percent.


GILBERT ASSOCIATES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GILBERT ASSOCIATES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
58,135,000
60,314,000
Net inc
2,158,000
b4,374,000
Share earns
.41
.83
Yr rev
238,651,000
240,269,000
Net inc
7,716,000
9,819,000
Share earns
1.45
1.85


Sports People; Irons Out
LEAD: The United States Golf Association's executive committee reaffirmed its position that, starting in 1990, it will not permit use of the Ping Eye 2 irons in its competitions.
The U.S.G.A. has declared that club illegal for general use starting in 1996, saying that the square grooves in the club are not set far enough apart.


Sailboats For Rent: Dreams In the Sun
LEAD: Like restless thoroughbreds shifting in their stalls, luxury sailboats rock in their slips at the yacht charter docks here, sleek bows straining at lines as the wind slaps halyards against tall masts with a metallic clang.


UDC-UNIVERSAL DEVELOPMENT LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UDC-UNIVERSAL DEVELOPMENT LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
82,662,000
66,415,000
Net inc
13,939,000
10,016,000
Share earns
1.38
.93
Shares outst
9,340,000
10,655,000
Yr rev
235,917,000
206,285,000
Net inc
34,436,000
30,130,000
Share earns
3.20
2.90


WARNER COMMUNICATIONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARNER COMMUNICATIONS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,024,849,000
822,037,000
Net inc
92,000,000
c62,000,000
Share earns
.59
.38
Yr rev
3,403,563,000
2,848,324,000
Net inc
b328,142,000
c185,800,000
Share earns
2.09
1.26


DYNATECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYNATECH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
94,565,000
78,921,000
Net inc
6,120,000
6,738,000
Share earns
.54
.59
9mo sales
266,895,000
228,751,000
Net inc
16,828,000
18,994,000
Share earns
1.48
1.67


Talks on Lear Bid
LEAD: Executives of the Lear Petroleum Corporation and the United States arm of the British Petroleum Company met to discuss BP America's $250 million bid for the Texas natural gas concern.
Oil industry analysts said such an acquisition would serve both companies well.
Lear has not made money in two years, and needs a strong backer like BP America, which does not own any gas pipelines.


Film: A Collection Animated by Computer
LEAD: HOW you gonna keep 'em down on the farm after they've seen Max Headroom?
That question should have occurred to the producers of ''The Computer Animation Show,'' a collection of computer-generated shorts that has plenty of technology but none of Max's sophisticated wit.
Creatively, this film, which opens today at the Bleecker Street Cinema, is the equivalent of pointing a camera at Mr.


INSIDE
LEAD:  New Waldheim Document  Kurt Waldheim criticized Nazi reprisal killings of civilians in Greece in 1944, according to a newly discovered German Army dispatch.
Page A3.
Sale to Tokyo Challenged  A small group of lawmakers objects to a Pentagon plan to sell the Navy's most sophisticated air defense system to the Japanese.


COMPTEK RESEARCH CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPTEK RESEARCH CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Sales
12,839,000
9,219,000
Net inc
382,000
283,000
Share earns
.18
.13
9mo sales
33,436,000
24,322,000
Net inc
1,040,000
608,000
Share earns
.48
.28


ISI SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ISI SYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,001,000
7,570,000
Net inc
1,263,000
657,000
Share earns
.19
.12
Shares outst
6,682,636
5,250,000
6mo rev
17,453,000
14,677,000
Net inc
2,476,000
1,230,000
Share earns
.37
.23
Shares outst
6,682,568
5,250,000


Donors Offer Memorial Gifts To Assist the Neediest Cases
LEAD: An ecumenical memorial service for the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in Manhattan last month inspired Juliann Davidson to send a gift in memory of the civil rights leader to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


UNITED SAVINGS BANK (VA) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED SAVINGS BANK (VA)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
601,273
810,199
Per share
.44
.68
Yr net loss
148,665
b2,590,000
Per share
-
2.09
b-Net income


ENCOR ENERGY CORP LTD reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENCOR ENERGY CORP LTD
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
191,400,000
138,100,000
Net inc
23,600,000
b406,400,000
Share earns
.22
-
b-Net loss and included $406.5 million of writedowns.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Questions on Waldheim and Reprisal
LEAD: Kurt Waldheim knew of and criticized Nazi reprisal killings of civilians in Greece in 1944, according to a newly discovered German army dispatch found by an American historian.


West Coast Jazz Stars To Play
LEAD: NEW YORKERS tend to get smug about the city's status as the world's jazz capital.
This weekend, however, two of the best jazz groups in town can testify to the existence of jazz life in Los Angeles, the home of both John Carter, the clarinetist leading a quartet at Carlos 1, and Harold Land, the tenor saxophonist who's featured with the Timeless All-Stars at Sweet Basil.


Federated, Fighting Bidder, Is Said to Consider Buyout
LEAD: Federated Department Stores Inc. is weighing a management-led leveraged buyout to fend off a hostile takeover threat from the Campeau Corporation, banking experts familiar with the deal said yesterday.


Inconvenience Foods
LEAD: A friend who makes lists has begun yet another, of self-defeating ''convenience'' packaging.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Missing Ingredient
LEAD: The Democratic candidates for the Presidential nomination have been accused of lacking ideas, vision, charisma and experience.
But Governor Cuomo of New York thinks that is not their real problem.


Drug-Free Games Expected
LEAD: The chief medical officer of the Calgary Olympics said today that he did not expect any athletes competing in the Games, which start next Saturday, to test positively for a substance banned by the International Olympic Committee.


PAR PHARMACEUTICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAR PHARMACEUTICAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
21,355,000
16,716,000
Net inc
3,247,000
2,216,000
Share earns
.29
.20


First Nationwide
LEAD: The First Nationwide Bank, a unit of the Ford Motor Company, said it had completed the acquisition of Uptown Federal Savings of Chicago for an undisclosed amount.
Uptown Federal, which has deposits of about $1.5 billion and $2 billion in assets, operates 22 retail branches in Chicago and its northern suburbs, the company said.


HEALTHWATCH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTHWATCH INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,592,360
1,148,000
Net inc
129,287
61,592
Share earns
.07
.03
6mo rev
3,100,000
2,300,000
Net inc
217,279
110,891
Share earns
.12
.06


Pall Picks Greenstone
LEAD: The Pall Corporation, a manufacturer of industrial and medical filters based in Glen Cove, L.I., has named Greenstone &amp; Rabasca Advertising, of Melville, L.I., to handle advertising for seven of its divisions.
The budget exceeds $1 million.
Jarman, Spitzer &amp; Felix is the former agency.


Art: 31 Late Drawings By Picasso in a Show
LEAD: IT has always been accepted wisdom that late Picasso was lesser Picasso.
During the decade or so before the artist's death in 1973 at the age of 92, Picasso's untiring energy was often spent on drawing images of splay-legged women.
This was greeted by the artist's many followers with considerable, if reasonable, unease, especially coming as it did during the 1960's and early 70's when the women's liberation movement was beginning to gain steam.


KEARNEY-NATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEARNEY-NATIONAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
40,749,000
39,770,000
Net inc
1,256,000
1,454,000
Share earns
.22
.25
Yr sales
158,327,000
148,900,000
Net inc
7,766,000
9,302,000
Share earns
1.37
1.64


First Executive
LEAD: The First Executive Corporation said two of its shareholders had filed a lawsuit seeking to block the completion of a tender offer from the ICH Corporation and to overturn a standstill agreement.
ICH, a Louisville, Ky., insurance holding company, began a $134.4 million tender offer last month for 11.2 million shares of First Executive at $12 a share.


DELTA WOODSIDE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELTA WOODSIDE INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
113,175,000
98,371,000
Net inc
6,315,000
5,121,000
Share earns
.36
.34
Shares outst
17,395,000
15,000,000
6mo sales
223,029,000
193,433,000
Net inc
12,252,000
8,863,000
Share earns
.70
.59
Shares outst
17,373,000
15,000,000


Mexican Asks U.S. Not to Use Force in Region
LEAD: President Miguel de la Madrid of Mexico called today for a negotiated settlement of the Nicaragua-contra war and for a United States policy of nonintervention in Latin America.


EXCHANGE LIMITING TRADING STRATEGY TIED TO COMPUTERS
LEAD: In a move to restore investor confidence in the stock market, the board of the New York Stock Exchange voted unanimously yesterday to restrict a form of computerized stock trading that had been blamed for accelerating the market's chaotic plunge in October.


Heinz Acquisition
LEAD: The H. J. Heinz Company said it had agreed to acquire Bumble Bee Seafoods Inc. of San Diego.
The price was not disclosed.
Bumble Bee, which was acquired in a leveraged buyout from Castle &amp; Cooke Inc. in 1985, produces tuna, salmon and oysters and Figaro cat foods. ''The acquisition of Bumble Bee will bring into Heinz operations another brand of well-respected, high-quality food products,'' said Anthony J.


NATIONAL INTERGROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL INTERGROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
743,641,000
1,139,332,000
Net inc
b3,438,000
c7,144,000
Share earns
.10
-
9mo sales
2,661,866,000
3,242,994,000
Net inc
b8,466,000
c29,556,000
Share earns
.20
-


The Law; At the Bar
LEAD: At the beginning of Tom Wolfe's ''The Bonfire of the Vanities'' there is the disclaimer, so beloved of lawyers, that all of the characters are imaginary.
But that is only partly true.
The prosecutors and policemen and defense lawyers who populate the book may technically be fictional, but they are also the people Edward


Roll-Call Vote In the Senate
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote of 51 to 48 by which the Senate tonight approved $43 million in aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.
The vote was largely symbolic because the House defeated the measure Wednesday.
FOR REAGAN PLAN - 51  Democrats - 12  Bentsen, Tex.
Boren, Okla.
Breaux, La.


EX-HBO VIDEO CHIEF HEADING REEBOK UNIT
LEAD: Frank J. O'Connell, who has been chief executive of HBO Video, has signed on with Reebok International Ltd. as president of the Reebok brands, which include the Reebok footwear and apparel divisions in North America.


How Great Were the Injustices of Arabs to Jews
LEAD: To the Editor:


LaRouche, on TV, Cites AIDS
LEAD: Lyndon LaRouche, the political extremist running for President as a Democrat, said on network television tonight that the AIDS virus was transmitted much like any other virus, including through casual contact, and that most medical warnings about how it is spread are ''an outright lie.'' Mr.
LaRouche spoke on a 30-minute taped program televised nationally on CBS, from which his campaign bought air time.


SOUTHDOWN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHDOWN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
82,292,000
80,106,000
Net inc
8,461,000
c3,443,000
Share earns
1.23
.38
Yr rev
342,486,000
339,190,000
Net inc
b45,115,000
cd13,100,000
Share earns
6.46
-


ABI AMERICAN BUSINESPHONES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABI AMERICAN BUSINESPHONES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,639,000
7,117,000
Net inc
301,000
345,000
Share earns
.18
.21
6mo rev
14,008,000
13,070,000
Net inc
639,000
447,000
Share earns
.38
.27


Rock: Sting At Garden
LEAD: HANS EISLER, a composer who worked with Bertolt Brecht, might well have been amused to hear one of his melodies sung at Madison Square Garden with teen-age girls shrieking at the end of each chromatic phrase.
But that was only one of the unlikely treats at Wednesday's concert by Sting, who somehow balances musicianly experiments and melancholy, high-minded songs with the charisma and showmanship of a pop star.


Art People
LEAD:  Supplyside


LINCOLN TELECOMMUNICATIONS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINCOLN TELECOMMUNICATIONS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
43,209,000
41,425,000
Net inc
5,869,000
4,396,000
Share earns
.66
.51
Yr rev
170,222,000
159,425,000
Net inc
21,076,000
18,319,000
Share earns
2.44
2.21


Camacho Bout Is Imperiled
LEAD: Negotiations for Hector Camacho's fight with Ray Mancini, the former World Boxing Association lightweight champion, are continuing despite Camacho's arrest Tuesday in Clewiston, Fla., on charges of assault with a deadly weapon and possession of cocaine.


RIVERBEND INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RIVERBEND INTERNATIONAL (AMEX)
Year to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
48,900,446
41,923,569
Net inc
2,859,619
1,615,579
Share earns
.55
.36
Shares outst
5,200,000
4,500,000


LEINER P NUTRITIONAL PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEINER P NUTRITIONAL PRODUCTS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,728,000
19,648,000
Net inc
754,000
935,000
Share earns
.22
.27
9mo sales
47,907,000
52,444,000
Net inc
1,989,000
2,278,000
Share earns
.57
.66


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 50.


FIRST UNION REAL ESTATE EQUITY &amp; MORTGAGE INVESTMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST UNION REAL ESTATE EQUITY &amp; MORTGAGE INVESTMENT (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,992,000
c6,828,000
Share earns
.33
.38
Yr net inc
b26,016,000
c25,496,000
Share earns
1.43
1.40
b-Includes capital gains of $775,000 and $6,656,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


GENERAL HOMES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL HOMES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
66,715,000
73,304,000
Net loss
37,000
771,000
The company said the results for the latest quarter include a net loss from operations of $6.1 million, offset by a cumulative adjustment of $6 million to adopt the liability method of accounting for income taxes.


South Africa Opens a New Session of Parliament
LEAD: President P. W. Botha and his wife, Elize, listening to the national anthem during the opening of Parliament yesterday in Cape Town.
Mr.
Botha recommitted his Government to the removal of rules and regulations, often related to the maintenance of apartheid, that obstruct the development of the informal economic sector.


PHILHARMONIC: DUTOIT CONDUCTS RACHMANINOFF
LEAD: In 1940, when Rachmaninoff completed his last work, ''Symphonic Dances,'' the tides of history were running powerfully away from his heart-on-sleeve kind of music.
For years, the score's only committed friend seemed to be Eugene Ormandy and the Philadelphia Orchestra, to whom it was dedicated.
But tides, being tides, inevitably turn.


Isaac L. Asofsky, HIAS Director, 98
LEAD: Isaac L. Asofsky, retired director of the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society, died at his home in Manhattan Jan. 18 after a short illness.
He was 98 years old.


Cuomo Reports A Spending Rise Of $258 Million
LEAD: Governor Cuomo announced today that state spending in the current fiscal year would be $258.5 million higher than he had originally projected.
That means total spending for will be 7.9 percent more than in the previous year, exceeding the 7 percent limit on growth the Governor had set.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''In plain language, what he did was he utilized his position to sell the country of Panama to drug traffickers.'' - Leon B. Kellner, a Federal prosecutor, speaking of Gen.


No Room for Difference in East Germany
LEAD: At a mid-January march commemorating Rosa Luxemburg, the German Communist murdered in 1919, East German police arrested 120 activists.
Protesters carried banners quoting her appeal from the Kaiser's prison: ''Freedom is real only when there is freedom for those who think differently.'' Blasphemy, one official called it.


Arrest in Ghana Leads To Fight Over L.I. Home
LEAD: Efua Cabiri last saw her husband in July 1986, when she waved goodbye to him at Kennedy International Airport.


FERROFLUIDICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FERROFLUIDICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,866,000
9,249,000
Net inc
1,005,000
b406,000
Share earns
.07
.03
6mo sales
13,127,000
18,124,000
Net inc
1,670,000
b510,000
Share earns
.12
.04


GUIDEPOST
LEAD:  SHELF LIFE OF MEDICINE


Olympic Villages Are Opened
LEAD: In near-zero temperatures, Juan Antonio Samaranch presided over his first official act of the Calgary Olympics today by declaring open the two villages that will house the 1,700 athletes.


MIDWAY AIRLINES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDWAY AIRLINES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
97,378,000
71,408,000
Net inc
b5,088,000
c5,138,000
Share earns
.46
.55
Yr rev
346,935,000
261,365,000
Net inc
b18,847,000
c9,031,000
Share earns
1.71
.87


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Art Schlichter, the quarterback who is Ohio State's career leader in total offense, has been denied re-entry into the N.F.L. because of his gambling history.
He plans to try out next summer with the Ottawa Rough Riders of the Canadian Football League. . . .
Jack Evans of the Hartford Whalers, at 59 the oldest head coach in the National Hockey League, said he would retire when his contract expires at the end of the 1988-89 season, according to a report published yesterday in The Hartford Courant.


In Wrong Place With a Gun
LEAD: A man with a gun was hustled away from a restaurant today as Gary Hart, a Democratic Presidential candidate, arrived to have breakfast, but the Secret Service said it was a case of ''being in the wrong place at the wrong time.'' A Secret Service spokesman said the man had a gun permit and apparently did not know Mr.


Site Set for Cup Defense
LEAD: San Pedro Bay, off Los Angeles and Long Beach, Calif., will be the site of the America's Cup defense in September, Sail America and the San Diego Yacht Club announced today.


Key Democrats Threaten to Stall Missile Treaty Over ABM Dispute
LEAD: Senate Democratic leaders threatened tonight to delay approval of the new missile treaty with the Soviet Union after efforts to reach a compromise with the Administration on a key arms issue appeared to collapse.


BIO-MEDICUS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIO-MEDICUS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,143,000
2,487,000
Net inc
371,000
416,000
Share earns
.07
.08
9mo sales
8,428,000
6,513,000
Net inc
423,000
1,280,000
Share earns
.08
.26


GENICOM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENICOM CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
87,728,000
43,134,000
Net inc
3,303,000
2,504,000
Share earns
.29
.22
Yr sales
302,151,000
157,463,000
Net inc
b12,555,000
8,608,000
Share earns
1.09
.83
Shares outst
11,555,000
10,414,000


G&amp;K SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*G&amp;K SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
22,358,000
20,132,000
Net inc
1,975,000
1,276,000
Share earns
.22
.18
6mo rev
43,870,000
39,579,000
Net inc
3,753,000
2,553,000
Share earns
.44
.36


HOMAC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOMAC INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,119,000
3,862,000
Net loss
3,393,000
b1,235,000
Share earns
-
.41
Yr rev
9,154,000
9,998,000
Net loss
6,607,000
210,000
b-Net income  The company said it established a $3,900,000 provision for losses in 1987, $2,400,000 of that amount in the fourth quarter.


CALGON CARBON reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALGON CARBON (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
46,200,000
36,880,000
Net inc
5,010,000
2,660,000
Share earns
.51
.27
Yr sales
170,710,000
138,150,000
Net inc
b16,960,000
11,350,000
Share earns
1.84
1.17


Spending Limit Up 14% for Primaries
LEAD: Presidential campaigns will be allowed to spend 14 percent more in pursuit of the 1988 nominations than in 1984, but for some essential campaign goods and services they will get less for their money than their predecessors.


From Palestinian Rage, New Leadership Rises
LEAD: As Palestinian protests head into a third month, what began as a spontaneous outburst of stone-throwing is developing a new underground leadership and organization in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


POSTAL INSTANT PRESS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POSTAL INSTANT PRESS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,908,000
5,659,000
Net inc
952,000
1,167,000
Share earns
.22
.28
6mo rev
12,063,000
10,840,000
Net inc
2,101,000
2,189,000
Share earns
.50
.53


NATIONAL FUEL GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL FUEL GAS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
222,298,000
224,564,000
Net inc
14,951,000
13,803,000
Share earns
.58
.58
Shares outst
25,867,420
23,856,992


Rapid Rise of Fast Photo Processing
LEAD: Fran Rosenthal-Myer burst into the 1 Hour Foto Lab in Times Square in Manhattan one day recently and plopped down a roll of film. ''When I need it fast, I come here,'' she said.
A few hours later, she returned to pick up pictures she wanted to have before leaving town the next morning.


Bank of New York
LEAD: The Bank of New York filed suit in New York State Supreme Court yesterday seeking to enjoin the Irving Bank Corporation from issuing new convertible preferred stock to investors friendly to Irving's current management, the Bank of New York reported.
Despite the objections of Irving's management, the Bank of New York has been trying to acquire Irving.


TELOS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELOS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
25,821,000
20,293,000
Net inc
1,089,000
c660,000
Share earns
.28
.17
9mo rev
73,384,000
60,226,000
Net inc
b3,325,000
c2,165,000
Share earns
.87
-


Fountain of Data: Cuomo's Librarian
LEAD: Need to know how much money Governor Cuomo plans to spend this year in aid to private schools?
How much the Thruway Authority needs to raise by 1996?
How many grape growers there are in the state?


New Poll in Iowa Shows Dole Ahead of Bush and Robertson Special to The New York Times
LEAD: A new poll in Iowa shows Senator Bob Dole with a small lead over Vice President Bush and Pat Robertson gaining ground.


CONTRA AID CUTOFF: A SETBACK, NOT A DEATH BLOW
LEAD: WASHINGTON, Feb. 5 -


Officer Is Questioned on Photos of Levin
LEAD: A police detective conceded yesterday that photographs of Jennifer Levin's body appeared to vary as to how much dirt was on her face, depending on when the photographs were taken on the morning of her death.


TEXAS AIR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS AIR CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,078,554,000
1,626,430,000
Net loss
265,648,000
b21,735,000
Share earns
-
.26
Yr rev
8,474,967,000
4,406,897,000
Net loss
466,146,000
b72,703,000
Share earns
-
1.75


Youth Given 6 to 18 Years In Attack Case
LEAD: A white teen-ager convicted of manslaughter and assault for attacking three black men in Howard Beach, Queens, was sentenced yesterday to 6 to 18 years in prison by a judge who said the teen-ager had been a ''follower'' rather than a ''leader'' in the attack.


CUSHMAN ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CUSHMAN ELECTRONICS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,248,000
1,890,000
Net inc
b92,000
c36,000
Share earns
.09
.03
b-Includes a gain of about $60,000 on the sale of fixed assets.
c-After an extraordinary gain of $142,000.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 1988
LEAD:  Markets


CROSS, A T CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROSS, A T CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
68,750,456
56,935,275
Net inc
12,763,887
10,452,835
Share earns
.77
.63
Yr sales
187,269,821
155,327,397
Net inc
28,879,026
21,360,468
Share earns
1.74
1.29


First Impeaching of a Governor Since '29
LEAD: Following are six Governors who have been impeached and removed from office:


Noriega Indictment Muddles Efforts By U.S. to Ease General From Power
LEAD: While the indictment of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega holds little promise of leading to his arrest, it complicates efforts by the Reagan Administration to ease the Panamanian leader from power.


CARL MARKS SELLS UNIT TO BRITONS
LEAD: Carl Marks &amp; Company, the venerable New York investment bank, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its securities business, the largest sector of its operations in terms of personnel, to Smith New Court P.L.C., a British concern.


Troubles of Empire Health Plan Were Built In by the Insurers
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 ARE SENTENCED IN WEDTECH CASE
LEAD: State Senator Michael B. Mitchell and his brother, former state Senator Clarence Mitchell 3d, were sentenced today to two and a half years in prison each for taking payoffs to block an investigation of the Wedtech Corporation.


'Star Wars' Contract
LEAD: To the Editor:


EMPLOYMENT DATA SHOW SIGNS OF A SLOWING ECONOMY
LEAD: Fresh signs of economic slowdown were reflected today in Government job figures for January, but the unemployment rate did not rise as many had expected, remaining at 5.7 percent, the lowest level since 1979.


IMPACT SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMPACT SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,202,000
6,023,000
Net inc
722,000
c815,000
Share earns
.07
.09
9mo sales
21,747,000
16,429,000
Net inc
b2,401,000
c1,229,000
Share earns
.25
.14


ENTERTAINMENT PUBLICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENTERTAINMENT PUBLICAIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
33,553,000
26,856,000
Net inc
b6,628,000
c5,081,000
Share earns
1.38
1.06
6mo rev
36,627,000
29,471,000
Net inc
b3,803,000
c2,793,000
Share earns
.79
.58


UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE U.S.
LEAD: Unemployment remained unchanged at 5.7 percent in January, the Government announced yesterday.
Jobs grew more slowly than some economists had expected, but others were heartened that growth continued and appeared to be concentrated in export-oriented industries.
Page 6.


NORIEGA INDICTED BY U.S. FOR LINKS TO ILLEGAL DRUGS
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the military ruler of Panama, in effect sold his government to drug traffickers for millions of dollars in bribes and turned Panama into a capital of international cocaine smuggling, the Justice Department charged in two indictments made public today.


School Staff Cleared In Steinberg Case
LEAD: No disciplinary action will be taken against teachers, counselors and other school worker for failing to report signs that 6-year-old Lisa Steinberg was being abused, the superintendent of Community School District 2 said yesterday.


HICKAM, DOW B INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HICKAM, DOW B INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,950,000
2,998,000
Net inc
164,000
477,000
Share earns
.05
.20
Yr sales
11,834,000
11,596,000
Net inc
1,294,000
1,986,000
Share earns
.52
.91


Mullin Impressive
LEAD: In what his coach, George Karl, called ''the best game he's played since he's been back,'' Chris Mullin scored 18 of his 22 points after halftime Thursday night and sank two free throws in overtime to break a tie.
Those 2 points put the Golden State Warriors ahead for good in a 96-90 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers in Richfield, Ohio.


Caveat Investor on Monthly Trade Data
LEAD: To the Editor:


Perestoika in New York Schools, Please
LEAD: The more I learn about the New York City Board of Education's amazing contract with its school custodians, the more I appreciate what Mikhail S. Gorbachev is up against.
The hero of perestroika - restructuring - would surely find something familiar in an arrangement that rewards sloth and irresponsibility and discourages initiative.


More Heat Than Light on the Death of Dinosaurs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush Presses the Attack in Dole Dispute
LEAD: Vice President Bush's Presidential campaign stepped up its attacks on Senator Bob Dole of Kansas today, saying Mr.
Dole had started a fight but could not tolerate the Bush camp's fighting back.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Sentence in Queens Attack


ADRIAN WILSON, 64, A PRINTING TEACHER AND BOOK DESIGNER
LEAD: Adrian Wilson, a book designer and scholar who was considered one of America's leading fine printers, died Wednesday of congestive heart failure at the Pacific Presbyterian Hospital in San Francisco.
He was 64 years old.


NICOLET INSTRUMENTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NICOLET INSTRUMENTS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Revenue
37,220,000
30,936,000
Net loss
5,702,000
b1,438,000
Share earns
-
.22
9mo rev
102,662,000
89,102,000
Net loss
2,799,000
b13,309,000
Share earns
-
2.02


50 Years After His Execution, Soviet Panel Clears Bukharin
LEAD: A Communist Party commission reviewing the purge trials of the 1930's announced today that Nikolai I. Bukharin, among the most prominent victims of Stalin's terror, was wrongly convicted and executed.


German Backs Dollar Level
LEAD: In the clearest sign of the intentions of the major industrial countries for the recently tumbling dollar, West Germany's Finance Minister, Gerhard Stoltenberg, said today that the current exchange rate was acceptable.


Goldman, Sachs Ends Program Trading for Itself
LEAD: One day after the New York Stock Exchange announced new restrictions on program trading, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company said yesterday that it would no longer use the strategy to manage its own capital.
However, the institutional firm will continue to execute such trades for its customers.


Northwestern Steel Accord Set
LEAD: The Northwestern Steel and Wire Company said that it had tentatively agreed to be bought by a management group led by its president and chief executive officer, Robert Wilthew, and other employees and investors.
The payment would consist of $18 a share in cash and 13 percent subordinated notes due in 1997 with a $4.50 principal amount.


OMNICARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OMNICARE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
32,087,000
29,550,000
Net inc
78,000
b2,436,000
Share earns
.01
-
Yr rev
124,811,000
142,126,000
Net inc
1,807,000
c160,000
Share earns
.18
.02


KENNETH PORTER, WORLD WAR I ACE
LEAD: Kenneth Lee Porter, one of the last surviving American air aces of World War I, died Wednesday at his home in Jackson Heights, Queens.
He was 91 years old.


HIGH VOLTAGE ENGINEERING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HIGH VOLTAGE ENGINEERING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
32,448,000
25,059,000
Net inc
b712,000
c5,000
Share earns
.14
-
Yr sales
118,617,000
98,011,000
Net inc
b3,434,000
c3,128,000
Share earns
.69
.62


BRT REALTY TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRT REALTY TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,294,000
3,617,000
Net inc
3,474,000
b2,053,000
Share earns
.65
.61
Shares outst
5,336,035
3,384,235
b-Includes a gain of $303,000 on a sale of other investments.


State Dept. Denies Rift Over P.L.O. Mission
LEAD: A State Department spokeswoman said today that there was no dispute in the department over a request to delay the closing of the Palestine Liberation Organization's mission at the United Nations.


BRENTWOOD INSTRUMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRENTWOOD INSTRUMENTS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,305,000
3,623,000
Net inc
65,000
35,000
Share earns
.04
.02
9mo sales
10,028,000
9,430,000
Net loss
163,000
240,000


Israeli Army Also Worried By the Settlers
LEAD: Growing unrest and threats of vigilantism among the Jewish settlements rooted like citadel-suburbs amid resentful Arabs are posing new problems for the Israeli Army as it faces a third month of Palestinian protest.


LINPRO SPECIFIED PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINPRO SPECIFIED PROPERTIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
351,000
459,000
Share earns
.19
.25
Yr net inc
1,470,000
-
Share earns
.79
-
The company commenced operations July 31, 1986.


Hitachi to Expand
LEAD: Hitachi Ltd. said it would expand its semiconductor subsidiary here into a full-time production unit, which may employ 100 more workers.
Hitachi Semiconductor America, which now employs 200 in an operation that handles computer chips imported from Japan, had suspended construction on its manufacturing plant here in October 1986 because of a slump in the semiconductor industry.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a computer error, the film review of ''The Unbearable Lightness of Being'' in Weekend yesterday included a phrase erroneously in the second paragraph.
The passage should have read: '' 'Take off your clothes,' says Tomas.
After three seconds of playing hard-to-get, the nurse does.
On the other side of a frosted-glass window several other hospital employees watch Tomas's technique with admiration.


2 Arrested in Hotel Stabbing
LEAD: The police arrested two teen-agers yesterday in the stabbing of a 14-year-old boy during a drug-related robbery in a welfare hotel in midtown Manhattan.
Another youth was being sought.
The incident occurred Wednesday at the Bryant Hotel on Broadway at 54th Street.
Sgt.
John Venetucci of the police said the three youths stabbed the victim and stole $1,000.


INNOVATIVE SOFTWARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INNOVATIVE SOFTWARE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,727,087
3,592,854
Net inc
516,503
b191,984
Share earns
.13
.05
6mo sales
15,021,080
7,034,875
Net inc
1,329,232
b630,841
Share earns
.32
.16


FIRST FAMILY GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FAMILY GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
25,200,000
21,300,000
Net inc
711,662
553,026
Share earns
.20
.16
6mo sales
43,500,000
40,300,000
Net inc
1,314,254
b1,988,948
Share earns
.38
-


DRUG COURT CUTS NEW YORK BACKLOG
LEAD: A drug court has been strikingly successful in cutting a backlog of cases that almost overwhelmed judges and prosecutors in Manhattan last year when crack-related arrests soared, officials say.


MUSIC: STUART DEMPSTER
LEAD: For a moment on Wednesday, dreaded seriousness took the floor at the Alternative Museum.
Stuart Dempster, the trombonist, wandered out from off stage, playing his plastic didjeridu -a long tube, derived from the Australian aboriginal wooden instrument of the same name, which, when blown into, makes buzzing sounds.


A Lawyer's Fast Track to Destruction on Wall Street
LEAD: Six days before he was to be sentenced last month for his role in an insider trading scandal, David W. C. Clark collapsed at his mother's home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Within an hour, he was dead, a victim of chronic alcoholism.


Renee Pollack, Health Aide,53
LEAD: Renee Pollack, executive director of Westchester Jewish Community Services, died of a cerebral hemorrhage Thursday in White Plains Hospital Medical Center.
She was 53 years old and lived in Hartsdale, N.Y.


POLYGAMIST CLAN LEADER CHARGED IN BOMBING
LEAD: Addam Swapp being escorted from Federal Court in Prove, Utah, after he pleaded not guilty at arragnment on charges stemming from the bombing of a Mormon chapel.
Mr.
Swapp had been released earlier in the day from a hospital.
He is recuperating from wounds received in a shoot-out that followed 13-day standoff with authorities.


How Did the F.B.I. Go Astray?
LEAD: Aggressive F.B.I. surveillance of the Government's foreign policy critics supposedly ended with the regime of J. Edgar Hoover.
News that such activity apparently continued under F.B.I.
Director William Webster does not yet warrant alarms about political police, but neither can the bureau be exonerated on the basis of what's been revealed so far.


Florida Votes to Limit Medical Malpractice Costs
LEAD: The Florida Legislature has approved a bill calling for major changes in medical malpractice laws, including a limit on the amount of money that may be awarded in malpractice lawsuits.


LCS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LCS INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,302,872
8,882,696
Net inc
29,241
b310,028
Share earns
.02
.20
b-Included a $132,000 settlement from early termination of a contract.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 13.


Nashville Musicians Defy Order to Cancel Season
LEAD: Musicians of the Nashville Symphony, defying a board decision to shut down the 85-member orchestra, vowed to appear as scheduled at the Tennessee Performing Arts Center tonight, even though orchestra officials designated last night's concert as the orchestra's final performance.


2 Europeans Seized in Lebanon
LEAD: Two Scandinavians working for the United Nations were reported kidnapped in southern Lebanon today.
No group claimed responsibility, but the police here said the kidnappers were Palestinian guerrillas loyal to Abu Nidal.


4th-Quarter Charge Widens Amax Loss
LEAD: Amax Inc., the large natural resources company, announced yesterday that it had taken a fourth-quarter charge of $385.6 million to cover the costs of diminishing its molybdenum business.
Largely because of that charge, the company reported a net loss of $280.8 million, compared with a net loss of $49.7 million in the fourth quarter of 1986.


Reagan's Cruel Abortion Politics
LEAD: Millions of Americans and third world women literally are hostages trapped in the Reagan Administration's cruel global war on abortion, taken prisoner primarily because they are poor and disadvantaged.
Unless Congress or the courts intervene, these women will lose their right to effective family planning, the best protection they can get against unwanted pregnancy and, ironically, against abortion itself.


More Heat Than Light on the Death of Dinosaurs; Stones, Bones, Names
LEAD: To the Editor:


13.09 Drop Sends Dow To 1,910.48
LEAD: Stock prices remained listless most of yesterday before late selling pushed the the Dow Jones industrial average down 13.09 points to close at 1,910.48.
Over all, the market ended mixed.


GROSSMAN'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROSSMAN'S INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
257,831,000
242,909,000
Net inc
b1,954,000
c352,000
Share earns
.08
.02
Shares outst
26,170,000
20,000,000
Yr sales
1,077,297,000
1,006,644,000
Net inc
b17,840,000
c152,137,000
Share earns
.79
7.61
Shares outst
22,707,000
20,000,000


FLEXTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLEXTRONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
35,064,000
17,054,000
Net inc
755,000
751,000
Share earns
.08
.10
9mo sales
103,796,000
51,835,000
Net inc
4,008,000
1,891,000
Share earns
.48
.25
Shares outst
9,593,000
7,546,000


Simon Campaign Says Gephardt Exceeds Spending Limits in Iowa
LEAD: Stepping up the level of confrontation in the final days of the Iowa caucuses, Senator Paul Simon's campaign manager today called on Representative Richard A. Gephardt to suspend television advertising here until his campaign had filed a report on his finances with the Federal Election Commission.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Broken Hill Proprietary Ltd., Melbourne, Australia, has agreed not to increase its stake in Bell Resources Ltd. beyond its existing 5 percent for at least two years, according to its capital restructuring plan.


The Public's Indifference To On-Time Flight Data
LEAD: Despite the Federal Government's efforts in recent months to inform the public of the major airlines' on-time performance, travel agents and others in the travel industry say the data are having little impact among ticket buyers.


Ruling on Texaco
LEAD: United States District Court Judge Charles L. Brieant is expected to rule early next week on whether Texaco Inc. may continue mailing its bankruptcy reorganization plan to shareholders.
Judge Brieant heard arguments from shareholders opposed to the plan but has made no decision on their request to halt the mailing, which began on Wednesday.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption on Jan. 11 about the participation of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis in a forum at Miami Shores, Fla., misidentified the sponsor.
It was the Forum of North Dade, a nonpolitical organization, not the Democratic Party.


Congressional Pork, White House Pork
LEAD: President Reagan mocked Congress recently for tucking dozens of frivolous expenditures into the catch-all 1988 budget bills.
Shortly he will send back all the items that he says he would cross out if he had a line-item veto, and ask that they be canceled.
That, he suggests, will test whether Congress really thinks the Government should subsidize such things as cranberry, crawfish and wildflower research.


Federated Rejects Bid By Campeau
LEAD: Federated Department Stores Inc. said yesterday that its board had unanimously rejected the $47-a-share cash tender offer by the Campeau Corporation.
Federated also challenged Campeau to prove that it had the financing for the $61-a-share merger offer it had announced Wednesday.


Help on Children's Books
LEAD: Adults who want to select the best in children's books may refer to ''Children's Books 1987: 100 Books for Reading and Sharing,'' a list available at branches of the New York Public Library.
The guide, published annually since 1911 by the library's Office of Children's Services, costs $2 and cites books that are recommended by children's libraries.


Correction
LEAD: An article yesterday about redistricting of seats in the House misidentified the Representative from the 11th District in New York.
He is Edolphus Towns, Democrat of Brooklyn, not Major R. Owens.


Dog Show Preparations
LEAD: Wendell Sammett grooming Rage, a standard poodle, at Madison Square Garden.
The dogs are there for the annual Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show that opens Monday.
A total of 2,649 dogs of 140 breeds and varieties are entered in the show, which is the 122d consecutive running of the event. (The New York Times/Edward


U.S. Agent and Suspects Slain
LEAD: A Federal drug agent and two gunmen were shot to death today during an undercover drug operation, the authorities said.
Two other Federal agents and a third gunman were wounded.


More Heat Than Light on the Death of Dinosaurs; Fairly to Dissent'
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSITUFORM SOUTHEAST reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSITUFORM SOUTHEAST
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,127,460
2,083,514
Net inc
129,515
66,771
Share earns
.03
.02
9mo rev
7,096,723
6,433,757
Net inc
300,363
480,729
Share earns
.07
.14
Shares outst
3,910,757
3,393,832


COMPONENT TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPONENT TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,681,000
3,594,000
Net inc
312,000
121,000
Share earns
.17
.06
Shares outst
1,835,386
1,975,973
Yr sales
16,820,000
14,813,000
Net inc
1,039,000
526,000
Share earns
.55
.26
Shares outst
1,904,303
2,045,370


Eastern To Lose Shuttle
LEAD: In a reorganization intended to put pressure on its unions, the Texas Air Corporation said yesterday that it would take the profitable Eastern shuttle away from its Eastern Airlines subsidiary.


Farmers to Face Patent Fees To Use Gene-Altered Animals
LEAD: The United States Patent and Trademark Office, in a new policy that could substantially change how lifestock and poultry are sold, has determined that companies holding patents on new animal forms have the authority to require farmers to pay royalties.


FRANKLIN COMPUTER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRANKLIN COMPUTER (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,247,000
7,990,000
Net inc
1,268,000
b2,735,000
Share earns
.26
-
9mo sales
30,534,000
14,898,000
Net inc
690,000
b4,865,000
Share earns
.15
-


DECOM SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DECOM SYSTEMS INC
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
1,503,000
2,912,000
Net loss
174,000
b308,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-Net income and includes a tax credit of $89,000.
Year-ago sales include $628,000 from Land Mobile Radio Products which were discontinued in the 1987 second quarter.


Islanders Earn Room to Brag
LEAD: Bill Smith had just spent the last 20 minutes of hockey diving on his stomach and flopping on his back, all the time trying to keep his head from spinning.
But despite the barrage of 17 shots, Smith maintained his equilibrium and preserved a 4-2 victory for the Islanders over the Capitals.


Meet The M-Bomb
LEAD: Overkill is our style. ''Everything to excess,'' we reply to the Athenians' ''Everything in moderation.'' The spirit of the day, until Wall Street turned into Sucker's Alley, was expressed in the Yuppie's Creed: ''I want it all, and I want it now.''


Surprise Birthday Party for the President
LEAD: Nancy Reagan helping her husband blow out a birthday candle at a White House party.
Family and friends gathered for the celebration as the President was honored with a song composed by Marvin Hamlisch called ''The Ronald Reagan March.'' Mr.
Reagan is 77 years old today (AP)


THOMPSON MEDICAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THOMPSON MEDICAL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
30,653,204
23,891,162
Net inc
329,789
536,995
Share earns
.04
.06
Shares outst
7,457,559
8,823,670
Yr sales
141,131,049
119,990,771
Net inc
8,916,574
7,447,694
Share earns
1.11
.84
Shares outst
8,051,339
8,830,014


SUNDSTRAND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNDSTRAND CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
378,043,000
397,665,000
Net loss
b10,365,000
c11,528,000
Yr sales
1,365,482,000
1,433,940,000
Net inc
34,635,000
45,400,000
Share earns
1.85
2.42
b-Included a charge of $19.3 million for the discontinuance of the company's unprofitable ring laser gyro business, the planned disposal of a small aerospace unit, accruals for legal settlements, employee termination costs, and other matters.


Subway Panel Offers Safety Procedures
LEAD: A task force on the safety of subway doors concluded yesterday that there is no ''quick fix'' to the problem of passengers being dragged by moving trains.


Hart Asks for Ruling on Debt
LEAD: Gary Hart's Presidential campaign has asked the Federal Election Commission for a ruling on whether it can use 1988 campaign contributions to repay debts from the 1984 race.


HOUSE IMPEACHES ARIZONA GOVERNOR
LEAD: The Arizona House of Represenatives late today impeached Gov.
Evan Mecham for ''high crimes, misdemeanors and malfeasance in office.''


A.T.&amp;T. Lead Shared By Two
LEAD: Mark Calcavecchia hit his second shot today over the back of the green at the first hole on Spyglass Hill, one of the longest holes on the PGA Tour.
Then he chipped back strongly and the ball rolled into the middle of the cup for an eagle 3 on the 610-yard hole.


COPING: WITH BUYING A CAR
LEAD: When it comes to unappealing prospects, the average person probably ranks buying a new car right up there with public speaking and tax audits.


INSITUFORM GULF SOUTH reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSITUFORM GULF SOUTH
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
4,810,895
1,956,141
Net inc
318,805
6,633
Share earns
.11
-
6mo rev
8,086,638
5,101,410
Net inc
416,730
302,475
Share earns
.14
.12


Carmen Lundy Sings
LEAD: Carmen Lundy, a jazz singer, is to perform tonight at Twenty Twenty, 20 West 20th Street (627-1444).
Sets begin at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; $15 cover and a $15 minumum at tables, a $10 cover and two-drink minimum at the bar.


GENERAL AMERICAN INVESTORS CO reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL AMERICAN INVESTORS CO (NYSE)
As of Dec 31
1987
1986
Assets
287,142,417
306,546,890
Share earns
16.70
19.29
Shares outst
17,198,463
15,893,752
Assets represent net assets.


A.T.&amp;T., in a Rebound, Outshines 'Baby Bells'
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the original ''Ma Bell,'' is now outperforming the seven operating companies formed by its 1984 breakup.


A Misanthropic View
LEAD:  WOODCUTTERS. By Thomas Bernhard. Translated from the German by David


F.B.I. WILL GIVE PANEL MORE SURVEILLANCE FILES
LEAD: More than 2,000 pages of classified files of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, generated by an inquiry into an organization sympathetic to left-wing guerrillas in El Salvador, will be released to a Congressional subcommitee looking into the bureau's conduct of the investigation, Representative Don Edwards of


ILC TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ILC TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
8,002,000
7,205,000
Net inc
b400,000
c744,000
Share earns
.18
-
b-After a tax credit of $165,000.
c-Net loss  The year-ago figures are restated.


The Communist Gains In '47 Hungarian Vote
LEAD: To the Editor:


Public Money for Campaigns Is Questioned by Lawmaker
LEAD: Warren M. Anderson, the majority leader of the New York Senate, yesterday questioned the need for government financing of political campaigns, but reiterated that he was ''not unalterably opposed '' to such financing for statewide campaigns.


Beulah Bryant Is Dead; Singer of Blues Was 69
LEAD: Beulah Bryant, a blues singer, died Sunday in Bird S. Coler Memorial Hospital after a heart attack.
She was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.


HALLIBURTON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HALLIBURTON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
994,472,000
808,256,000
Net inc
34,044,000
5,377,000
Share earns
.32
.05
Yr rev
3,367,980,000
3,509,439,000
Net inc
48,090,000
b515,214,000
Share earns
.45
-


Consumer Debt Rose $4.5 Billion in December
LEAD: Consumer debt rose by $4.5 billion in December, the biggest monthly gain in three months, the Federal Reserve said yesterday.
The December increase placed total consumer debt at $612.57 billion, up 6 percent from the end of 1986.


Bridge:; With 1 No-Trump Opening, Some Hands Don't Fit Rules
LEAD: The past two decades have seen the development of a plethora of conventions concerning competitive auctions following a one no-trump opening.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.56
6.57
6.07
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.65
5.65
5.65
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.96
6.05
5.67
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.94
8.08
6.99
30-YR.


DENNISON MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DENNISON MANUFACTURING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
184,746,000
193,820,000
Net inc
b10,711,000
12,686,000
Share earns
.69
.81
Yr sales
708,001,000
701,059,000
Net inc
b34,413,000
c30,254,000
Share earns
2.19
1.94


Redmen Take On Orange
LEAD: In a matchup between a team that finally seems to be hitting its stride and one that may already have found its level, Syracuse plays St.
John's at Madison Square Garden this afternoon.


UTILICORP UNITED reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UTILICORP UNITED (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
177,574,000
150,971,000
Net inc
9,378,000
7,508,000
Share earns
.50
.44
Yr rev
595,692,000
595,805,000
Net inc
b30,450,000
29,732,000
Share earns
1.74
1.79


COLUMBIA GAS SYSTEM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLUMBIA GAS SYSTEM INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
911,809,000
906,875,000
Net inc
36,285,000
b29,947,000
Share earns
.75
.64
Shares outst
44,623,000
42,498,000
Yr rev
2,798,004,000
3,369,578,000
Net inc
111,333,000
b86,847,000
Share earns
2.30
1.82
Shares outst
43,763,000
41,436,000


Mistrial for Former Klansmen
LEAD: The trial of two former Ku Klux Klansmen charged in the beating death of a black teen-ager ended today in a mistrial when a defendant collapsed as a former associate described making the noose used to hang the youth's body from a tree.


AMAX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMAX INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b280,800,000
c49,700,000
Yr net inc
b51,200,000
c14,300,000
Share earns
.53
.05
b-Includes the writedown of Molybdenum assets of $385.6 million and a gain of $38.3 million from the sale of oil and gas interests in the Dutch North Sea for both the quarter and year, and the year also includes a gain of $279.1 million from sales of gold interests and a gain of $43.9 million from pension reversions.


Lawmaker Backs Dole Over Contract
LEAD: The chairman of a House committee says an investigation has found nothing to suggest wrongdoing by Senator Bob Dole in the award of a $26 million contract to a company owned by a former aide to the Senator from Kansas.


AIR WISCONSIN SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIR WISCONSIN SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
41,461,000
29,502,000
Net inc
2,232,000
b2,362,000
Share earns
.30
.32
Yr rev
145,601,000
119,191,000
Net inc
5,784,000
b4,869,000
Share earns
.78
.66


SILICONIX INC reports earnings for 16wk to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILICONIX INC (OTC)
16wk to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
38,195,000
30,461,000
Net inc
b2,382,000
1,589,000
Share earns
.19
.12
Shares outst
12,484,000
13,241,000
Yr sales
122,528,000
111,185,000
Net inc
b5,025,000
7,364,000
Share earns
.39
.55
Shares outst
12,942,000
13,338,000


Riches in the Public Interest
LEAD: The negotiations unfolded like a mini-series and should probably have been held in Geneva. ''Shirtless'' Butch Lewis, representing Michael Spinks, and the dynamic duo of Jim Jacobs and Bill Cayton, Mike Tyson's managers, mostly haggled about money, how to divide a gate expected to gross more than $30 million.


GENMAR INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENMAR INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
111,670,000
79,095,000
Net inc
b9,212,000
4,695,000
Share earns
.31
.16
Yr rev
448,010,000
340,427,000
Net inc
b38,189,000
20,795,000
Share earns
1.30
.77


FORUM GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORUM GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
20,845,000
19,811,000
Net inc
b1,621,000
3,183,000
Share earns
.05
.09
9mo rev
64,986,000
67,321,000
Net inc
b6,036,000
11,499,000
Share earns
.18
.32


A Top Contra Official Resigns
LEAD: Alfonso Robelo has resigned as one of the six leaders of the Nicaraguan Resistance, the contras' political organization, the group's headquarters announced here today.


ELDORADO MOTOR CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELDORADO MOTOR CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
17,098,152
17,871,905
Net loss
214,281
b30,057
Share earns
-
.01
6mo sales
37,157,647
35,217,716
Net loss
113,163
b229,888
Share earns
-
.09


TRANSCAPITAL FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSCAPITAL FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,595,000
6,980,000
Share earns
.27
.86
Shares outst
9,539,348
8,147,280
Yr net inc
b12,266,000
c22,316,000
Share earns
1.25
3.48
Shares outst
9,816,688
6,413,663


Accord on Sale of Post Is Called Imminent
LEAD: A tentative agreement to sell The New York Post for $37 million - contingent on large cuts in labor costs - was described as imminent yesterday as Rupert Murdoch and Peter S. Kalikow, a New York City real-estate entrepreneur, continued intensive negotiations.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


PROGRESSIVE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROGRESSIVE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b10,399,000
c12,804,000
Share earns
.36
.45
Yr net inc
b93,460,000
c64,680,000
Share earns
3.23
1.98
b-After securities losses of $16,887,000 for the quarter and $1,566,000 for the year, and a gain of $3,705,000 for the both periods from an accounting change.


CMX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CMX CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,114,000
2,722,000
Net inc
46,000
164,000
Share earns
.01
.03
Shares outst
8,994,389
5,975,472
6mo sales
6,150,000
5,204,000
Net inc
354,000
321,000
Share earns
.04
.05
Shares outst
8,532,432
5,884,431


MILLIPORE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MILLIPORE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
154,230,000
124,604,000
Net inc
15,714,000
12,695,000
Share earns
.56
.45
Yr sales
528,743,000
443,092,000
Net inc
47,713,000
39,064,000
Share earns
1.70
1.40


President Signs Housing Bill
LEAD: President Reagan today signed the first major housing legislation passed in his Administration, saying it ''will efficiently and effectively meet the challenge of America's changing housing needs.'' The $30.6 billion measure is the first substantial housing legislation since 1980.
It includes $15 billion for housing and community development in the fiscal year beginning Oct.


Senate Group Says Canada Is Jeopardizing Trade Pact
LEAD: The Senate Finance Committee's leaders on trade issues warned the Reagan Administration today that approval of a free trade agreement with Canada was imperiled by Ottawa's proposals to help its domestic apparel and dairy producers withstand American competition.


Panel Backs Curbs on Surrogate Motherhood
LEAD: After a second day of heated discussion, a panel of specialists concluded today that payment to surrogate mothers for bearing a child should be prohibited when it involves a loss of parental rights.


Foreman Wins Again
LEAD: George Foreman, the former heavyweight champion, tonight scored his seventh consecutive victory since returning to the ring last March, stopping a bloodied Guido Trane in the fifth round of their scheduled 10-round bout.


ATLANTA GAS LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTA GAS LIGHT CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
254,152,000
241,072,000
Net inc
12,992,000
6,883,000
Share earns
.67
.35


ROCKEFELLER CENTER PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCKEFELLER CENTER PROPERTIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,770,000
26,456,000
Net inc
b15,736,000
11,805,000
Share earns
.42
.31
Yr rev
105,570,000
104,631,000
Net inc
b50,074,000
47,286,000
Share earns
1.33
1.26


Starling Is Winner In Lackluster Effort
LEAD: Between the eighth and ninth rounds of Marlon Starling's title defense against Fujio Ozaki tonight, Starling's promoter, Cedric Kushner, stepped out of the Convention Center crowd and yelled at the champion.


CITADEL HOLDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CITADEL HOLDING CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,091,000
c4,793,000
Share earns
2.12
1.39
Yr net inc
b26,501,000
c29,030,000
Share earns
7.72
8.43
b-Includes a gain of $1,396,000 and a charge of $6,376,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, from lawsuit and other settlements and related costs, and year also includes a charge of $4,540,000 from an FSLIC secondary reserve write-off.


French Concern Sides With Societe Generale
LEAD: Compagnie Financiere de Suez, a diversified French concern, took the first steps today toward forming an alliance with the management of Societe Generale de Belgique, which is trying to fend off a bid for control by the Italian financier Carlo de Benedetti.


Jackson Cooperative
LEAD: The Bo Jackson saga, baseball division, continues.
In view of Jackson's batting collapse in the second half of last season that cost him his starting assignment in left field, his career in the major leagues is now viewed as uncertain by the Kansas City Royals, who plan to open with Gary Thurman in left field.


Kenyan Disbands Parliament And Frees 9 Before Elections
LEAD: President Daniel arap Moi dissolved Parliament today to prepare for general elections March 21, and released nine political prisoners who had been held without trial.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Skiing  Fletcher and Brown Triumph: Pam Fletcher won her second race in two days, and Mike Brown got a measure of revenge for being left off the Olympic team in super giant slalom races yesterday at the United States Alpine championships in Crested Butte, Colo.
Fletcher flashed to victory in the women's race by more than a full second.


Gillette Stock Up On Takeover Talk
LEAD: Shares in the Gillette Company rose yesterday amid growing speculation that the personal-care-products company is again a takeover candidate, Wall Street traders said.
The stock of Gillette, which avoided the takeover intentions of the Revlon Group Inc.'s chairman, Ronald Perelman, last year, rose 87.5 cents, to $37.625 yesterday, on top of


Payton May Return
LEAD: At tomorrow's Pro Bowl game in Honolulu, Walter Payton will be honored on the occasion of his retirement as the National Football League's career rushing leader.
But while talking to reporters yesterday, his retirement after 13 seasons as a runner for the Chicago Bears didn't sound as definite as it had a few weeks ago.


HDR POWER SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HDR POWER SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
2,157,909
2,278,146
Net inc
185,075
314,637
Share earns
.09
.18
6mo sales
4,454,619
4,327,934
Net inc
405,143
567,078
Share earns
.20
.34


Radiothon Continues
LEAD: The New York Philharmonic-WQXR Radiothon, the 11th such fundraiser for the orchestra, continues this weekend with music and interviews that can be heard on WQXR (96.3 AM or 1560 FM) through midnight Sunday.
Listeners who make donations may also receive gifts ranging from meals around town to helicopter rides.


Bond Prices Soar on Job Report
LEAD: Bond prices soared and interest rates fell yesterday after the Government reported a smaller-than-expected rise in January non-farm employment.


KINNARD INVESTMENTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KINNARD INVESTMENTS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,681,094
4,644,124
Net loss
1,169,198
b103,032
Share earns
-
.06
Yr rev
18,061,961
18,610,656
Net loss
571,653
b678,842
Share earns
-
.42


Horn &amp; Hardart In King's Table Bid
LEAD: The Horn &amp; Hardart Company, based in Las Vegas, Nev., said that it had agreed to acquire International King's Table Inc., which operates King's Table Buffet restaurants in California, Oregon, Washington and other Western states.
Horn &amp; Hardart, which already owns 19.9 percent of King's Table, will make a cash offer to purchase a minimum of 31.1 percent and up to all common shares oustanding for $20.25 in cash, or a total indicated price of $58.7 million.


Dollar Moves Up Strongly, But Price of Gold Slumps
LEAD: The dollar rebounded sharply against leading currencies in active domestic trading yesterday.


West to Resume Farm Aid to Ethiopia
LEAD: The World Bank and several Western nations will resume agricultural development aid to Ethiopia, which has agreed to create new incentives for food production to combat a famine, United Nations officials and diplomats say.


MUSIC: ALL-RIETI CONCERT
LEAD: Vittorio Rieti turned 90 years old on Jan. 28, and Wednesday night he was honored by an elegantly accomplished concert of his elegantly accomplished music at Merkin Concert Hall.


Lilco's Foes Express Doubts on Talks
LEAD: As the state and the Long Island Lighting Company intensify talks to end their battle over the Shoreham nuclear power plant, Lilco's opponents on the Island are beginning to voice doubts that a negotiated settlement will be politically acceptable.


AN ACCOUNT OF HOMELESSNESS INSPIRES GIFTS TO THE NEEDIEST
LEAD: Growing concern for the homeless, and especially homeless children like those found in the Martinique Hotel on Herald Square in Manhattan, has inspired many contributions to the 76th annual appeal of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


INSTRUMENT SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSTRUMENT SYSTEMS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
90,310,000
82,328,000
Net inc
b3,429,000
c1,454,000
Share earns
.06
.03
Shares outst
31,562,000
32,073,000
b-After tax credits of $1.3 million.


Ballet: 'Ives, Songs,'' By Jerome Robbins
LEAD: In ''Ives, Songs,'' his new ballet, Jerome Robbins has a nameless man look back upon his youth in early-20th-century America.
For some, the knee-pants imagery of the childhood scenes might recall Norman Rockwell; the spirit of Mark Twain is more apt.


Panel on Waldheim May Extend Work to Check Disputed Telegram
LEAD: Historians on a panel assigned to examine President Kurt Waldheim's wartime record said today that they might have to extend their work because of a disputed document said to have been discovered in Yugoslavia.


100 Million Lures Later, and They're Still Fishing
LEAD: Do not be misled by the snow falling through the pines or the crust of ice across Lake Paijanne.
On these frigid shores, 52 years ago, occurred one of the holy moments in the history of warm-water fishing.


T ROWE PRICE ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*T ROWE PRICE ASSOCIATES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
32,961,000
28,931,000
Net inc
4,098,000
3,288,000
Share earns
.56
.44
Yr rev
132,368,000
111,070,000
Net inc
b19,851,000
14,791,000
Share earns
2.68
2.00


53,000 Students Face Loss of Federal Grants
LEAD: About 53,000 students will be denied college aid under the major Federal grant program next fall unless Congress provides more money or reduces the amount of each Pell Grant, according to the Department of Education.


SCHERER, R P CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCHERER, R P CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
70,697,000
57,691,000
Net inc
b3,229,000
c2,462,000
Share earns
.29
.26
9mo sales
207,935,000
165,480,000
Net inc
b9,757,000
c6,423,000
Share earns
.86
.69


AMAX GOLD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMAX GOLD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
18,685,000
10,604,000
Net inc
8,870,000
4,751,000
Share earns
.22
.12
Yr sales
66,997,000
43,038,000
Net inc
40,373,000
17,292,000
Share earns
1.01
.43


Mario Cozzi, 72, Dies; Led Customs Inquiries
LEAD: Mario Cozzi, former chief of the foreign investigative branch of the United States Customs Service, died of a brain tumor Jan. 29 in New Rochelle Hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in the Pelham Manor section of the Bronx.


Denver Mayor Faces an Ouster Move
LEAD: When a Christmas Eve storm swept down from the Rockies five years ago, Denver's cigar-chomping Mayor, Bill McNichols, was slow to react, leaving many ice-covered side streets impassable for weeks.
He quickly slipped in the opinion polls, paving the way for the election of this city's first Hispanic-American Mayor, Federico


COLONIAL LIFE &amp; ACCIDENT INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLONIAL LIFE &amp; ACCIDENT INSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,121,888
c5,598,343
Share earns
.67
.71
Yr net inc
b22,937,100
c26,888,106
Share earns
2.93
3.42
b-After capital losses of $821,758 and $127,459 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Milers, Led by O'Sullivan, Set the Pace at Millrose
LEAD: The Millrose Games have always commanded attention largely for the blue-ribbon race of indoor track, the Wanamaker Mile.
Last night, the 81st annual Panasonic Millrose Games produced one startling mile race after another.


ANAREN MICROWAVE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANAREN MICROWAVE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,287,974
7,268,772
Net inc
364,072
461,871
Share earns
.09
.11
6mo sales
12,911,566
14,235,654
Net inc
756,360
843,881
Share earns
.18
.20


Nancy Abraham Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Nancy Abraham, a senior vice president of Shearson Lehman Hutton, and Arnold Moss, a vice president of Integrated Resources, a real-estate and investment concern in New York, were married yesterday at the bride's home in Manhattan.
Justice Alvin Schlesinger of State Supreme Court officiated.


Poles Said Ready to Admit Error In Purging Jews From Party in 60's
LEAD: Poland will soon acknowledge ''political error'' in 1967-68, when thousands of Jews were purged from the Communist Party, according to a scholar who said he was conveying a message from the Polish leader.


UTL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UTL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,575,396
6,000,214
Net inc
b693,706
430,061
Share earns
.17
.09
6mo rev
14,648,872
13,210,364
Net inc
b1,291,908
1,579,435
Share earns
.31
.33
b-After a gain of $4,593,420 from the early extinguishment of debt for the quarter and after a gain of $4,639,008 for the 6 months.


GROW GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROW GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
119,567,000
112,701,000
Net loss
b3,230,000
d2,047,000
6mo rev
256,006,000
235,211,000
Net loss
b1,853,000
cd54,000
b-Includes one-time expenses of $1,639,000 associated with terminating personnel in connection with the restructure of the consumer operations, as well as the cost of refinancing the company's debt for the quarter, and the 6 months includes an accounting change gain of $568,000.


Single Financial Regulator Backed
LEAD: The chairman of the New York Stock Exchange today endorsed a key proposal of a Presidential task force by agreeing that just one Federal agency should dominate regulation of the financial markets.


West Point Makes Soldiers, Not Scholars
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Resurgence of Takeovers
LEAD: It is back to the barricades for corporate America.


POLITICIANS IN EUROPE PRESS FOR ARMS TREATY
LEAD: A panel of four European politicians told members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee today that failure to approve the new arms control treaty banning ground-launched medium- and shorter-range missiles would have disastrous consequences for the Western alliance.


BATTLE MOUNTAIN GOLD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BATTLE MOUNTAIN GOLD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
39,671,000
25,022,000
Net inc
17,458,000
8,774,000
Share earns
.27
.14
Yr sales
122,793,000
91,021,000
Net inc
47,643,000
26,958,000
Share earns
.74
.42


CLEVELAND-CLIFFS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLEVELAND-CLIFFS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
146,100,000
58,700,000
Net inc
b39,600,000
c33,200,000
Share earns
2.33
-
Yr rev
435,000,000
226,900,000
Net inc
b12,700,000
c41,700,000
Share earns
.57
-


FAIR, ISAAC &amp; CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAIR, ISAAC &amp; CO INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,161,000
4,447,000
Net inc
300,000
557,000
Share earns
.05
.12
Shares outst
5,777,000
4,710,000


2,000 Protest Man's Parole
LEAD: About 2,000 residents, law-enforcement officials and politicians gathered this evening to rally against the possible parole of a man convicted of killing two police officers in 1963.
About 30 police cars from municipalities throughout Essex and Bergen Counties lined the street in front of the municipal complex.


Casting Is Completed For the Musical 'Chess'
LEAD: Casting was completed yesterday for ''Chess,'' the Tim Rice-Bjorn Ulvaeus-Benny Andersson musical that is scheduled to begin rehearsals Monday.
The principals are David Carroll and Philip Casnoff as Soviet and American chess masters and Judy Kuhn as the woman in love first with the Russian and then with the American.


Mortgages Dip Below 10%
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages have fallen below 10 percent for the first time since last April, according to a nationwide survey.


Edward S. Tauber, 79, Psychiatrist and Writer
LEAD: Dr.
Edward S. Tauber, a psychiatrist and author, died yesterday in White Plains Hospital Medical Center from complications of a stroke he suffered two weeks ago.
He was 79 years old and lived in Harrison, N.Y.


Tops in Losses
LEAD: Among National Basketball Association coaches, Gene Shue stands fourth in career victories with 767, only 171 behind the 938 of the leader, Red Auerbach.
But in defeats, Shue heads the list.
And on Thursday night in Los Angeles he became the first N.B.A. coach to lose 800 games when his Clippers fell to the Lakers, 117-86.


About New York; The Lagelli Way To Cheaply Stage A Play by Pinter
LEAD: Mickey Rooney used to say to Judy Garland (if he said it once, he said it a thousand times), ''Say, I've got an idea: Let's put on a show!'' So you take eight Northwestern University graduates, all drama majors, and you plop them down in New York, give them a few years knocking around looking for a break, pour a few beers down them one night in 1986, and inevitably one says, ''Say, why don't we put on our own show!


RLI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RLI CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
29,100,681
28,902,072
Net inc
b2,092,368
c3,028,893
Share earns
.34
.50
Yr rev
104,360,782
108,495,186
Net inc
b13,965,174
c10,978,773
Share earns
2.27
1.82


MULTIMEDIA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MULTIMEDIA INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
111,201,000
100,383,000
Net inc
5,043,000
c2,461,000
Share earns
.42
-
Yr rev
410,753,000
371,799,000
Net inc
b12,489,000
c4,661,000
Share earns
1.03
-


INTEGRATED GENETICS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTEGRATED GENETICS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,307,392
3,689,630
Net loss
1,048,214
b291,283
Share earns
-
.03
Yr rev
12,476,367
10,122,329
Net loss
2,722,583
2,794,707
b-Net income


Extradition of Sikh Is Approved in Jersey
LEAD: A Federal magistrate yesterday ruled that the second of two Sikhs captured in New Jersey and accused of assassinations in India could be extradited to that nation.


GEPHARDT IS WARY OF LEADER'S LABEL
LEAD: After months of painful anonymity, Representative Richard A. Gephardt is beginning to show the telltale sign that proves he considers himself a front-runner.
He is denying that he is ahead in next Monday's Iowa Democratic Presidential caucuses.


FLORIDA ROCK &amp; TANK LINES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA ROCK &amp; TANK LINES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,654,000
7,625,000
Net inc
774,000
713,000
Share earns
.17
.15


Village Concert
LEAD: The Greenwich Village Orchestra will perform works by Haydn, Rossini and Schumann at 3 P.M. tomorrow at Washington Irving High School (Irving Place at 16th Street).
A $5 donation, or $2 for students and the elderly, is requested.
Information: 265-7000, extension 273.


A Service to Keep Tabs on Credit Records
LEAD: It's an interesting proposition: They keep the records; the records help lenders decide if you're a good credit risk; and for $35 a year you can keep tabs on the record keepers.


PANAMA AT A GLANCE
LEAD:  Government


CARDINAL DISTRIBUTION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARDINAL DISTRIBUTION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
197,631,000
173,662,000
Net inc
1,537,000
1,069,000
Share earns
.31
.22
9mo sales
558,608,000
483,331,000
Net inc
3,948,000
3,628,000
Share earns
.80
.74


Devils Lose by 5-1; 9 Power Plays Fail
LEAD: Tony Tanti scored his 33d goal of the season at 13 minutes 24 seconds of the second period to snap a tie, and Rich Sutter scored twice as the Vancouver Canucks beat the New Jersey Devils, 5-1, tonight.


ROBERTSON VICTOR IN HAWAII VOTING
LEAD: Hawaii Republicans, voting in record numbers, have given Pat Robertson an overwhelming victory in a nonbinding straw vote.
The voting accompanied the selection of delegates to the party's state convention.


INSITUFORM EAST INCORPORATED reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSITUFORM EAST INCORPORATED (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,255,574
4,169,944
Net inc
532,432
270,954
Share earns
.11
.06
6mo sales
9,788,394
7,944,240
Net inc
1,121,962
603,707
Share earns
.24
.13


Black &amp; Decker Increases Bid for American Standard
LEAD: The Black &amp; Decker Corporation announced yesterday that it was increasing its all-cash offer for American Standard Inc. by $9 a share, to $65 a share, or about $2 billion, for the New York-based producer of plumbing fixtures, air-conditioning units and transportation products.


JUSTIN INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JUSTIN INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
67,603,000
62,356,000
Net inc
b60,000
c3,079,000
Share earns
.01
.53
Yr sales
234,277,000
230,035,000
Net inc
b752,000
c5,033,000
Share earns
.13
.86


Correction
LEAD: Because of editing errors, articles from Washington on Jan. 30 and 31 about the Iraqi oil pipeline project, and an article on Feb. 2 that incorporated the error, misidentified a law against bribery of foreign officials by American companies.
The law is the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, not the Federal Corrupt Practices Act.


Correction
LEAD: A brief article in Weekend yesterday about Grecian music gave an incorrect date for a performance by Microcosmos.
The group will play at 8 P.M. tonight, not tomorrow, at the Ethnic Folk Arts Center, 179 Varick Street.


FOR SOVIET OFFICIAL, GOOD WILL AND FLU
LEAD: When Vasily G. Zakharov, the Soviet Union's Minister of Culture, left New York for Moscow early yesterday morning, he took along the memory of a flood of good-will speeches, a few rocky moments with Congressmen who challenged the Soviet record on human rights and a severe case of the flu.


PRIMARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIMARK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
370,873,000
406,326,000
Net loss
36,656,000
b15,646,000
Share earns
-
.79
Yr rev
1,364,443,000
1,553,746,000
Net loss
1,727,000
b53,797,000
Share earns
-
2.73


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 1988
LEAD:  International 2-5  Panama's strongman was indicted.
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega sold his position to drug traffickers for millions of dollars in bribes and turned Panama into a capital of international cocaine smuggling, the indictments say.
Page 1  News analysis: The indictment holds little promise of leading to the arrest of General Noriega, and it complicates efforts by the Reagan Administration to ease the Panamanian leader from power.


CONCERT: THE CLEVELAND AT CARNEGIE HALL
LEAD: The clarinet explains Mozart as well as any other instrument.
It was a relatively new and unused device in his time, but the quintet, trio and concerto he wrote for it form the base on which the clarinet literature has rested ever since.
Mozart must have been attracted by its sour sweetness, soft yet with an aftertaste of tartness.


Shift of Titles Atop Ogilvy
LEAD: William E. Phillips, the 58-year-old chairman and chief executive of the Ogilvy Group, said yesterday that he would relinquish his titles to Kenneth Roman, 57, the chairman of Ogilvy's largest operating company, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, at the firm's annual shareholder meeting on May 17.


Baby M Surrogate Settles Fraud Suit
LEAD: Mary Beth Whitehead Gould and her former husband, Richard, have agreed to a settlement of their Federal fraud and negligence suit against the Infertility Center of New York, which arranged the February 1985 surrogate-mother contract that the New Jersey Supreme Court invalidated Wednesday.


Ugandans to Ration Fuel
LEAD: Uganda is beginning fuel rationing after years of periodic fuel crises.
The Energy Ministry this week ordered all vehicle owners, including those with tractors and motorboats, to register at their nearest filling stations within 10 days.


HORIZON FINANCIAL SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORIZON FINANCIAL SERVICES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
519,009
554,430
Share earns
.32
-
Yr net inc
1,869,298
1,858,594
Share earns
1.16
-
The company went public in November 1986.


Emeric Pressburger Is Dead at 85; The Screenwriter for 'Red Shoes'
LEAD: Emeric Pressburger, a British screenwriter whose widely acclaimed films made in collaboration with the director Michael Powell included ''The Red Shoes'' and ''Tales of Hoffmann,'' died yesterday of bronchial pneumonia at a nursing home in Saxstead, England.
He was 85 years old.


American City Journals' Shift
LEAD: American City Business Journals announced today that it was no longer for sale but would shed several unprofitable weeklies to shore up its ailing financial position.


Amending Lemon Laws
LEAD: Lemon laws, enacted by 43 states since 1982 to protect owners of unrepairable vehicles, have themselves proved defective, according to attorneys general in several states that have amended these laws.


FIRST MISSISSIPPI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST MISSISSIPPI CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
85,777,000
62,319,000
Net inc
3,103,000
84,000
Share earns
.16
-
6mo sales
164,836,000
117,558,000
Net inc
17,706,000
6,598,000
Share earns
.88
.33


Out at Count of 36
LEAD: Fighters older than 36 should be barred from participating in title fights, said Jose Sulaiman, World Boxing Council president, and he will ask his organization to do that at its convention in October.


Rapist Convicted on DNA Match
LEAD: A jury today convicted a man of rape on the basis of the DNA ''fingerprint'' of his blood.


N.B.A. Union Asks To Be Decertified
LEAD: Team representatives for the National Basketball Players Association voted unanimously tonight to decertify their union as the bargaining agent with the league.
In a separate action, the union agreed not to call for a strike of the All-Star Game or the playoffs.


FUTURES/OPTIONS Gold and Silver Prices Fall; Meat and Grains Are Mixed
LEAD: The Government's report yesterday of a slowdown in job growth sent a new wave of worry through the already pessimistic precious-metals futures markets, causing gold and silver prices to fall.


A GRANDDAUGHTER LEAVES CHILDHOOD BEHIND
LEAD: I DIDN'T cry when my grandfather died.
This man had taken me in, loved me and did the job his son couldn't do, but when he died I didn't cry.
His death wasn't a sad death or a shocking death.
It was a long time coming: he was a long time going.
We called it senility back then.
But for those last five years, he had been in steady decline.


MISS ENGEL PLANS TO MARRY IN FALL
LEAD: Marcy Engel, a lawyer for Salomon Brothers, and Stuart M. Cobert, an associate in the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, plan to be married in October, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Engel of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced.


Talks Reported
LEAD: Denver Broncos Coach Dan Reeves has said his team will talk to the Dallas Cowboys about a trade involving running back Tony Dorsett.


With New Editor, Paper In Maine Looks Ahead
LEAD: When Matthew V. Storin decided to take a job as editor of a weekly newspaper in this little coastal town, some of his friends thought he was crazy.


Near-Record Shootout
LEAD: Bimbo Coles scored a career-high 51 points today, including a 3-point goal that started a decisive Virginia Tech run in the second overtime as the Hokies defeated Southern Mississippi, 141-133.


Haitians Warily Enter an Uncertain New Era
LEAD: AFTER teaching political science in the United States, France and Latin America for 23 years, Leslie F. Manigat, the new President of Haiti, believes he is going to have a chance to test his ideas of national development.
But first, Mr.
Manigat, who is to be inaugurated today, must ease the resentment over the blatantly rigged Jan.


NOT JUST A NOTCH IN THE RUST BELT
LEAD:  SECOND SIGHT  By Mary Tannen. 259 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.


Preventing a Recurrence of the 'Black Monday' Blues
LEAD: TAMING volatility in the stock market appears to be the order of the day.


WAR AND CHANGE COME TO TEMPLE PUDLEY
LEAD:  THE SHELL SEEKERS  By Rosamunde Pilcher. 530 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $19.95.


FAMILY SAGA MOVES INTO VIDEO AGE
LEAD: I'M an incurable romantic.
I question couples on how they met.
Their fairy-tale wedding albums are the end of the story.
Similar to the wedding gown, the volume is boxed and wrapped for eternity.
And as a history published three or four decades ago, it is a quaintly dated reference.


PETER M. RUGGIERO WEDS JOAN CRAIG
LEAD: Joan Craig, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Craig of Moorestown, N.J., and Peter Michael Ruggiero, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Ruggiero of Elmont, L.I., were married yesterday at the Princeton University Chapel.
The Rev.
Raymond Finn, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.


Question Of the Week; Are Free Agents Free Again in Baseball?
LEAD: No.
To quote Janis Joplin, ''Freedom's just another word for nothing left to lose.''  EDWARD RANDALL  New York


CHIEF KEAN ECONOMIST LEAVENS OPTIMISM
LEAD: GOVERNOR Kean's leading economic adviser says that a glowing forecast for 1988, issued just two weeks ago, may have been overly optimistic.


JEAN GRIFFITH ENGAGED TO ROBERT D. HOPKINS
LEAD: The engagement of Jean Dashiell Griffith to Robert Dixon Hopkins has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Alexander Griffith of Ruxton, Md.
The couple plan to wed March 19.
Miss Griffith, a graduate of the Garrison Forest School and Towson State University, is an employment counselor for Nancy Adams Personnel in Baltimore.


Seeing London on a Tight Budget
LEAD: LONDON may be dreary and drizzly in winter but it tingles with the excitement of concerts and theater and things to do.
Question: Can an American enjoy an inexpensive holiday there with the dollar so sick?
Answer: Yes, but you have to work at it.


DANGEROUS RELATIONS
LEAD:  BY SILENCE BETRAYED  Sexual Abuse of Children in America.
By John Crewdson. 267 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $17.95.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I live in a new town house condominium that has an outdoor wood deck made of pressure-treated 2-by-4's.
The decking has turned green with mildew, and the builder has suggested using a K2 spot remover to clean it.
Is this the way to correct the problem?


TEMPLE OVERWHELMS RUTGERS
LEAD: Mike Vreeswyk scored 21 points for Temple today as the Owls defeated Rutgers, 84-53.
The Scarlet Knights set a school record by losing their 13th consecutive game.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Free Needles for Addicts; Experts Find Fault in New City AIDS Plan
LEAD: WHEN the Cuomo Administration decided last week to let New York City give clean needles to drug addicts, it may have seemed like a bold new step to stem the spread of AIDS.
But in the days that followed, the experimental program drew criticism and questions from a wide range of drug abuse experts who said the project will be plagued by problems.


ELIZABETH SHINE PLANNING TO WED M. S. ROSENZWEIG
LEAD: The engagement of Elizabeth Ochs Shine to Matthew Samuel Rosenzweig, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Y. Rosenzweig of Milwaukee, has been announced by the future bride's parents, Gretchen O. Shine and Warren S. Shine, both of New York.


U.S. Skaters Divided but Nearly Equal in Calgary
LEAD: ONE by one by one they were almost dazzling last month in Denver.
Showered with applause, flowers and teddy bears after their long programs, they had become America's ice-skating darlings, leaving the impression they were more a team than sometimes cutthroat competitors in a national championship.


2 Maine Agencies Curb Home Care of Elderly
LEAD: A shortage of health care workers and inadequate state financing have prompted two of Maine's largest home health care agencies to stop accepting new patients under a state program designed to lessen the reliance of the elderly and the handicapped on nursing homes.


Witt Figures to Reign Supreme
LEAD: HER name hung over Denver last month like the smog, and it almost did not seem to matter how badly any of America's best female figure skaters beat up on each other in the national championships.
The significant other, thousands of miles to the east, lurked in spirit, nonetheless.
Katarina Witt.
Of course.


LIFE ON THE LINE: VERMONT AND CANADA
LEAD: It was a curious scene that Monday morning last week in the main hall of the Haskell Free Library.
On one side of the thin, black line sat a Canadian judge; five Canadian witnesses for the prosecution; a Canadian attorney and George Terwilliger 3d, the United States Attorney for Vermont, who was there to question the witnesses.


A SHOWPLACE FOR HORSES IS IN THE WORKS
LEAD: AFTER 10 years of applying the spurs to reluctant bureaucrats, a horse-loving, horse-owning schoolteacher from Oakland in Bergen County has won the right to build a world-class horse-show arena for New Jersey.


Q AND A
LEAD: Swiss Glasses  Question:In a television program about the Swiss mountain railroads, I noticed the use of wineglasses with bent stems, designed so the contents would always remain level as the train ascends.
Where can I obtain some of this glassware? - G. R., Alexandria, Va.
Answer:The tilted wineglasses are used on the Glacier Express, which runs between St.


A FALL WEDDING FOR MISS MARSHALL AND D. B. STRONG
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Marshall of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Lea Marshall to Douglas Bavier Strong, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank P. Strong Jr. of Fairport, N.Y.
The couple plan to marry in October.


CAN ART MAKE THE WORLD SAFE FOR ROMANTICISM?
LEAD: Browsing through the romanticism exhibit at the New York Public Library on 42d Street, watching visitors pore over original manuscripts by Wordsworth, Coleridge, Shelley, Keats and Blake or gaze at paintings by Turner, Constable, Samuel Palmer and others, I wondered what has happened to romanticism, how it has weathered since Wordsworth.


Naming of Doctor in Mercy Death Is Resisted
LEAD: The American Medical Association says only a court order could force it to disclose the identity of a physician who wrote an essay about injecting a terminally ill patient with a lethal dose of morphine.


A 'CRUCIAL OMISSION' IN ARTICLE ON EGGS
LEAD: The Jan. 17 article ''Animal Rights Group Assails Egg Farm'' omits a crucial fact about factory farming: Since the hens that are crammed together in tiny cages could easily succumb to infectious illness, their feed is heavily dosed with antibiotics.


Rock: Frank Zappa Opens a Three-Show Series
LEAD: LONG hours of rehearsal went into Frank Zappa's concert Thursday at the Beacon Theater.
Opening a sold-out three-night stand, Mr.
Zappa and 11 backup musicians played complex, irregular pieces - suite-length pastiches of everything from electro-pop to country to blues-rock to soundtrack marches to


Maine Monitors Chlorine Leak at Paper Mill
LEAD: The site of a 112,000-gallon chlorine dioxide leak at a paper mill was being monitored today by environmental officials while the mill awaited the Governor's permission to resume normal operations.


CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING STAIRS
LEAD: INSTALLING a prefabricated disappearing stairway as an attic entrance is worth considering if a larger or more convenient opening is needed.
The task is simple for two people (an assistant is necessary to help maneuver the staircase), provided that the opening for the stairway can be cut so that its long sides are parallel with the existing ceiling joists, and that the roof is supported by rafters, not trusses.


Redmen Slow in Rout by Syracuse
LEAD: Even the most loyal St. John's fan should have been able to predict this one.


POSTINGS: Biltmore on the Block; Curtain Falling
LEAD: ''Stardust'' is but a memory at the Biltmore Theater, though it still embellishes the marquee at 261 West 47th Street that once spoke of ''Barefoot in the Park'' and ''Hair.'' Since its last musical closed in May, the police say the theater has been used as a drug shooting gallery.
On Feb. 16, it will be auctioned off at the Hotel


Car Stereos Cover the Ground
LEAD: The uses of MOzart are manifold.
For example, last week I discovered that the Haffner Serenade is good for frayed nerves while you're waiting to be pulled out of a ditch.
No cause for alarm - it's all part of winter driving in the Berkshires, but it explains why, under certain conditions, a good sound system in a car gives as much comfort as a good heater.


TALKING: House Rules; How Best To Win Compliance
LEAD: A PICKUP truck belonging to a unit owner is continually parked in a New Jersey condominium parking lot in violation of house rules that permit only passenger cars.


Attack on Nicaragua Bus Kills 17, Including Infant
LEAD: Lying on a crude kitchen table, the body of perhaps the youngest victim of Nicaragua's civil conflict lay swaddled in white inside a dank mud shack today.


MANHUNTING, IN AN ARMCHAIR
LEAD: The line between en-tertainment and news will be stretched a smidgen thinner beginning tonight, when Fox's fledgling network launches a weekly series called ''America's Most Wanted,'' described by its producers as ''a televised manhunt'' intended to enlist the public's help in the capture of fugitives.


America Is Running Out of Time
LEAD: AMERICA can't compete.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  Heavy Metal in a Quiet Room IT was hard to tell who was having more fun at the Nassau Coliseum recently, the 17,000 screaming teen-agers in the arena, who were boogying away to the heavy-metal sound of the rock band Whitesnake, or Rose Liss in the basement, who was ''up a couple of dollars'' in a deuces-wild seven-card-stud poker game.


Cabaret: 'New Age Revue'
LEAD: FEW subjects are more ripe for satire than the so-called ''new age'' movement with its assorted gurus, nuts and charlatans all spouting different brands of transcendental mumbo jumbo.
Jeff and Julie Olmsted, the songwriter-performers who created ''Jeff and Jewel's New Age Blues Revue,'' which plays at Don't Tell Mama on Thursdays through the end of the month, have done their homework in researching a field that encompasses phenomena as different as Werner Erhard's EST training seminars and Shirley MacLaine's thoughts on reincarnation.


View of the White House From the Nofziger Trial
LEAD: The Federal ethics trial of Lyn Nofziger, now entering its fifth week, has provided a revealing glimpse at the ready access to high Reagan Administration officials that was granted to former aides who return as lobbyists.


Soviet Lifting Veil on Death Of Astronaut
LEAD: The Soviet Union is slowly disclosing the circumstances of the mysterious airplane crash 20 years ago that killed Yuri A. Gagarin, who was the first man to orbit the earth and was one of his nation's most popular heroes.


A CORRECTION
LEAD: An article and a caption on Jan. 31 misidentified a community group in East Harlem.
It is the Union Settlement Association, not the East Harlem Settlement House.


A Basic Choice With Laser Printers
LEAD: LASER printers are getting better, smaller, faster and slightly less expensive.
That makes them more attractive than ever as replacements for the dot matrix or daisy wheel printers now in the office.


Pay Cited in Loss of Day-Care Staff in New York
LEAD: Administrators and teachers in New York City's day-care centers are leaving their jobs for positions with higher salaries and better working conditions and the quality of care at the centers is suffering, according to participants in a symposium yesterday in Manhattan.


Skipper Plans School for Young Sailors
LEAD: John Kolius has needed the time to slow down.
Little has been heard in the last year from the skipper who carried the New York Yacht Club's banner to Australia for the 1986-87 America's Cup series.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  BLACK HISTORY MONTH  Although officially it began last week, Black History Month really gets into gear this week as museums and libraries throughout the Island study the past, celebrate the present and look into the future.
For example, ''Out of Africa,'' a traveling photographic exhibition from the Smithsonian Institution that traces the rich cultural heritage of West Africa, is at the African-American Museum in Hempstead, 110 North Franklin Street, through February.


Guides to the Bible
LEAD: To the Editor:


Capital Gains Tax
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tibetan Religion
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cup Tactics Attacked
LEAD: The choice of San Pedro Bay near Los Angeles as the site for the next America's Cup match is a move by the San Diego Yacht Club to gain a tactical advantage, Bruce Farr, designer of New Zealand's yacht challenger, said yesterday.


A Recording Studio As Artists See It
LEAD: The battle has raged for decades - is recorded music a valid substitute for live performance before an audience?
The extremes have ranged from listeners and musicians who felt recordings were at best misleading to those like Glenn Gould who retreated to the recording studio and forswore live performance entirely.


DATA BANK: February 7, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
IV Q'87
III Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,870.0
$3,835.9
$3,702.4
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.2
4.3
1.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$141.9
$134.5
$130.2


A Caustic Koch Assails Pension Plan Increase
LEAD: In an unusually caustic attack on some members of the State Legislature, Mayor Koch yesterday released a barrage of statistics that he said showed how the city would be hurt by a state proposal to supplement the pensions of retired city and state workers.


Stagehand Seized at Airport in Karate-Kick Slaying
LEAD: A nationwide manhunt set off by the karate-style kick slaying of a young business executive on a Manhattan street ended Friday night with the capture of a 20-year-old part-time New York stagehand as he stepped off an airliner in San Francisco.


Grand Concourse
LEAD: To the Editor:


DR. SUSAN KELLIE TO MARRY DR. JAMES HARDING IN JUNE
LEAD: Dr.
Susan Margaret Kellie, a resident in internal medicine at Beth Israel Medical Center, and Dr.
James Sutherland Harding, a resident in internal medicine at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, plan to marry June 4, the parents of the future bride, Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Kellie of Brooklyn, have announced.


A LB CARTE
LEAD: LOVERS are preparing for the romantic highlight of the year, Valentine's Day.


White House Criticizes Democrats For Threatening Arms Pact Delay
LEAD: The White House today criticized Senate Democratic leaders for threatening to delay approval of the new Soviet-American treaty banning ground-launched medium- and shorter-range missiles after negotiations between the Senators and the Administration on a key issue appeared to collapse Friday.


Workers to Register
LEAD: WHEN large employers sponsor voter registration drives for their workers, the number of new registrants can be as large as the voting population of an entire small town.
The Nationwide Insurance Companies, with 14 regional offices, has registered or reregistered an average of 3,000 voters a year since 1984.


THE REGION: City Charter Changes; If the Board of Estimate Dies, Who Will Inherit Its Powers?
LEAD: IF the New York City Board of Estimate is dismantled, as some legal experts were proposing last week, there could be an ironic result.
A challenge to the board that originated in a desire for a more representative city government could so upset the city's system of checks and balances as to give more power to an already powerful mayor.


When Dance Leaps Onto the Silver Screen
LEAD: Life is too short, you realize after dropping in on ''Dance on Film, Dancin' in the Movies,'' a wonderfully eclectic series that continues at Film Forum 2 through Feb. l8.
Does anybody nowadays have time to sample everything from big-band musicals to ''The Red Shoes,'' Merce Cunningham and the Bolshoi?


China
LEAD: To the Editor: In Betsy Wade's ''Going to China?
What to Expect'' (Practical Traveler, Sept. 13), many valuable and valid hints for comfortable travel in China were given.
I would like to give one additional hint.
The old adage, ''When in Rome, do as the Romans do,'' might wisely be updated to ''When on a Pacific Delight tour in China, do as the Pacific Delighters do.


Candidates Scramble as Iowa Campaign Nears End
LEAD: Eleven of the 13 Presidential candidates crisscrossed Iowa today in pursuit of the uncommitted, the undecided and the persuadable as the campaign here drew to a close.


'Grand Old Men'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Skeptically, Koreans Await Demonstrations of Democracy
LEAD: FOR optimists, here are some signs of a democratic breeze that has been blowing sweetly through South Korea since the mid-December election of Roh Tae Woo as President:


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  IRISH TO ENTERTAIN


ELIZABETH EDDY WEDS
LEAD: At Calvary Episcopal Church in Stonington, Conn., Elizabeth Blair Eddy and Andrew Cary Heublein were married yesterday by the Rev.
John Donnelly.
The bride is the daughter of Comdr.
William P. Eddy, U.S.N., retired, and Mrs.
Eddy of North Stonington, Conn.
A graduate of the Loomis Chaffee School, she attended Randolph-Macon Woman's College.


WESLEYAN EXHIBITS BIBLICAN PRINTS AND HARLEM PHOTOGRAPHS
LEAD: THE story of the Holy Family's flight into Egypt is not one of the Bible's cliffhangers - St.
Matthew devotes but three or four verses to it.
Nevertheless, the tale becomes endearing and often quite dramatic, as it is told in the print show that is one of the two current attractions at the Davison Art Center at Wesleyan


Correction
LEAD: A chart last Sunday with an article on the Nova Pharmaceutical Corporation misidentified the market where the company's stock is traded.
The shares are traded over-the-counter.


An Up-to-Date Look at A Very Old Habit
LEAD: THE oldest ''rule'' in bridge, far older than the game itself, has been under attack for a quarter of a century.
It's now in decline, but is likely, like Charles II, to be an unconscionable time dying.


LATE MOTHERHOOD
LEAD: As the 46-year-old mother of a healthy 6-month-old daughter (and a 19-year-old son), I read Melvin Konner's article ''Childbearing and Age'' with considerable interest (Body and Mind, Dec. 27).
While I do not dispute the reality of his statistics on the decreasing chances of conception with advancing age, it must be said that, despite atrophying organs and waning hormonal levels, the life force can be more generous to older women than mere statistics might lead us to believe.


Reagan to Work for Contra Aid Compromise
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he would reject any Congressional alternative for aid to the Nicaraguan rebels ''that is little more than a disguise for surrender and abandonment.''


NONFICTION
LEAD:  GERMANY AND THE GERMANS: An Anatomy of Society Today.
By John Ardagh. (Harper &amp; Row, $24.95.) Like John Gunther's ''Inside . . .'' series, John Ardagh's book about Germany may be of some use to those readers who have absolutely no idea at all about the subject being dealt with.
Like Gunther, Mr.


Wrong From the Start; Reagan's Contra War, Reagan's Failure
LEAD: President Reagan lost a crucial funding vote last Wednesday on the contra war.
Only a vote was lost, not a country.
Yet the White House is sure to blame Congress if the Sandinistas fail to live up to the Central American peace plan.
But it is Mr.
Reagan, not Congress, who is responsible for the breakdown of U.S.


No Headline
LEAD: It is a rite of dawn on the banks of the Amazon: fishermen briskly tossing their haul on the piers, ready for market.


NEW YORKERS Etc.
LEAD: THEY'RE out there somewhere; they must be.
But who are they and where are they?
Do they look like everyone else?
Have they advanced degrees in science, math and languages?
Do they occasionally have temper tantrums?
Have they ever been heard to mutter, or even to come right out with, words like ''heck,'' ''darn,'' or ''oh, fudge?


Correction
LEAD: A report last Sunday on fiscal issues before the General Assembly gave an incorrect figure for the amount of money to be taken from the 1986-87 budget surplus and state corporate tax and used for local property tax relief in the 1988-89 fiscal year.
The amount is $42 million.
The article also misstated an increase to that fund being sought by the Connecticut Conference of


U.S. Envoy Is Critical of Rumania on Rights
LEAD: After meeting with President Nicolae Ceausescu for nearly three hours today, a visiting United States official said he had found the Rumanian leader unwilling to listen to American concerns about Rumania's human rights policies.


F. Vernon Foster Dies; Stockbroker Was 94
LEAD: F. Vernon Foster, a New York stockbroker for more than 70 years, died of complications following a blood infection last Sunday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 94 years old and lived in Manhattan.


The Vice President and the Anchor Man
LEAD: To the Editor:


RIGHTING A WRONG
LEAD: Russell Baker's amusing essay ''High-Flying Confusion'' (Sunday Observer, Jan. 10), on how journalists confess error, recalls an anecdote told about John Foster Dulles, a prominent lawyer who was Secretary of State in the Eisenhower Administration.
Mr.
Dulles was once asked whether he had ever been wrong.


REAL-ESTATE GROUP POLL FINDS MANY SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
LEAD: A New York City real-estate trade group said last week that despite recent criticism of several ambitious development projects, a public opinion poll it commissioned has found a reservoir of support among residents for commercial and residential development.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; A Superstore Rises in Tiny Edgewater
LEAD: By RACHELLE GARBARINE


For a Very Sizable Majority More Than Enough Politics
LEAD: There are many here who refer to this week as ''the end of the world.'' The candidates will stop talking to animals and will fly East.
The reporters will stop caring that Iowa is the Jell-O-eating capital of the country, and will stop buying products of the new political tourist industry, like ''Ski Iowa'' T-shirts and ''Weak-End in Des Moines'' lingerie.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I live in a new town house condominium that has an outdoor wood deck made of pressure-treated 2-by-4's.
The decking has turned green with mildew, and the builder has suggested using a K2 spot remover to clean it.
Is this the way to correct the problem?


Abrams Frustrated by Lawyer in Assault Case
LEAD: New York State Attorney General Robert Abrams, who was appointed by Governor Cuomo last month as special prosecutor in the Tawana Brawley case, has expressed frustration over the continuing refusal of Miss Brawley's lawyer, Alton H. Maddox Jr., to cooperate in any way.


Warming Up in the Wings: A Revival of 1970's Rock
LEAD: A 1960'S REVIVAL IS gusting through rock.
Musicians and critics are jostling one another to praise the human scale and anything-goes spirit of 1960's rock; college radio stations can play hours of recent music in which the hoarse vocals and garage-band production are virtually indistinguishable from the ''Nuggets'' collections (on Rhino Records) of half-forgotten 1960's singles.


Ghost Bands Very Much Alive
LEAD: Back in the 60's, Woody Her-man was asked if the big bands would ever come back.
His answer was blunt: ''No.''


Radioactivity At Air Force Site
LEAD: FOR more than 27 years, a three- acre slab of concrete, surrounded by barbed wire, has been a silent witness at Fort Dix, N.J., to the deadly potential of nuclear arms.


THE CAREFUL SHOPPER
LEAD:  Supplies and Services For the Wedding


Tipping at Sea
LEAD: To the Editor: ''Calming the Jitters About Tipping on Cruises'' (Practical Traveler, Nov. 1) was timely.
Some crew members on our recent Royal Caribbean Cruise Line cruise seemed to receive virtually no monetary remuneration, only uniforms, bed and board.
With such an arrangement, company loyalty is minimal, and the caveat regarding personal effects (stressed by the cruise line) becomes more significant.


Eye of the Beholder
LEAD: To the Editor:


Are U.S. Companies Learning to Share?
LEAD: BATTERED by foreign gains in manufacturing and high technology, American companies are increasingly favoring cooperation over competition, as they band together in order to survive.
Taking a hint from the Japanese, endangered industries are forming research consortiums to pool limited supplies of talent, money and managerial skill.


Director With a Trans-Atlantic Touch
LEAD: Although he lives in London and directs an English company, in the last few years Max Stafford-Clark has become almost as frequent a presence in the New York theater as the most ubiquitous American director.
Since 1982, when Mr.
Stafford-Clark talked Joseph Papp into an exchange program between his own British group, the Royal Court Theater, and Mr.


Soviet Called Ready to Back Iran Embargo
LEAD: A Soviet official said today that Moscow is ready to support a United Nations Security Council resolution that would impose an arms embargo on Iran for failing to accept a cease-fire in its war with Iraq.


The Power of 'Siegfried' To Enthrall and Edify
LEAD: Friday night, the third shoe will fall, meaning that the Metropolitan Opera will unveil ''Siegfried,'' the third in its four new productions that make up Wagner's ''Ring'' cycle.
It will join ''Das Rheingold,'' first seen earlier this season; ''Die Walkure,'' which bowed last season, and ''Gotterdammerung,'' due next season, to form a complete ''Ring des Nibelungen'' scheduled to be presented as a whole for the first time in


COAST GUARD TO CUT NEW LONDON UNITS
LEAD: BOATERS on Long Island Sound and its major estuaries are probably going to find the Coast Guard far less accessible next summer as a result of Congressional budget cuts.


Chekhov's Thoughts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A roundup of educational tours on Jan. 10 misstated the languages used for liberal arts courses in the Paris program of the University of California at Berkeley.
Only one class, ''France d'aujourd'hui,'' is conducted in French; the rest are in English.


Town Is Heir to Land And Mystery: Where?
LEAD: Woonsocket has fallen heir to a parcel of land in New England that may be worth up to $500,000.
But the Boston-based company that advised the city of its inheritance has declined to say where the land is.


U.S. Planning Show of Force for Seoul Games
LEAD: The Reagan Administration plans a full-scale show of military force in and around South Korea next fall to deter possible North Korean terrorism or attack during the Olympic Games in Seoul, Administration officials say.


NANCY M. LYONS TO WED IN APRIL
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene T. Lyons of Arlington, Va., have made known the engagement of their daughter, Nancy Marie Lyons, to Robert Patrick Callahan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Callahan Jr. of Norfolk, Va.
The couple plan to marry in April.


WHAT HE DID FOR HIS IN-LAWS
LEAD:  THE MEMOIR OF MARCO PARENTI  A Life in Medici Florence.
By Mark Phillips. 283 pp.
New Jersey: Princeton University Press. $40.


Vindicated Bolsheviks
LEAD: ' Of course, we can't return their lives, but this is a very noble deed. '


CONNOTATIONS OF 'BLACK' HELD TO BE NONRACIAL
LEAD: The McClean article represents another tiresome assault on English usage by people who should know better.


QUICK FIXES
LEAD: A HOW-TO BOOK PROMISES to create ''a more beautiful you'' in 21 days.
Twenty-one days?
It seems like an eternity.
The book, by the way, was written in 1972.


WENDY MUNOZ TO WED DR. ANDREW J. LERRICK
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William Munoz of Freehold, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Wendy Ann Munoz, to Dr.
Andrew James Lerrick, a son of Mrs.
Robert Lerrick of Chappaqua, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Lerrick.
A September wedding is planned.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I live in a new town house condominium that has an outdoor wood deck made of pressure-treated 2-by-4's.
The decking has turned green with mildew, and the builder has suggested using a K2 spot remover to clean it.
Is this the way to correct the problem?


CHANCE ENCOUNTER WITH BITTER CHILDHOOD MEMORIES
LEAD: HE CAME out of the elevator - dumpy, sixtyish, hair still dirty blond - and the shock of recognition went through me.
It had been 15 years since I had seen him, nearly 20 since we shared the same household, and I no longer saw through the eyes of a boy.


Overtired
LEAD: THE PROBLEM HAS ALWAYS been what to do with them.
One Minnesota plant turns them into a re-usable rubber compound.
And, of course, they make good rope swings.
There are an estimated 2 billion discarded tires in this country; about 40 million - the world's largest pile (above) - are near Westley, Calif.


HOWARD RORY ELISOFON ENGAGED TO MS. KARTER
LEAD: The engagement of Marguerite Karter to Howard Rory Elisofon has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Karter of New York.
An April 30 wedding is planned.


THE UGLY HISTORIANS
LEAD:  REFLECTIONS ON HISTORY AND HISTORIANS  By Theodore S. Hamerow. 267 pp.
Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press. $25.
THE NEW HISTORY AND THE OLD  By Gertrude Himmelfarb. 209 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press/Harvard University Press. $20.


Legends Live Up To Their Billing
LEAD: It started out as a nice game with everybody trying to be polite and allowing his teammate to get a shot.
But the N.B.A.
Legends Classic ended up resembling a regular-season game today, and it ended in sudden-death overtime.


IN BUSINESS, U.S. SAYS DONALD IS TRUMP
LEAD: Donald J. Trump has built a business empire on his name.
He calls his company the Trump Organization.
Its home is Trump Tower.
His fanciest condominium project bears the name Trump Parc.
He owns casinos in Atlantic City called Trump Plaza and Trump's Castle.


Tacit Admission?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Guides to the Bible
LEAD: To the Editor:


KOHL WOULD KEEP TACTICAL MISSILES
LEAD: In a major policy declaration, Chancellor Helmut Kohl today formally spurned the idea of eliminating short-range nuclear missiles from Europe but demanded negotiations that would reduce to equal ceilings the number of such weapons held by NATO and the Warsaw Pact.


In the Philippines, The Politics of Turmoil Casts A Murky Shadow Over the Arts
LEAD: The major artistic creation of the Philippines today is a passion play in which a simple widow challenges a dictator she believes killed her husband, and leads her nation to freedom.
In its second act, the widow, as president, faces down a series of violent challenges, clinging perilously to power as the forces of darkness struggle to reassert themselves.


A Statute Was Needed to Stop Abuses
LEAD: LAST spring the United States Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Indiana Control Share Acquistion Statute, which limits company takeover activity in that state.
This statute requires certain hostile bidders to obtain the approval of the disinterested stockholders - the bidder or management - in order for the takeover bidder's shares to have voting power.


Next Week; Who Was Better, Mantle Or Mays? (Or Snider?)
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Thomas B. Lamb, 91, an Inventor, Industrial Designer and Cartoonist
LEAD: Thomas Babbitt Lamb, an inventor and industrial designer, died of pneumonia Tuesday at the Carolton Manor convalescent home in Fairfield, Conn.
He was 91 years old and lived in New Canaan, Conn.


Architects Now Doubling as Developers
LEAD: EVEN after construction crews completed work two years ago on Riveredge, an office complex in Florham Park, N.J., plenty of work remained for Edward Blake and Donald Rotwein, who served as the project's architects.


TROUBLED ENTREPRENEUR: Stuart Karl; From Fonda and Hart To Flops and Hot Water
LEAD: AS he walked into the Beverly Hills Hotel one day in January 1984, Stuart Karl surely felt on top of the world.


THREE GOLDS A DAY
LEAD: WHEN Torvill and Dean competed in the Olympics, they were DiMaggio rounding second, Evert placing a backhand, Erving dunking a basketball, grace and power, style and purpose, the champs.


Albany Notes; Cuomo Pushes Challenge To Salaries at Authorities
LEAD: Governor Cuomo this week stepped up his campaign against the salaries at public authorities, calling them excessive and demanding that the authorities bring them under control.


'Scared Straight' Studies Sought
LEAD: Scene from Juvenile Awareness Program at East Jersey State Prison, which brings in juvenile deliquents to see and hear inmates describe, in harsh, often abusive language, life behind bars.
Such life is producing tensions at Bergen County's 25-year-old Jail Annex, top. 'Scared Straight' article, Page 18.


Feminism and Marxist Feminism
LEAD: To the Editor:


PERSPECTIVES: City-Assisted Housing; Mixed-Income Condo Nears Completion
LEAD: A SALES program is under way in the Towers on the Park condominium at the northwest corner of Central Park, at the edge of Harlem, and it is demonstrating a new concept in producing high-rise housing with government assistance for people of moderate to middle income.


Victim of Vietnam Identified
LEAD: An Army laboratory in Hawaii has identified remains returned to the United States by Vietnam last September as those of Maj.
Michael J. Bosiljevac of Omaha, an Air Force officer who disappeared on a flight over North Vietnam more than 15 years ago.
He was the 146th American whose remains, having been returned by Hanoi since the Vietnam War, were subsequently identified by the Central Identification Laboratory in Honolulu.


MORE THAN ONE ROUTE TO BEETHOVEN
LEAD: May I propose an inter-esting experiment: turn on your record machine and play - in either order you choose -Wilhelm Furtwangler's Bayreuth recording of the Beethoven Ninth Symphony (1951) and Roger Norrington conducting the same piece with the London Classical Players (1987).


Grow Your Own In-House Lobbyists
LEAD: THERE'S plenty of help available to businesses that want to encourage employees or customers to register and vote, or to participate more actively in the political process.


TOUGH QUESTIONS ON THE ROAD TO OZ
LEAD: ''I WANT to know if what I heard was true,'' said Diana, my 5-year-old granddaughter. ''Did Dorothy kill herself by taking drugs?''


Cabaret: Marlene VerPlanck
LEAD: LOVE songs are normally an inevitable part of a cabaret singer's repertory, but Marlene Ver Planck has built her entire program at Dannys' Skylight Room (346 West 46th Street) on songs that trace the ups and downs of a love affair.


In Calgary, Samaranch Plans for Seoul
LEAD: In his first meeting with a North Korean official since North Korea announced it would not participate in the 1988 Seoul Summer Olympics unless it is a co-host, Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, warned that time was growing short for North Korea to participate in any form.


At South Pole, Tourists and Cigarette Butts
LEAD: Chalk up another point for inevitability: tourists have set foot on the South Pole.


Jazz: Cecil Taylor Quintet
LEAD: FRANTIC, unpredictable, turbulent and - out of nowhere - harmonious, Cecil Taylor's music mirrors urban life in all its hyperactive sprawl.
The pianist brought a new quintet to a packed Knitting Factory Thursday through last night; his Bosendorfer concert grand was squeezed onto the tiny stage along with Thurman Barker's drums and vibraphone and William Parker's bass.


Malay Party Ruled Illegal, Spurring Conflicts
LEAD: The political party that has headed every Malaysian Government since independence in 1957 was ruled illegal last week by a Malaysian judge because some of its branches were improperly registered.
The unexpected ruling is likely to pose political, legal and possibly financial problems for Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad and the party, the United Malays National Organization.


Scholars in Poland Protesting Political Control
LEAD: Poland's authorities are struggling to close a festering wound at the nation's prestigious Academy of Sciences, where members published an unusual open letter charging that inroads of political control crushed work in the academy's social science institutes.


Dole and Gephardt Lead Poll
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole of Kansas and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri ranked first today in The Des Moines Register's final poll of Iowans before the state's precinct caucuses Monday night.


POSTINGS: On a Hilltop, w/Vus; Houses Share the Waters
LEAD: Sparta Brook will share attention with the Hudson River in a colony of 20 houses being built in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Mitchell Hochberg, the co-developer, promises a backyard babbler for 12 of them and a Tappan Zee view for seven.
The project, called The Orchard, will also retain some of the apple trees that once dominated the 30-acre hilltop off Scarborough Road.


Boston Vista Clouded
LEAD: To the Editor:


Survey Finds a Clash on AIDS in Workplace
LEAD: A clash between the rights of employees suffering from AIDS and those of noninfected co-workers could pose a growing problem for employers, according to a survey of attitudes toward people who have the disease.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Trading Pinstripes For Chef's Toque


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  'WALLENBERG AT 75'  Harvey Rosenfeld, the author of ''Raoul Wallenberg: Angel of Rescue,'' will give a talk in Hartford tomorrow about the Swedish businessman who ran an underground from Germany to England during World War II and saved many Jews from the Holocaust, The talk is titled ''Raoul Wallenberg at 75: The Unresolved Question.


In Cornwall, a Meal in a Crust
LEAD: IN the 18th century in England's Cornwall, tin smelters would stand around a basin of the silvery liquid as a huge block of wood dropped into it and sent up a fountain of molten metal.
The impact of the wood made the tin boil off impurities.
Sparks flew and the heat was intense, but according to a contemporary historian, the workers scarcely noticed the bright specks of tin flying about them.


BARBARA SUZANNE CHRISTMAN, BANKER, IS WED TO WILLIAM PRESTON HUTCHINGS
LEAD: At St.
James's Episcopal Church in Manhattan yesterday, Barbara Suzanne Christman, the daughter of Clyde Salle Christman and Suzanne Carter Christman of Yakima, Wash., was married to William Preston Hutchings.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
H.
Ford Hutchings of Tucker's Town, Bermuda, and New York.


Room Enough for 50 Earths
LEAD: Seymour Simon's series of children's books on the planets, the sun and the stars reminds you of the old joke about childhood being too good to be wasted on kids.
What do these books lack that a good adult book should have?
The latest, URANUS (Morrow Junior Books, $12.95. Ages 4 to 8), like its companions, is beautiful, evocative, neat, simple, informative.


UCONN TOPPLES GEORGETOWN
LEAD: Cliff Robinson scored 16 points and blocked 9 shots to lead Connecticut over Georgetown tonight, 66-59.


A CHALLENGE FOR HEALTH CARE
LEAD: SEVEN months ago, New Jersey's health-care community received a challenge: to develop innovative and unique approaches to the state's most pressing health-care problems.


SHERIFF WARNS OF GROWING TROUBLE AT BERGEN JAIL ANNEX
LEAD: TENSIONS in Bergen County's 25-year-old Jail Annex are difficult to manage, says Sheriff Robert R. Herb, and unless changes are made, he contends, violence will continue and injuries increase.


LISA BURTON WED TO BRUCE ERICSON
LEAD: At the Plymouth Congregational Church in Minneapolis, Elizabeth Whitney Burton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Burton of Deep-haven, Minn., was married yesterday to Bruce Alan Ericson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl H. Ericson of Snyder, N.Y.
The Rev.
Carla Bailey performed the ceremony.


Package Deals in Three Capitals
LEAD: TRAVELERS watching their pounds, francs or lire - and the dollar buys fewer of each these days -might consider buying a package deal to Europe.
A weeklong package in Paris, London or Rome can represent a substantial saving over standard prices because airlines and tour companies get discounts by negotiating for large blocks of rooms.


FICTION
LEAD:  GOD'S WATER CARRIERS.
By Manes Sperber.
Translated by Joachim Neugroschel.
Foreword by Elie Wiesel. (Holmes &amp; Meier, $24.50.) In ''God's Water Carriers,'' Manes Sperber (1905-84) describes a time during his youth when, questioning God and beginning a lifelong debate over his faith, he climbed a barn roof in his shtetl in Poland to hurl stones into space, in the hope of challenging the God he was certain waited behind the ''trapdoor'' in the sky.


A NEW KITCHEN AND WHAT IT COOKED UP
LEAD: NOW that our last child will be leaving home for college and our net worth is down approximately 40 percent since October's Black Monday, I have finally realized my dream - a magnificent new kitchen.
Just a few thousand dollars more than the original purchase price of our house in 1970, the room has brought me all the obvious anticipated pleasures.


Second Drug Agent Is Dead After Ambush by Suspects
LEAD: A Federal drug agent was pronounced dead today, a day after he was shot in an ambush by drug traffickers.
Another agent and two suspects died in the shooting.


Mozambique is Weighing a Political End To Its War
LEAD: A JOKE around this capital city has President Joaquim A. Chissano, Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Ronald Reagan out for a sightseeing drive in Washington.
President Reagan instructs the driver to keep turning right.
Seeing that the car is going in circles, Mr.
Gorbachev takes over.
He tells the driver to keep turning left.


MISS WALKER IS ENGAGED
LEAD: The engagement of Marylou Dillon Walker to George Washington Arnett 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cornelius Arnett 3d of Tiburon, Calif., has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Philip S. Walker of West Hartford and Westbrook, Conn.
The couple plan to marry in August.


Olympic Reflections: On Golden Pond
LEAD: When it began, it was a pristine dream, the clear crystal palace of the Olympics.
Now the palace does not shine so brightly.
Memories of the Olympics still bring a warmth to my soul and a smile to my face.
The Olympics, however, did not live up to my ideal.


Broadway on the Baltic Seeks Infusion of Zlotys
LEAD: In a blotch of light on an otherwise dim stage, a man with white curled locks and beard, wearing baggy trousers, raises his hands and begins to sing ''If I were a rich man.''


THE NATION: Congress, the President and N.I.H.; The Political Ingredients of Medical Grants
LEAD: THE campus of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., is studded with buildings named for members of Congress who channeled billions of dollars into it.
Among them is the Clinical Center, a 540-bed research hospital, named for Warren G. Magnuson, a Democratic Senator from Washington for more than three decades.


CUTIES AND COCKROACH HUSBANDS
LEAD:  WOMANSWORD  What Japanese Words Say About Women.
By Kittredge Cherry.
Illustrated. 151 pp.
New York: Kodansha International.
Paper, $13.95.


LABOR LAW: TWO LAWYERS, TWO VIEWS
LEAD: ROY BARNES, a union labor lawyer, calls them ''union busters.'' But Patrick L. Vaccaro, the managing partner of the White Plains office of the law firm of Jackson Lewis Schnitzler &amp; Krupman, said: ''That's a union cop-out.
That's a term they use for any firm that counsels management.''


SARAH STRICKLER TO MARRY JONATHAN COLE
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Strickler of Killingworth, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Allen Strickler to Jonathan Seth Cole, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray L. Cole of Wayne, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Strickler, until recently a book sales coordinator at Publisher's International Marketing Services in New York, graduated from Choate Rosemary Hall and Skidmore College.


TOXIC ASH
LEAD: THE $237 million garbage-to-energy plant in Peekskill has become one focus of a national debate over the proper handling of toxic ash.


'SELF AS SUBJECT' EXAMINED IN SEVERAL MEDIUMS IN KATONAH
LEAD: IT has been more than a decade since the age of narcissism was identified as such by Christopher Lasch.
Tom Wolfe's proto-Yuppies, the ''me generation,'' appeared at about the same time.
What was formerly deplored is now accepted, even applauded.


BILLINGS DAY MARRIED ON L.I.
LEAD: At St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I., B. Billings Day, a daughter of Mrs.
Vincent C. Banker of Locust Valley and Richard W. Day of New York, was married yesterday to Bradford Delano Smith, a son of Mrs.
Frank Y. Larkin of Greenwich, Conn., and David S. Smith of Washington.


Trouble for Nettles
LEAD: Things haven't been going too well for one former Yankee.
Graig Nettles, the former Gold Glove third baseman and team captain, who was making $800,000 a year when he was traded to the Padres in 1984, has filed for bankruptcy in San Diego.


Capital Hitchhikers Beat the System
LEAD: Commuters traveling to jobs in the nation's capital keep developing new twists, and the latest is organized hitchhiking.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Skiing  Slalom to Pelletier: Monique Pelletier, a member of the United States Ski Team's National Training Group, outdueled Tamara McKinney and other more experienced skiers yesterday to win the women's giant slalom at the United States Alpine championships in Copper Mountain, Colo.
McKinney, in her first competition of the season, finished a respectable third, behind Pelletier and runner-up Heidi Voelker.


Latest Administration Tactic Makes Abortion Fight a Free Speech Issue
LEAD: LAST week, the Reagan Administration published its new regulations ending Federal funds for any family-planning clinic that counsels women about abortions or refers them to abortion providers.
But whether the rules will ever be enforced remains very much in question.


SCIENCE FICTION
LEAD: The three long tales that make up THE BRIDGE OF LOST DESIRE by Samuel R. Delany (Arbor House, $17.95) display one of science fiction's finest writers at the top of his form.
This book is an addition to Mr.
Delany's unique Neveryon series, which slyly builds on archeological speculation to body forth a world at the very beginning of civilization in which such important events as the change-over from hieroglyphs to alphabet have occurred within the life spans of the characters.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I live in a new town house condominium that has an outdoor wood deck made of pressure-treated 2-by-4's.
The decking has turned green with mildew, and the builder has suggested using a K2 spot remover to clean it.
Is this the way to correct the problem?


12 1/2% RISE IN BUDGET CAUSING CONCERN
LEAD: Thanks to six years of a booming economy, Governor Kean has been able to initiate a number of programs in education, environmental cleanup and trasportation, and in his latest budget proposal last week he continued to target new spending in those areas.


HAIR OF DISTINCTION
LEAD: Ruth La Ferla's article ''Under Cover'' (Men's style, Jan. 17), does not reflect the opinion of the many who feel that gray(ing) temples on a man are attractive and evoke an air of distinction and success (and there is no greater aphrodisiac than success).


Pamela Grace Dorman, Editor, to Marry in July
LEAD: Announcement of the engagement of Pamela Grace Dorman to Stuart Krichevsky has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Dorman of Dix Hills, L.I.
A July wedding is planned.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Not So Gay Paree  Not all the Americans in Paris haunted cafes and dance halls.
Here is The New Yorker's Janet Flanner describing Edith Wharton's sober expatriation.
She is quoted in ''Women of the Left Bank: Paris, 1900-1940,'' by Shari Benstock (University of Texas).


Aids in Justice System: Searching for Fairness
LEAD: It was more than a question that Marvin Schecter posed.
It was a scenario that he painted.


CONNOTATIONS OF 'BLACK' HELD TO BE NONRACIAL
LEAD: Prof.
Vernon McClean's Opinion Page article on racism in language (Jan. 24) seems peculiarly misdirected.
It also makes some arguments based on etymological errors.


PREPARE FOR THE WORST?
LEAD:  CALCULATED RISKS  A Century of Arms Control, Why It Has Failed, and How It Can Be Made to Work.
By Bruce D. Berkowitz. 221 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


Looking Back
LEAD: What did Martin Heidegger think about the Nazis, and when did he think it?
Debate over the German philosopher's Nazi past was rekindled in France recently with the publication of a new book, ''Heidegger and Nazism,'' by a former student, Victor Farias.
Mr.
Farias produces evidence that Heidegger, whose thinking has had widespread influence on postwar intellectual life in France, was no mere dabbler in Hitlerian politics, as his apologists maintained after the war.


CONNOTATIONS OF 'BLACK' HELD TO BE NONRACIAL
LEAD: Professor McClean's effort to attribute to ''white racism'' 500 years of English usage, wherein the word ''black'' has come to have a derogatory or sinister meaning, is absurd.


Body and Mind; Too Much of a Good Thing
LEAD: WHEN A NEW acquaintance told me not long ago that he runs five miles every day, I felt jealous and ashamed (I jog only three miles, three times a week) and vowed to step up my program.
Only later, and with some effort, did I remind myself that I jog as much as current medical opinion says is needed to keep my heart and lungs fit.


WENDY ENGEL TO WED A. S. COHEN IN AUGUST
LEAD: An August wedding is planned by Wendy Joy Engel and Adam Seth Cohen, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Philip A. Engel of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., have announced.
Mr.
Cohen is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley L. Cohen of Hewlett Harbor.


Federal Labs: Might a Link To Industry Aid Research?
LEAD: THE Office of Management and Budget has provoked debate in the scientific community by suggesting that the laboratories of the National Institutes of Health be converted to a private research center, financed by government, industry and foundations.


THE ACTOR AS ATHELTE: SUBTLE AND COMPLEX PORTRAIT
LEAD: When Billy Dee Williams took over last week for James Earl Jones in ''Fences,'' the Pulitzer Prize-winning play at the 46th Street Theater, it was a little like an athlete being asked, on short notice, to take over for Babe Ruth - or Josh Gibson.
Mr.
Jones won a Tony award for his towering portrayal of Troy Maxson, the Josh Gibson-like ex-Negro League slugger caught in a vise of frustration and limitation with members of his own family.


Rangers Finish Road Trip at 4-2-1
LEAD: The Rangers will have just 14 hours to savor what they accomplished here tonight, and most of that time will be spent worrying about longterm implications.


Opposites Don't Necessarily Attract
LEAD: Nietzsche Thought he put his finger on it with his distinction between Apollonian and Dionysian personalities.
Other thinkers have divided us into such antagonistic camps as Yogis and Commissars, Hedgehogs and Foxes, Yea-sayers and Nay-sayers, Saved and Unsaved.
Wagner detected a sharp difference between Day People and Night People.


3 TV SPOTS TO ENTICE OUT-OF-STATE TOURISTS
LEAD: TELEVISION viewers in New York will soon be treated to glimpses of New Haven pizzerias as Connecticut takes to the airwaves to seek tourism dollars.


Mehta as Accompanist
LEAD: To the Editor:


What's Doing in Cairo
LEAD: From the 900-year-old walls that once marked the northern boundary of Cairo stretch the remains of a city many tourists never see.
Graceful minarets still punctuate its horizon like exclamation points, while in the narrow streets below, men in turbans and striped robes sell onions, garlic and lemons from donkey-drawn carts.


New Yorkers Lauded For Work to Improve City's Quality of Life
LEAD: The Citizens Committee for New York City has chosen three prominent New Yorkers and five neighborhood organizations to receive its annual awards for ''enhancing the quality of life in New York City.''


Correction
LEAD: A Sports of The Times column last Sunday about the old boy network in professional football gave an incorrect figure for the number of assistant coaches in the National Football League.
There are 282, of whom 41 are black.


MISS BUCHANAN TO WED IN JULY
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Peter McE.
Buchanan of New York and Quechee, Vt., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Willets Buchanan to Gary Raymond Pfister, a son of Sally D. Pfister of South Roanoke, Va., and Dr.
Richard C. Pfister of Newton, Mass.
A July wedding is planned.


FARE TO TAKE THE CHILL OFF, FROM BRISKET TO TORTE
LEAD: ON winter weekends, I like to make meals that will warm people after an active day in the cold outdoors.
Old-fashioned food - thick soups, stews and pot roast - is what I enjoy most.


Calgary Has It Down Cold
LEAD: It finally snowed last week, a blustery storm that lasted long enough to paint the entire landscape a pristine white and dump more than a foot in the nearby Rockies.


Subtle Interpretations Of the Beethoven Trios
LEAD: Many first-rate recordings of Beethoven's complete trios have become available in recent years, and to these may now be added the cycle by the Borodin Trio, containing the basic six (the three of Op. 1, the two of Op. 70 and Op. 97), two sets of variations and several rarely heard early works.
All are available on a set of four Chandos compact disks (CHAN 8352/3/4/5; also on


PLAN TO TAP FUND SPLITS LAWMAKERS
LEAD: SOME of Connecticut's lawmakers sounded like weather forecasters last week after Governor O'Neill unveiled his $6.3 billion budget proposal for the next fiscal year and recommended spending $73.8 million of the state's five-year old budget reserve, more commonly known as the ''rainy day fund.''


Cambridge
LEAD: To the Editor: I read with great interest your coverage on travel-study in England - Cambridge and Oxford (Travel, Jan. 10).
In fact, the bit on Corpus Christi, Cambridge, brought smiles to me because some years ago I myself was a student at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, with Dr.
E.
J.
Wolff's University of Detroit program there, and as part of our program we visited our sister school in Cambridge.


Special Today
LEAD:  The Winter Olympics  The 15th Winter Games begin Saturday in Calgary, Alberta.
A special report that appears in Section 5 includes these articles:


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; New Edition of Landmark Lures Tenants
LEAD: A 55-YEAR-OLD Yonkers landmark, the Herald Statesman Building on Larkin Plaza, is being renovated into offices for two major tenants who are expected to bolster the local economy.


Soviet Deserter Is Said to Urge Comrades to Resist
LEAD: A young Soviet soldier who defected to the guerrilla forces in Afghanistan has appealed in an open letter to other Soviet soldiers to resist the war there, according to a human rights organization in New York.


SCHOOL STRESSES USES OF ETHICS
LEAD: THE Dwight-Englewood School here is teaching students that ethical issues have a practical application in everyday life outside of textbooks.


CATHERINE B. COX ENGAGED TO DANIEL J. BLUMENTHAL
LEAD: Catherine Baum Cox and Daniel Jacob Blumenthal, a son of Mrs.
Albert H. Blumenthal of Larchmont, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Blumenthal, plan to marry in the fall, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin E. Cox of Newport News, Va., have announced.


Too Close To Reality
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


FACING FACTS ON NASSAU'S PROBLEMS
LEAD: CONCERN is rising that Nassau County is rapidly reaching its capacity to absorb more people.
Lack of planning, inadequate land-use controls, poor design and unsatisfactory maintenance of our ecological systems are taking a toll on our communities.


Sunday Observer; Cartoon Crisis
LEAD: SOMETIMES IT SEEMS I am being drawn by a cartoonist.
How else can I explain my being in this supermarket with an impulse to ask the manager to recommend a soap for my dishpan hands?


Legislation to Help Alaska Natives Keep Land
LEAD: A measure that has been signed into law by President Reagan gives Alaska's 85,000 Eskimos, Indians and Aleuts a fighting chance to keep native lands and other wealth in native hands, several of their leaders say.


New York's Cabaret Scene, Ertegun Style
LEAD: A record set called ''New York Cabaret Music'' (Atlantic LP 81817-1, six disks; CD 81817-2) is both more and less than that title might suggest.
There has been cabaret music of one sort or another in New York for decades, but this collection deals primarily with the 1950's.
Even more specifically, it reflects the tastes and interests, personal and business, of the Ertegun Brothers, as indicated by its subtitle, ''The Erteguns' New York.


Film
LEAD: With the weather outside somewhat frosty, a welcome warning trend has settled into several theaters. ''Distant Harmony,'' at the Carnegie Hall Cinema (Seventh Avenue at 57th Street), gives us Luciano Pavarotti conquering and being conquered by China, during his 1986 tour with the cast of ''La Boheme.


Under Long Coats, Longer Legs
LEAD: WHILE the gurus of fashion contemplate the next direction of the hemline (can a hem go sideways?), the current crop of wildly diverging lengths has created some interesting contrasts to hold our attention.


A Specter of Wandering Garbage Barges Is Haunting America
LEAD: To the Editor:


ALLAN BLOOM'S GREAT IDEAS
LEAD: Allan Bloom's book is a pretentious account of his own nostalgia for the days when white-male authority went unquestioned.
Such yearnings are the standard litany of extreme conservatism.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''Something had to snap.
If it didn't happen in October, it would have happened soon thereafter.
The immediate cause of the break was incidental.'' - Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, in Congressional testimony about regulating the markets.


Curbing Raiders Is Bad for Business
LEAD: Congressional action to preserve a free market is now more necessary than ever, since Delaware, the nation's second-smallest state, adopted legislation to sharply restrict contested mergers.
The measure, signed by Delaware's Governor last week, will affect companies around the country.


Death Toll Rises to 85 From Flooding in Brazil
LEAD: Flood victims on the roof of a house in Petropolis, where five days of heavy rain left at least 58 dead.


Dupes or Partners?
LEAD: General Noriega forestalled American retaliation for years by playing Federal agencies off against one another and against other countries, American officials said.


POSTINGS: Geologist Strikes Marble; SoHo Landmark
LEAD: Owain Hughes, a Welsh geologist, made a significant discovery recently.
While rehabilitating a New York City landmark at 597 Broadway in SoHo, Mr.
Hughes, who left Oxford University to mine real estate, found a white-marble facade beneath decades of accumulated grime.
His training had almost failed him.


The Big City on the Beach
LEAD: A FRIEND stopping off in Miami to break up a New York to Buenos Aires trip inquired if there was anything to do in Miami for two days besides the beach.
He didn't mean Miami Beach, of course.
Everyone knew that was dead, he said, a kind of Far Rockaway with palm trees, and not too many of those.


86-Game Slump Ends
LEAD: The University of Dallas ended its 86-game losing streeak today, beating John Brown University by 76-68.
The streak was the longest ever by a four-year college.


City in Rhode Island Proposes New Rules On Guests at Hotels
LEAD: A proposed city ordinance to require people checking into hotels, motels and inns to show an identification card bearing a photograph is being supported by local officials, but criticized by hotel industry organizations.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: New Ski Trail For Adirondacks


And Now, a Magazine for the Over-40 Woman
LEAD: FRANCES LEAR didn't know anything about headlines or deadlines.
But she was convinced that she had an idea.
Two years ago, armed with a huge settlement from her divorce from the television producer Norman Lear, she started work on a magazine for women over 40.


PHYSICIAN TO WED DALE H. WOLFSON
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Harold K. Wolfson of New York and White Plains have announced the engagement of their daughter Dale Honey Wolfson to Dr.
William M. Reiff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Reiff of Chicago.
An August wedding is planned.


'ART INTO PRODUCTION'
LEAD:  Before the Revolution of 1917, Russian artists were already experimenting with radical visual vocabularies based on abstraction and geometric forms.
The pioneers of Suprematism and later Constructivism further championed a new marriage of ''art and life.'' After the Revolution, artists such as Alexander Rodchenko, Vladimir Mayakovsky, Liubov Popova and El Lissitzky actively participated in advertising the virtues of their new society.


PASSING ONTHE JOY OF CARING FOR THE BIRDS
LEAD: OUR family has a soft spot in our collective heart for all animals, and we have made an attempt each winter to provide food for the birds in our neighborhood.


YOUNG WERTHER IN THE 60'S
LEAD:  IN THE NEW WORLD  Growing Up With America 1960-1984.
By Lawrence Wright. 322 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


TOO FAR, TOO FAST
LEAD: Carol Vogel states that Mrs.
Gutfreund's ''style now is to hold Sunday night suppers offering a Texan menu of fried chicken and monkey bread.'' Since when has fried chicken and monkey bread, of all things, been considered ''Texan''?
THE REV.
DAVID H.  MARION-DAVIS  Houston


THE CHILDREN OF THE CHILDLESS
LEAD: IN the closing months of 1987, the people of the United States had 58 hours of shared anguish.


Question Of the Week; Are Free Agents Free Again in Baseball?
LEAD: My response to the question - Are free agents free again in baseball? - is: Is anyone free?
MICHAEL HASDAY  Scarsdale, N.Y.


Uncle Sam, American Sport Needs You!
LEAD: In every Olympic year, many Americans seem to think that our privately supported athletes are at a disadvantage compared to the Eastern bloc's state-subsidized athletes.
Unfortunately, a more serious United States disadvantage is being overlooked: our Government's attitude toward bidding for and staging international events.


A TALE OF TWO CITIES, SNOW AND ALL
LEAD: HERE in Scarsdale we manage to keep in touch with the world, and when I learned that they had had nearly 12 inches of snow in Washington, it gave me an excuse to call William.
Even though I am nearly 20 times his age, there is a bond between us - his mother, my daughter.
He answered the phone himself.


TEXT OF O'NEILL'S BUDGET ADDRESS TO LAWMAKERS
LEAD: Following is the text of Governor O'Neill's budget address to the General Assembly on Wednesday, as transmitted by The Associated Press:


Palestinian Turmoil Could Provide the Seeds of Peace
LEAD: SINCE the birth of Israel nearly 40 years ago, the Arab-Israeli conflict has fallen into a circular pattern.
Statesmen try to move ahead, push some distance but finally fail.
Amid diplomatic stagnation, warfare erupts.
Then the combat ends, having loosened some of the old positions, providing a period of diplomatic fluidity.


What Is Being Lost
LEAD: To the Editor:


IMPORTANCE OF BEING ERNEST
LEAD:  THE TRUE GEN  An Intimate Portrait of Ernest Hemingway by Those Who Knew Him.
By Denis Brian.
Illustrated. 356 pp.
New York: Grove Press. $19.95.


MAKING THE FRIENDLY WORLD BEHAVE
LEAD:  POLITICS  A Work in Constructive Social Theory.
By Roberto Mangabeira Unger.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Social Theory: Its Situation and Its Task.
A Critical Introduction to Politics. 256 pp.
Cloth, $39.50.
Paper, $12.95.
False Necessity: Anti-Necessitarian Social Theory in the Service of Radical Democracy.


A House of Art That Is Quirky, Aloof and Grand
LEAD: Though best known in his lifetime for having invented an invaluable antiseptic, Dr.
Albert C. Barnes (1872-1951) had an auxiliary reputation as a major art collector and the founder of a private educational facility in the suburbs of Philadelphia.
In its turn, that facility had also a double reputation.


CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING STAIRS
LEAD: INSTALLING a prefabricated disappearing stairway as an attic entrance is worth considering if a larger or more convenient opening is needed.
The task is simple for two people (an assistant is necessary to help maneuver the staircase), provided that the opening for the stairway can be cut so that its long sides are parallel with the existing ceiling joists, and that the roof is supported by rafters, not trusses.


TONI L. SCHACHTER MARRIES A BANKER
LEAD: The marriage of Toni Lynn Schachter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin I. Schachter of Freeport,L.I., and Copake Lake, N.Y., to Seth Perry Bernstein a son of Laurel Culter of New York and Wilton, Conn., and Stanley D. Bernstein of Nutley, N.J., took place last evening at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.


Sports of The Times; Hoops, Chicago-Style
LEAD: I INFORMED Mark Aguirre, the Dallas Maverick forward who has returned home to Chicago for the N.B.A.
All-Star Game this afternoon, that he and I had graduated from the same grammar school, William Cullen Bryant on the West Side, though a number of years apart.


U.S. and Soviet Film Makers Plan Joint Ventures
LEAD: A delegation from the Hollywood film industry returned from the Soviet Union this week with three signed agreements for joint ventures.


NUCLEAR INDUSTRY UNDER FIRE IN BONN
LEAD: The West Germans' faith in nuclear energy, never too strong and even shakier since the Chernobyl disaster, has been further battered in recent weeks by a barrage of revelations about embezzlement, bribery and illegal shipments of nuclear wastes in the industry.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Summer Night  Starring Mariangela Melato and Michele Placido.
Directed by Lina Wertmuller. 1983.
International Video Entertainment. 94 minutes. $79.95.
Rated R.


Photo of Don Harrelson with adopted sons, Doug and Jon, in 1980 Gay Couples' Wish to Adopt Grows, Along With Increasing Resistance
LEAD: They live in a quiet residential neighborhood in San Francisco, a professional couple in their late 30's, with two adopted daughters, 5 and 2 years old. ''Our kids play with the neighbors' kids,'' said one of the parents. ''We swap recipes and borrow tools from the people next door.
We're just another family.


FROM BACH TO BACHELOR BALL
LEAD: An Evening With Bach


'SOCIETY WILL BUILD WHAT IT BELIEVES IN'
LEAD: VINCENT J. SCULLY is the Sterling Professor of Art History at Yale.
He has been teaching art and architecture history since 1947.


CARMEN MARIA FIAL IS WED
LEAD: At St.
Andrew's the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in Brooklyn, Carmen Maria Fial, the daughter of Walter F. Fial of Baltimore and the late Carmen S. Fial, was married yesterday to Hans-Jurgen Sund, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hans Sund of Osterode, West Germany.
The Rev.
Edward J. Kiernan performed the ceremony.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: FEBRUARY 7, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
7
THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
(Signet/NAL, $4.50.) A fairy tale, complete with
an aged king, an evil wizard and a mouse.
2
2
OUTBREAK, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.)
Tracking down a deadly disease that
ophthalmologists pass on to their patients.


JULIE BREENE TO MARRY WILLIAM T. ZIEBOLD JR.
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James K. Breene Jr. of Bryn Mawr, Pa., and Warren, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Julie Brodie Breene to William Townsend Ziebold Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ziebold of Charleston, W.Va., and Hot Springs, Va.
The couple plan to marry in September.


TOO FAR, TOO FAST
LEAD: I read with interest James Sterngold's article ''Too Far, Too Fast'' (Jan. 10), about John Gutfreund, chairman and chief executive of Salomon Brothers.
Though I have had a minimal business relationship with Salomon Brothers in the last 10 years, my experience requires that I comment on the article.


FICTION
LEAD:  WINTERS' TALES: Stories and Observations for the Unusual.
By Jonathan Winters. (Random House, $13.95.) Included in the publicity material sent to reviewers along with ''Winters' Tales'' is a quotation from Jonathan Winters's most famous fan. ''Jonathan showed me,'' Robin Williams writes, ''that anything is possible - one of the few people able to make me laugh from my soul.


Sweden Clinches Series
LEAD: The defending champion, Sweden, Czechoslovakia and West Germany clinched first-round victories in Davis Cup competition yesterday.


Bush as Hostage
LEAD: Why can't George Bush simply come clean on his participation in the arms-for-hostages decision?
Why does he respond by attacking the press for daring to ask the question, or by hiding behind his confidential relationship with the President, or by claiming that he's already answered everything?


WHAT'S NEW IN GETTING OUT THE VOTE
LEAD: IT'S far too early to tell whether voter turnout for the 1988 Presidential election will be greater than the 53.1 percent of eligible voters who turned out for the 1984 Presidential election.
But if it is, a number of businesses will be able take some of the credit.


Hints That Repression May Lead to Reform
LEAD: FOR weeks, a battle has been raging in Angola that could have repercussions throughout southern Africa.
The battle is for Cuito Cuanavale, the strategic town in southern Angola; the warring forces have been fighting for control of the region for more than a decade.
On the defending side are the troops of the Angolan Government, backed by Cubans and Soviet advisors; on the offensive, the UNITA forces of Jonas Savimbi, the guerrilla leader, receiving 5-million-a-year in American military aid, stiffened by a South African army of at least 5,000, perhaps as many as 7,000 men.


IN HASTINGS, A TREASURY OF HISTORY
LEAD: EVERY weekday afternoon in Hastings-on-Hudson, the 4:30 whistle signals the end of the workday of yesteryear - calling phantom laborers from the abandoned factories that still line the waterfront and that may soon become condominiums.


SUSAN HART IS ENGAGED
LEAD: Susan Spangler Hart and Matthew Paul Smith, teachers at the Collegiate School, plan to be married March 19.
The Rev. and Mrs.
Sinclair Danforth Hart of Williamstown, Mass., have announced their daughter's engagement to a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Smith of Brooklyn.
Miss Hart graduated from Amherst College.


POSTINGS: Mixing Uses; Greenwich Project
LEAD: Choosing a clean sweep rather than a renovation of the 10-acre industrial complex, Arthur Collins and James R. Psaki began demolition last November of a former Electrolux factory in Old Greenwich, Conn.
Next month construction will begin on a mixed-use development to take its place.
The $75 million project on Forest Avenue will include a four-story office building, scheduled for completion in the fall of 1989, as well as 167 low-rise condominium units and a recreation center.


Jazz: The Art Farmer-Clifford Jordan Group
LEAD: MAINSTREAM jazz - now essentially bebop - may be the most deceptive of all the kinds of music played under the name of jazz.
It has staid connotations: middle-aged musicians play music demarcated by a rigid set of harmonic and rhythmic rules; not much goes on formally, and musicians prize a logical narrative flow, with a minimum of abstraction.


WARMING UP TO WINTER
LEAD: WE are about at the half-way mark of winter and I have been accused of counting time, even days, too much, as though I were not a great fan of the season.
A few weeks ago, I was, in best Pollyanna fashion, buoying up a neighbor who was doggedly scraping ice from his car's windshield.
I said, cheerily, ''Hey, less than two months until spring.


ABC's $309 Million Package: 90 Hours, Three Weekends
LEAD: TELEVISING the Olympics is only slightly less complicated than staging them.


'THE STUDENT PRINCE,' OPERETTA IN DARIEN
LEAD: TO fill the gap between two musical hits - ''42d Street,'' which recently closed an extended engagement, and ''La Cage aux Folles,'' next month's attraction - ''The Student Prince'' has been lugged into the Darien Dinner Theater for a spell.


FARE TO TAKE THE CHILL OFF, FROM BRISKET TO TORTE
LEAD: ON winter weekends, I like to make meals that will warm people after an active day in the cold outdoors.
Old-fashioned food - thick soups, stews and pot roast - is what I enjoy most.


Dole and Bush: Dramatic Contrast of Styles . . . but There Is a Striking Similarity in Goals
LEAD: Since the Presidential campaign began, Gerald M. Boyd has been covering Vice President Bush while Bernard Weinraub covered Senator Bob Dole.
Last week they switched assignments to report how the campaigns compared in style and substance.


DECEPTION ON BUDGET LAID TO GULOTTA IN SUIT
LEAD: IN a move that could have a significant impact on Nassau County government, a businessman is asking the State Supreme Court to rule on what he contends is County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta's ''manipulation'' of the county budget to ''mislead the people of Nassau County.''


More Evidence on a New Flu
LEAD: An outbreak of influenza aboard a cruise ship in Asia is additional evidence of a new strain that is less susceptible to the current flu vaccine, according to the Centers for Disease Control here.


JOHN P. MORAN TO WED MARYE BUCKLEY IN JULY
LEAD: The engagement of Marye Esther Buckley to John Patrick Moran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Moran of Massapequa Park, L.I., and North Palm Beach, Fla., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Frederick O. Buckley of Marblehead Neck, Mass., and Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The couple plan to marry in


JOKES ASIDE, SHE IS ACTING GOVERNOR
LEAD: When speculation that Gov.
Evan Mecham might resign started rising last October, Secretary of State Rose Mofford telephoned a good friend in Flagstaff and said, ''Good morning, this is Governor Mofford.''


George Britt; Writer, 92
LEAD: George Britt, a former newspaperman, author and teacher, died Thursday at the Meadow Lakes retirement complex in Hightstown, N.J., where he lived.
He was 92 years old.


Transactions
LEAD:  FRIDAY  BASEBALL


SCHOOLS CITE SHORTAGE OF SPEECH THERAPISTS
LEAD: FACED with a chronic shortage of speech-language therapists, Connecticut public schools are turning to parents, paraprofessionals, teachers and computers for help.


FROM NEW JERSEY, A POLITICAL TRAIN
LEAD: The New Jersey Chamber of Commerce's annual visit here is a political as much as a business event, starting with the chartered train from Trenton on which politicians walk the aisles, renewing acquaintances and talking up their campaigns.


Maryland Legislator Sentenced to Prison For Wedtech Payoff
LEAD: State Senator Michael B. Mitchell and his brother, former State Senator Clarence Mitchell 3d, were sentenced Friday to two and a half years in prison each for taking payoffs to block an investigation of the Wedtech Corporation.


On Language; The Juddering Juice Shtick
LEAD: BRITAIN'S STEADILY growing prosperity,'' boasted Nigel Lawson, the British Treasury Minister, ''is not some short-lived boom, which could come to a juddering halt at any moment.'' Only a year before, the leader of Britain's Labor Party, Neil Kinnock, expressed the hope that America's policy toward Nicaragua would be ''brought to a juddering halt.


'STUDENT PRINCE' IS GIVEN A BRIEF RUN
LEAD: TO fill the gap between two musical megahits - ''42d Street,'' which recently closed an extended engagement, and ''La Cage aux Folles,'' next month's attraction - ''The Student Prince'' has been brought into the Darien Dinner Theater for a spell.


Contributors Donate Stock To Neediest
LEAD: A retired executive from Manhattan contributed 647 shares of Bancorp Hawaii stock, worth $30,570.75 to the New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Rabi Memorial Service Set
LEAD: A memorial service for Isidor Isaac Rabi, the Nobel laureate and University Professor of Physics at Columbia who died Jan. 11 at the age of 89, is to be held Thursday at 4 P.M. at St.
Paul's Chapel, Columbia University.
Speakers will include Michael I. Sovern, president of Columbia; Malvin Ruderman, Centennial Professor of Physics at Columbia, and William A.


RENEE CHENAULT ENGAGED TO WED M. T. CRAWFORD
LEAD: Renee Yvette Chenault, a television moderator and a producer for the New Jersey Network, a group of four PBS stations, and Michael Thaddeus Crawford, a copy editor at The Wall Street Journal, plan to be married March 19.
Their engagement has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.


DARCY MILLER, MAGAZINE PUBLISHER, WED TO JAMES R. DONALDSON 3D, A PRODUCER
LEAD: Darthea Mary Miller, publisher of Chief Executive magazine, a bimonthly Macfadden publication, and James Robertson Donaldson 3d, a film director and producer, were married yesterday at the Explorers Club in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Richard E. Spalding, the pastor of the Central Presbyterian Church in Manhattan and a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony.


Israelis Storm Home of West Bank Clan
LEAD: The intrusion was the sort of blurred moment, of off-the-street barrages of rocks and bullets, when the seeds of middle-class vendetta are being sewn amid the spirited villagers of the Palestinian protest.


Ex-Syracuse Mayor's Schemes Detailed in Memo
LEAD: Federal prosecutors have detailed the kickbacks and coverups that were conceived and directed over 16 years by Lee Alexander, the former Mayor of Syracuse.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bayport  $290,000  93 South Snedecor Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old ranch; sunroom, fireplace, screened porch, basement, 300- by 280-foot lot; taxes $7,500.
East Islip  $178,000  127 Marilyn Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old split level; dining room, new eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,500.


Hutton's Demise
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Central America, Trying To Deal With New Realities
LEAD: THE House vote against aid to the contras reflects another sharp swing in Washington's attitude toward Central America, leaving the region wondering what will come next.
No one pretends really to know.


How Explorers Saw the Brave New World
LEAD: Europeans took a long time assimilating their discovery of the New World.
It was almost a century before artists, in representing the New World, broke away from Eurocentric preconceptions and classical or medieval styles.
Initial attempts at realism may not have been great art, but they left a revealing historical record of one civilization's encounter with another.


RAGAZZO TO RICHES
LEAD:  VERDI  A Life in the Theatre.
By Charles Osborne.
Illustrated. 360 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95.


Waging Justice in Charleston
LEAD: To the Editor:


Singapore Ties Deaths to Chinese Transplants
LEAD: At least seven Singaporeans have died in the last six weeks after kidney transplant operations at a hospital in southern China, according to their families and Singaporean Health Ministry officials.


MISS FRENCH TO MARRY ANTHONY PETER FUSCO
LEAD: Martha Williams French and Anthony Peter Fusco, actors in New York, plan to marry in June, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
James M. French of San Francisco, have announced.


Don't Forget Olympic Ideal
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Why Managers Resist Machines
LEAD: WHEN Procter &amp; Gamble decided five years ago to build a manufacturing plant, the plans included so much electronic monitoring equipment that executives at headquarters, 500 miles away, would have been able to check the plant's exact output at any time.


Pentagon AIDS Testing Finds 5,890 Infected
LEAD: More than two years after starting an extensive screening program for infection with the AIDS virus, the Defense Department has tested nearly four million people and has identified 5,890 who carry the deadly virus.


Iowa Democrat Warns About Caucus Reports
LEAD: Iowa's Democratic chairman today defended her party's complicated Presidential caucus process and criticized news organizations that she said would report inaccurate results Monday night in a search for simplicity.


DETROIT'S STRANGE BEDFELLOWS
LEAD: OBSERVERS OF THE auto industry were not optimistic when the United Automobile Workers and General Motors sat down last July to negotiate a new three-year contract.
G.M., its share of the domestic car market falling, was seeking to shrink its work force.
The U.A.W., battered by layoffs, was equally intent on preserving jobs.


Far From Typical
LEAD: To the Editor:


WATCHING OVER MOMMY AND THE PRESIDENT
LEAD:  BEHIND THE SCENES  In Which the Author Talks About Ronald and Nancy Reagan . . . and Himself.
By Michael K. Deaver with Mickey Herskowitz.
Illustrated. 272 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $17.95.


Budget Puts Police Hiring In Jeopardy
LEAD: Of all the proposed pinches in Mayor Koch's gloomy spending plan for the next fiscal year, the one that he and other New Yorkers may feel the most, at least psychologically, is his decision not to hire nearly 2,000 police officers.


Science Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


WESTCHESTER BOOKCSAE
LEAD:  WEEKEND by Marlene Fanta Shyer. Warner Books. 316 pages. Paperback, $3.95.


Equity Library Theater Gives Itself a Party
LEAD: ''AT Equity Library Theater, the actor is our focus,'' declared George Wojtasik, the theater's producing director.


Reporter's Notebook; Meanwhile, At the Stop After Iowa
LEAD: The polls indicate the big undecided vote in New Hampshire is beginning to shrink, which is to say the Feb. 8 Iowa caucuses are upon us and New Hampshire's Feb. 16 primary, the first in the election year, is just around the corner.


Just Remember That Fathers Are Parents Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


A JOYFUL NOISE
LEAD: I thoroughly enjoyed Holcomb B. Noble's article ''A Joyful Noise'' (About Men, Dec. 27), about singing in a male chorus.
It recalled an experience I had in early 1944 in Belfast, Northern Ireland, where I was on furlough for three days.


The Fanciest Felines Are New on a Block
LEAD: THE United States Postal Service is in the midst of issuing seven commemorative stamps in two weeks.
Leading the way is a block of four that depicts domestic cats, two statehood issues and the 11th in the Black Heritage series.


FICTION
LEAD:  1919: The Year Our World Began.
By William K. Klingaman. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $27.95.) The year 1919, by any yardstick, was an eventful one, and the historian William K. Klingaman persuasively demonstrates that it began with hope, ended in despair and shaped the 20th century.
Consider these highlights: With hostilities ended in the Great War, Woodrow Wilson spends several months in Paris working on a treaty; by year's end, his dream of a League of Nations is shattered.


Art
LEAD: One of the most distinguished exhibitions to have been mounted in recent years by a dealer's gallery is the loan show of 44 oil paintings, drawings and gouaches by Piet Mondrian that can be seen at the Sidney Janis Gallery, 110 West 57th Street, through Saturday.


Fighting to Stop 'Killer' Bees
LEAD: THE Bee Battle of Mexico has started, and the bees have won the first encounter without wasting a sting.


AMY SILBERSTEIN TO WED LAWYER
LEAD: The engagement of Amy Jane Silberstein to James Howard Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert J. Cohen of Wellesley, Mass., and East Parsonfield, Me., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
N.
Ronald Silberstein of Chestnut Hill and South Dennis, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.


Two Years Make A Short Lifetime
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


NEGOTIATING THE IN-LAW PACT
LEAD: THERE'S a female rite of passage even more traumatic than the first date, and I recently came through it with flying colors.
I dined alone, for the first time, with my future mother-in-law.


Paying Back
LEAD: Anthony M. Frank, a successful California executive who came to the United States as a child when his parents fled Nazi Germany, figures he owes America something.


Choice Dining Around Miami
LEAD: JUST five years ago, the odds of wandering into a first-rate restaurant in greater Miami were roughly equal to your chances of finding a 16th-century Spanish doubloon in the Fontainbleau Hotel's swimming pool.
Except for some gutsy Cuban haunts downtown, Miami cuisine was characterized largely by over-air-conditioned tourist places featuring humdrum chain-restaurant fare.


SHELBY F. NELSON TO WED BIOLOGIST
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Courtney Andrew Nelson of Wells, Vt., and Cambridge, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Shelby Forrester Nelson to Dr.
Jon H. de la Harpe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman A. de la Harpe of Cape Town.
An April wedding is planned.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  COLLEGE CONCERTS


On Long Drives, Tolstoy Helps
LEAD: WHEN we prepare for a long driving trip, one of our tasks is picking a taped book to play on our cassette deck during the hours spent on monotonous interstates.
We call an 800 number and rent one because a six-hour tape is an expensive purchase.
If it's a book we discover we like, it can then be bought for our shelves at home.


How the Morgan Bank Struck Out
LEAD: IN a highly visible advertising campaign, the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company has been holding itself out as the bank that stresses its ''relationship'' with its clients above all else. ''We don't promote M.&amp;A. deals just to generate fees,'' heralds one ad that proudly shows an empty tombstone - symbolic of a takeover deal that wasn't done, presumably because it wasn't in the client's interest.


Test May End 10-Year Rape Dispute
LEAD: Illinois officials and the lawyers for Gary Dotson, a convicted rapist who was freed after Cathleen Crowell Webb recanted her accusation, are turning to a new genetic testing procedure in an effort to determine Mr.
Dotson's guilt or innocence.


Carmen Polo de Franco, Widow Of Spanish Dictator, Dead at 87
LEAD: Carmen Polo de Franco, the Spanish dictator's widow, who was considered a significant influence on some of the repressive policies of his 36-year rule, died today in her Madrid apartment.
She was 87 years old.


Soviet Shifts Planning Chief After Criticism by Gorbachev
LEAD: Nikolai V. Talyzin, the head of the powerful Soviet State Planning Commission who was criticized by Mikhail S. Gorbachev in June, has been transferred to another position, the press agency Tass reported today.


A Southern Novelist Serves as a Muse to Drama
LEAD: In the mid-1950'S, Jim Lehrer was working his way through junior college behind a bus-station ticket counter in Victoria, Tex., when he heard that one of his sports heroes, the Brooklyn Dodger pitcher Don Newcombe, was in town. ''My mother called me up from the car dealership where she was working, and told me Newcombe's car had broken down,'' Mr.


Jones Shoots 70 for Third-Round Lead
LEAD: Steve Jones has never broken par 72 on Pebble Beach Golf Links in the half-dozen rounds he has played here.
But he said he will need to do just that on Sunday to have a chance to win the A.T.&amp;T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.
The 6-foot-4-inch pro from Phoenix, who has yet to win in four years and three tournaments on the PGA Tour, took a three-shot lead today through three rounds of the event that used to be the Bing Crosby Pro


BETH LANGERMAN TO MARRY IN MAY
LEAD: The engagement of Beth Cari Langerman to Joseph Stephan Friedma,the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Friedman of Wayland, Mass., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
David W Langerman of West Nyack, N.U., and Boca Raton, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.


Correction
LEAD: A report last Sunday about the engagement of Julia McKay van Roden to Andrew Howard Lerman misidentified Miss van Roden's mother.
She is Amy McKay Biddle.


Which Way Will Kennedy Tilt the Bench?
LEAD: FOR all the bipartisan praise heaped upon Judge Anthony M. Kennedy, the Senate's 97-to-0 confirmation of his nomination last week ushered in a period of uncertainty about the Supreme Court's direction.


Barcelona
LEAD: To the Editor: ''What's Doing in Barcelona'' by Paul Delaney (Travel, Dec. 20) is an example of the tendency of many writers to describe exorbitantly expensive hotels and restaurants, thus giving a misleading picture to potential travelers.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Baby M; Taking the Money Out of Motherhood
LEAD: THE New Jersey Supreme Court last week undid most of the decision that a lower court judge reached in the case of Baby M, and it has declared that, contract or no contract, the woman who gave birth to her is her legal mother.
But the new decision leaves Baby M, now Melissa Elizabeth Stern, where the earlier one did - with her biological father.


Baseball Notebook; Economist Says McReynolds Will Lose Arbitration 3d Time
LEAD: If Kevin McReynolds loses his salary arbitration case with the Mets, he will join Julio Cruz as the only three-time losers in the 13-year history of the system.
People on both sides of the arbitration table have speculated that McReynolds will indeed lose because they think he submitted too high a number, $1.15 million.


AT A MINIMUM
LEAD: AN EXPANSIVE GREEN-house that overlooks Manhattan in Alfred Hitchcock's 1948 movie ''Rope'' so inspired Jon Weiser, president of Charivari Men's, that he obtained a production still to show Shigeru Uchida, the Japan-based interior designer who had begun to renovate Weiser's new apartment.
To Uchida, the views were intriguing and the space vast by Japanese standards.


Let's Make a Deal
LEAD: SOME IS WHERE the money is.
NBC will not be moving to New Jersey.
Thanks to Mayor Koch, it's going to stay at Rockefeller Center for at least another 35 years. ''The peacock can have both brains and beauty,'' the Mayor said last December as NBC accepted his offer.


NEIGHBORS FIGHT PIERPOINTE PROJECT IN YONKERS
LEAD: WHILE residents of the east side of Yonkers protest a Federal Court order to build 200 low-income housing units on the mainly white side of town, residents of the west side are fighting a condominium development proposed for their neighborhood because they say it would displace low-income minority families.


COZY, CHARMING AND IMAGINATIVE
LEAD: AS I glided through Bellport last fall on my bike, I got a glimpse of a white frame 19th-century charmer.
It was called the Old Inlet Inn.
Was this a find?
Would the food live up to the exterior charm?


Trains Collide Near Omaha
LEAD: An Amtrak train carrying 190 passengers ran a red signal and collided with a Burlington Northern freight Thursday, slightly injuring 13 people, the authorities said.
The accident occurred about 15 minutes after the passenger train had left Omaha for Chicago.


TABLE TALK PROSPEKS AS MARKET FALTERS
LEAD: I WAS so taken in by the events of Oct. 17, Black Monday, that I actually read past the first page of the daily business section now and keep the car radio set to news so I can keep track of the ups and downs of the stock market.


2 Hospitals to Expand for Treatment of AIDS
LEAD: Two of New York City's largest teaching hospitals - Beth Israel Medical Center and New York Hospital -plan to expand their treatment of AIDS patients as part of a major expansion of hospital-based AIDS care this year.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Clinton, Conn.  $155,000  12 Evergreen Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old split level; wall-to-wall carpeting, living-room fireplace; taxes $1,258.
Guilford, Conn.  $197,500  1821 Little Meadows Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 15-year-old raised ranch; skylights, solar water heat, 2.8 acres, taxes $1,965.


Editor's Note
LEAD: A Washington article by The Associated Press on Jan. 24 about oil production at Prudhoe Bay in Alaska reported charges by three environmental groups that the tundra there was being polluted.
The article said the American Petroleum Institute had declined to comment until it could see the report from the environmental groups.


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  Which Way for Housing?


MISS LENESS IS AFFIANCED
LEAD: The engagement of Christine Robertson Leness to David Lawton Boudreau, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Boudreau of Plymouth, Minn., has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Leness of New York and Quogue, L.I., parents of the bride-to-be.
A June wedding is planned.


Cutting the Cost of Car Insurance
LEAD: WHEN Mariarosa Cartolano, a New York lawyer, recently purchased her first car, a 1987 Chrysler Le Baron, she was prepared to find high prices in the dealer's showroom.
What she wasn't prepared for was the size of the insurance bill: $4,000 a year, or about 25 percent of the cost of the car itself.


Aide Seeks to Hasten Repairs For Hazardous Queens Road
LEAD: A state transportation official has promised to speed up repair plans for a stretch of road that accounted for almost half the car accidents and injuries last year on the Whitestone Expressway in Queens.


Barclay Plager; Hockey Player, 46
LEAD: Barclay Plager, a former National Hockey League defenseman for the St.
Louis Blues who later coached the team, died of brain cancer today.
He was 46 years old and was an assistant coach with the Blues at the time of his death.


ALLAN BLOOM'S GREAT IDEAS
LEAD: Allan Bloom gave quite a revealing interview to James Atlas - particularly when he likened himself to a rock star in his excitement over his success as an author (''Chicago's Grumpy Guru,'' Jan. 3). ''It's like being declared . . . a rock star.
All this energy passing through you. . . '' Could it be that this is how Mick Jagger feels when he is ''tarting it up on stage.


FICTION
LEAD:  WHITE LIES.
By Julie Salamon. (Hill, $16.95.) Jamaica Just, a young journalist working for a large New York City daily, is the heroine of this first novel by the Wall Street Journal film critic Julie Salamon.
Using the device of Jamaica's newspaper assignments on New York life and its characters, Ms.


SANTA BARBARA UPSETS NO. 2 LAS VEGAS
LEAD: Carrick DeHart scored 16 points in a second-half run today as the University of California-Santa Barbara erased an 11-point deficit and upset No. 2 Nevada-Las Vegas, 71-66.
It was the second time this year the unranked Gauchos had upset their Pacific Coast Athletic Association rivals.


TOO FAR, TOO FAST
LEAD: My congratulations to James Sterngold for having written the article about John Gutfreund with a straight face.
Here we have a sensitive report of the philosophical self-discoveries of an imposing man who denies himself millions of bonus dollars and only draws a million; who acknowledges disastrous misjudgments while promising to get it right next time; who enjoys the trust of the


FARE TO TAKE THE CHILL OFF, FROM BRISKET TO TORTE
LEAD: ON winter weekends, I like to make meals that will warm people after an active day in the cold outdoors.
Old-fashioned food - thick soups, stews and pot roast - is what I enjoy most.


China
LEAD: To the Editor: People who think their money will guarantee luxurious accommodations, familiar foods and paved highways in a poor, struggling country should stay home.


DEBORAH L. EICHHORN TO WED RUSSELL HINZ
LEAD: Rabbi and Mrs.
Jonathan Eichhorn of Kingston, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deborah Lynn Eichhorn, to Russell Alan Hinz, a son of Chief Warrant Officer Dale Hinz, U.S.A., of Mount Holly, N.J., and Lolita Eiden of Milwaukee.
The wedding is to be May 29.
Miss Eichhorn is a graduate of the State University at Albany, where she is studying for a master's degree in public administration.


Driver Is Suspended
LEAD: NASCAR officials in Daytona Beach, Fla. suspended Tim Richmond indefinitely yesterday after he tested positive for a substance prohibited under the stock car sanctioning body's policy.


An Epic For Three Handkerchiefs
LEAD:  THE CARDINAL  Starring Tom Tryon (in photo), Romy Schneider, Carol Lynley, Jill Haworth, Ossie Davis, John Huston, Burgess Meredith, Robert Morse, Raf Vallone, Josef Meinrad.
Produced and directed by Otto Preminger. 1963.
Video Treasures. 175 minutes. $9.98.


INCEST VICTIMS NEED MORE THAN SYMPATHY
LEAD: Bravo to those quoted in the article ''Incest Victims Get Sympathy but Little Help''  [ Jan. 10 ]  for having the courage to say what so many clinicians feel about our system of helping, be it legal or institutional.
The system does not work.


YALE AMONG GROUPS IN U.S. STUDY OF AIDS
LEAD: YALE UNIVERSITY is one of three schools chosen by the National Institutes of Health to undertake a study aimed at finding a cure for AIDS.


GETTING TEEN MOTHERS OFF WELFARE
LEAD: NEW JERSEY'S largest city has become a test site for a new Federal effort aimed at breaking the welfare cycle among teen-age mothers.


AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAMS ON THE ISLAND
LEAD: The article ''After School, They're at School'' on Jan. 3 has, I believe, some misinformation.
To my knowledge, the oldest program, Clasp, is located in Great Neck.
The second oldest program is the North Bellmore After-School Center Inc., which was incorporated in October 1979 and started in September 1980 at the Saw Mill Road School by Marilyn Deiner.


Jury by Trial
LEAD: William Shakespeare must have just returned from jury duty when he wrote, ''The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers.'' He might especially have had in mind the selection of civil juries in the New York State Supreme Court, a process that makes suicide seem user friendly.


Maine Company Drops Suit
LEAD: The Patten Corporation, a large development company based in Vermont, has agreed to drop its $1 million lawsuit against Hartford, Me., a small town in Maine's western mountains.


Piano: Thomas Lorango
LEAD: THE first simple chords of Beethoven's ''Les Adieux'' Sonata at Alice Tully Hall Friday night let us know about Thomas Lorango's intelligence and sympathy for the piano literature.
Each voice had its own life and each was joined together by Mr.
Lorango's natural feel for the tensions of movement.
This sensitive, almost private, feeling for music carried over into the finale of Schumann's Fantasy and the three Intermezzos from Brahms's Opus 119.


IN A LOTTERY FOR FAMILIES, PRIZE IS AFFORDABLE HOMES
LEAD: Nancy Manfredonia, above, executive director of the Central Islip Civic Council, which runs housing lotteries, in front of house in the Carleton Park section of Islip, where lottery houses may be built.
At right, Deborah Donahue in thekitchen of her new house in the Whalebone Woods section of East Hampton.


AMY ROBIN FIER ENGAGED
LEAD: Amy Robin Fier, an associate in the law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson in Washington, and Baruch Gitlin, a second-year student at the Georgetown University Law Center, plan to marry in April.
Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Fier of New York have announced their daughter's engagement to a son of Mr.


The Dance: Ann Carlson's 'Animals'
LEAD: ANN CARLSON had people dance like - and with - animals on Thursday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
Her ''Animals'' was an eloquent five-part work that examined differences between people and animals, yet affirmed the kinship of all beings.


RESIDENTIAL RESALES
LEAD: Closings in the week ending Jan. 23  MANHATTAN  Gramercy Park Area  $154,500  102 East 22d Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 640-sq.-ft. co-op in a recently renovated prewar Art Deco building; fireplace, original moldings and details; maintenance $603, 53% tax-deductible (Broker: H.H.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  STRAYED TEACHERS  Two one-act single-character plays that focus on teachers who have strayed from the norm are opening at East Coast Arts in New Rochelle.
They will run from Feb. 18 through March 13 and three previews will be performed, at 3 P.M. next Sunday and 8 P.M.
Feb. 16 and 17.


Who Will Speak for the Inner Cities?
LEAD: America's urban centers are hemorrhaging jobs, while ''outer cities'' are flourishing in places like White Plains, Boston's Route 128 corridor or the area around Chicago's O'Hare Airport.
In some such places, jobs now go begging, even while a few miles away, inner-city residents beg for jobs.


Laura Louise Foster; Artist, 70
LEAD: Laura Louise Foster, a botanical artist, died last Sunday at Sharon (Conn.) Hospital after a brief illness.
She was 70 years old and lived in Falls Village, Conn.


FEDERAL DRUG OFFICIALS SKEPTICAL ON BASUCO
LEAD: FEDERAL and local narcotics agencies are at odds over whether there has been an increase in the availability in New Jersey of a cocaine-based drug known to medical experts as basuco and to addicts as ''bazooka.''


CHERISHING THE HERITAGE OF THE SHAKERS
LEAD: FRANK TAYLOR pulled his car over to the side of the road, climbed out and scurried up the hill.
He aimed his camera at the aging brown Shaker sawmill, took some pictures, and returned to the car.


Q and A
LEAD:  Squeeze on Water


NEW CABARET DUO SINGS THE OLDIES
LEAD: TAKING a giant step away from the traditional theatrical fare it produces so well, Long Island Stage is presenting John Wallowitch and Bertram Ross in a cabaret act called ''Back on the Town.'' This elegant and intimate show is a sophisticated musical routine during which these two urbane and talented men woo their audience with renditions of such rarely heard delights as Irving Berling's ''Cohen Owes Me $97.


Cable TV
LEAD: Cable this week has some sturdy vintage movies whose rare exposure makes them seem even more evocative of their times.


Taking Back
LEAD: Senator Daniel K. Inouye apparently is a sensitive kind of guy.
The Hawaii Democrat said last week that he was ''hurt and angered'' when critics accused him of ''sneaking'' a measure through Congress that channeled $8 million to a campaign contributor's pet project.
The $8 million, attached to a huge spending bill that was rushed through Congress in December, was to support the Jewish education of North African refugees in France.


Food Inspection Results
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 30 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


Question Of the Week; Are Free Agents Free Again in Baseball?
LEAD: As free as the polluted air that we inhale each day is!
NICHOLAS D. DECURTIS  New York


Malle Confronts Haunting Memory
LEAD: His name appears, at one moment, to be Jean Kippelstein - already a sign of a mixed identity - even though his classmates knew him as Jean Bonnet, teasing him for being a ''bonnet de nuit,'' a nightcap.
The historical fact is that he was neither Kippelstein nor Bonnet.
His real name was Hans Helmut Michel, and he was born in Frankfurt, Germany, on June 6, 1930.


Poetic Injustice?
LEAD: To the Editor:


WAITING FOR THE STORY TO START
LEAD: Unlike babies, not all stories come from the same place, and not all people who create stories go about it in the same way.


Evans's Bamboozle, But in Reverse
LEAD: ABOUT 40 years ago, as a young grandmaster, the syndicated chess columnist Larry Evans jocularly broached his idea that the easiest way to win a game was to pick the ripe moment for a transition to an ending where the opponent could be bamboozled.
It was not quite all in fun either - he won loads of games ''transitioning'' his opponents.


INSIDE
LEAD:  17 Killed in Nicaragua


Producer Defends ABC Program in Libel Trial
LEAD: A producer has testified that Victor Lasky, a conservative author, was portrayed fairly in her ABC News television documentary on the McCarthy era.


Soviet Youth League Falls on Difficult Times
LEAD: Viktor I. Mironenko's son, Dima, turned 14 a month ago, and like most Soviet teen-agers he now faces an important decision.
Will he join Komsomol, the huge youth arm of the Communist Party and the route to power and prestige for generations of Communists, including Mikhail S. Gorbachev?


Piano: Barry Hannigan in Recital
LEAD: BARRY HANNIGAN came up with a dandy program for his piano recital Thursday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
The music consisted of two of the most admired, large-scale piano scores of the mid-1970's, both experimental and involving whistling and vocalizations from the performer, yet both looking forward to today's accessible post-modernism.


Beauty Cream Leads, Trails, Then Wins
LEAD: One thing a horseplayer can be sure of is that when his horse falls back from first to sixth turning for home, it is not going to win.
Today at Gulfstream Park, though, that is exactly what Beauty Cream did en route to a half-length victory in the $200,000 Orchid Handicap.


MS. SHARE TO WED MICHAEL E. FLEISS
LEAD: Mr.and Mrs.
Harold S Share of Hudson, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Vicki Ellen Share, to Micahel Eric Fleiss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Israel M. Fleiss of Plainview, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.


Perception Vs. Reality In Iowa
LEAD: Now it begins.
Vice president Bush and Dan Rather were only prelude.
Tomorrow night, television gets down to the real stuff.
Who will win the Iowa caucuses?
The candidates with the most votes, you say?
Strictly speaking, that's true, but on television that's only part of the story.
The other part has to do with perception.


Broader Medicare Is Urged To Cover Long-Term Cases
LEAD: Medicare, the Federal health insurance program for more than 31 million elderly and disabled people, should be expanded to cover much more of the cost of long-term care, including nursing homes and home health services, according to a major new study by experts at the Brookings Institution.


Where to Obtain More Information
LEAD: Abercrombie &amp; Kent/Continental Waterways, 1420 Kensington Road, Oak Brook.
Ill. 60521 (312-954-2944; 800-323-7308).


Corruption Runs Deep in Panama
LEAD: THE circle around Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega tightened last week, but Panama's military leader gave no indication that he is yet willing to relinquish control of his country.
On Thursday, United States grand juries in Miami and Tampa, Fla., indicted General Noriega and 15 other people on charges of drug trafficking and racketeering.


DEBORAH GLASER IS BRIDE OF BRIAN JEROME HENRY
LEAD: At St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York, Deborah Glaser, the daughter of Susan Heath of New York and David Glaser of Springfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Brian Jerome Henry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Henry of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Adrian van Kaam performed the ceremony.


BRIAN SMITH ENGAGED TO KATHLEEN PASTORE
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Frank Haas of Center Harbor, N.H., formerly of Armonk, N.Y., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Haas's daughter, Kathleen Elizabeth Pastore, to Brian Francis Smith, a son of John F. Smith of Zurich and Marie R. O'Neill of Somerset, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.


In Jordan, Anxiety and Joy Over Palestinian Upheaval
LEAD: The upheaval in the Israeli-occupied territories has brought both anxiety and exhilaration to Jordan, as Jordanians and Palestinians wonder where the events are leading them and how they will change the delicate alliance they have forged in this country in the last 40 years.


DATA UPDATE: Fabruary 7, 1988
LEAD:
MEDIAN HOUSE PRICES
Nov. 87
Oct.
Nov. 86
Nation
$83,700
$84,800
$80,400
Northeast
133,000
134,000
106,400
Midwest
64,200
63,800
63,500
South
78,100
79,000
76,300
West
105,500
108,300
102,400
*4*(Source: National Association of Realtors)


NORIEGA: A SKILLED DEALER WITH U.S.
LEAD: For more than a decade, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the Panamanian military leader, played off United States Government agencies against each other and against other countries in a dizzying succession of alliances and betrayals.


SOVIET REMAINS THE FAVORITE IN HOCKEY
LEAD: The Soviet Union, by virtue of its traditional pre-eminence in international hockey rather than its recent performances, remains the favorite to capture the gold medal.
However, the development of competitive teams by the rest of the Olympic contingent has rendered the Russians vulnerable to more challengers than ever before.


DISCO GIRL AND THE VATICAN
LEAD:  HE GOT HUNGRY AND FORGOT HIS MANNERS  A Fable.
By Jimmy Breslin. 275 pp.
New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $17.95.


REVISED CASPI PLAN WINS APPROVAL
LEAD: A MONTH after unanimously rejecting a $55 million complex of stores and condominiums, the White Plains Common Council last week approved a pared-down version that had been revised to answer neighbors' complaints.


MISS EASTWICK TO WED DAVID L. ALLEN IN JUNE
LEAD: Jennifer Louise Eastwick and David Lawrence Allen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Allen of Westbury, L.I., plan to marry in June, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Warren W. Eastwick of Pittstown, N.Y., and Ludlow, Vt., have announced.


THE SHAPE OF THINGS, PERHAPS
LEAD:  NEXT  The Coming Era in Science.
Holcomb B. Noble, General Editor. 190 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company.
Cloth, $17.95.
Paper, $9.95.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/SCIENCE
LEAD:  THE MAGIC SCHOOL BUS INSIDE THE EARTH  By Joanna Cole.
Illustrated by Bruce Degen. 40 pp.
New York: Scholastic. $13.95. (Ages 5 to 8)


CAROLYN SCERBO, PHYSICIAN, TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Dr.
Carolyn Mary Scerbo to Dr.
William George Kaelin Jr., a son of Nancy P. Kaelin and Mr.
Kaelin, both of Fairfield, Conn., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Scerbo of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
The couple plan to marry in May.


Who Makes Disney Run?
LEAD: IT'S 7 A.M.
ON A SUNDAY WHEN THE black Mustang convertible swings onto the Ventura Freeway.
While Los Angeles is sleeping off the excesses of Saturday night, at least two million people dreaming of easy fame or easy money, Jeffrey Katzenberg is driving to work with a phone in his hand and a list of 500 phone numbers in his head.


Islanders Stave Off Sabres' Threat
LEAD: A bad scare, and a little embarrassment about surrendering a four-goal lead, prompted the Islanders to come up with two more goals and defeat the visiting Sabres.


EDWARD GERRITY 3D MARRIED IN JERSEY TO LESLIE J. PAYNE
LEAD: At St.
Elizabeth's Episcopal Church in Ridgewood, N.J., Leslie James Payne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Payne Jr. of Ridgewood, was married yesterday to Edward J. Gerrity 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerrity Jr. of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard B. Andersen, the rector, performed the ceremony.


Trident Missile Explodes in Launching Test
LEAD: An unarmed Trident 1 nuclear missile exploded today 18 seconds after it was launched from a submarine in a test off the coast of central Florida, the Navy said.


Nick Pietrosante; Football Player, 50
LEAD: Nick Pietrosante, a former running back at Notre Dame and with the Detroit Lions, died today of cancer.
He was 50 years old.


Being Fired
LEAD: To the Editor:


Army Says Germ Warfare Lab Would Be Safe
LEAD: The Army says it can build a laboratory in Utah to experiment with defenses against germ warfare without posing a threat to the public or environment.


Success Spells Trouble for Airline in Alaska
LEAD: Alaska's largest commuter airline, whose recent troubles range from a crash that killed 18 people to an errant flight into Soviet air space, may be the victim of its own success, a Federal official says.


Pros vs Amateurs
LEAD: WHAT is it that separates the ''pros'' from the amateurs in photography?
To many minds, it's a matter of equipment.
Professional photographers, according to this theory, have access to a special breed of cameras, lenses, flash units and the like.
Using pro-level equipment, they are able to take pro-level pictures.


Dole and Bush: Dramatic Contrast of Styles . . .
LEAD: Since the Presidential campaign began, Gerald M. Boyd has been covering Vice President Bush while Bernard Weinraub covered Senator Bob Dole.
Last week they switched assignments to report how the campaigns compared in style and in substance.


TOO FAR, TOO FAST
LEAD: In the middle of an analytical article on John Gutfreund, you inserted a full page on his wife, Susan, and her ''high living.'' What in the world has her living style to do with the way her husband runs Salomon?
Wasn't the Gutfreund story designed to give us insights into the excesses of Wall Street, not Givenchy?


FARE TO TAKE THE CHILL OFF, FROM BRISKET TO TORTE
LEAD: ON winter weekends, I like to make meals that will warm people after an active day in the cold outdoors.
Old-fashioned food - thick soups, stews and pot roast - is what I enjoy most.


Barcelona
LEAD: To the Editor: Two hundred and sixty dollars for dinner for four in Spain?
Have travel writers no conception that many ordinary travelers choose Spain (and Portugal and Morocco and some others) because it is one of the less expensive places to visit?
If the writer of a ''What's Doing in'' must indulge himself in expensive restaurants, let him do it in a special category placed between ''Hotels'' and ''Restaurants.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I'm so sick and tired of the great, galloping hordes of candidates criss-crossing the state and burrowing into every nook and cranny, every home.
Every time you turn around you crash into one of them.
Enough, enough!''  Betty Dumbaugh  of Storm Lake, Iowa,  who plans to stay home  on caucus night.


ALLAN BLOOM'S GREAT IDEAS
LEAD: If it was distressing to be a professor during the 1960's, it was equally distressing to be a student.
Instead of sharing Professor Bloom's youthful experience of walking through the gates into a world in which intellectual endeavor was taken seriously, the student was plunged into a society ruled by demagoguery of the most extreme kind, in which slogans were substituted for ideas, and even attending class was sometimes a risky business.


NEHEMIAH SEEKS OLD FORM
LEAD: Renaldo Nehemiah is angry.
Not at his longtime archrival, Greg Foster, who won the hurdles Friday night in the Panasonic Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden.
Not at the others who beat him in that race as he finished next to last.
Not at the public, which wants to know what has happened to the old Renaldo


SNOW DAY: SUFFERING A WISH COME TRUE
LEAD: REMEMBER when your mother warned you to be careful what you wished for because you just might get it?


Concert: Australian Orchestra
LEAD: FOUNDED in 1975, the Australian Chamber Orchestra maintains an active schedule at home in Sydney, plays elsewhere in Australia and has toured Asia and Europe.
But its current 16-city swing through the United States is its first in this hemisphere.
A part of the Australian bicentennial celebrations, the tour brought the orchestra Friday night to the Metropolitan Museum of


Rude and Belligerent
LEAD: To the Editor:


MOIRA VOSS ENGAGED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Voss of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Moira Damaris Voss, to Rene Garcia-Grayre, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raul Garcia-Grayre of Brooklyn.
Ms.
Voss, a graduate of Hampshire College and an intern at the Actors' Fund, is studying at Columbia University for a master's degree in social work.


Dance: Limon Company
LEAD: THE presentation of dances-in-progress is always a tricky business.
Unfinished, they defy reasonable critical analysis, and most tend to exist in a kind of limbo between inspiration and execution.
The three pieces presented by the Jose Limon Dance Company in a gala showcase on Thursday at the Joyce Theater were no exception.


CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING STAIRS
LEAD: INSTALLING a prefabricated disappearing stairway as an attic entrance is worth considering if a larger or more convenient opening is needed.
The task is simple for two people (an assistant is necessary to help maneuver the staircase), provided that the opening for the stairway can be cut so that its long sides are parallel with the existing ceiling joists, and that the roof is supported by rafters, not trusses.


Wright Seen Anew as an Architect of Thoughts
LEAD: In the 28 years since Frank Lloyd Wright's death, his associates, who have tried to keep the flame of his reputation burning, have often done more to damage his name than to enhance it.
Under the rubric of Taliesin Associated Architects (named for the architect's famous houses in Spring Green, Wis., and Scottsdale, Ariz.) they have produced new buildings that are generally mediocre imitations of the great architect's late work.


Valedictorian, Denied West Point, Will Settle for Texas A&amp;M
LEAD: A Dallas high school student who was not allowed to apply to the United States Military Academy because she is not yet a citizen has received a scholarship to Texas A&amp;M University.


IF KING AND MALCOLM X HAD MET...
LEAD: ''WE DO make quite a team,'' the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. remarks to Malcolm X at the end of a hypothetical meeting in a Harlem hotel room.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  LOVING LITTLE EGYPT, by Thomas McMahon. (Penguin, $6.95.) In the early days of electrical power, Thomas Alva Edison fought with Nikola Tesla over whether direct current or alternating current would be the wave of the future.
In this novel by Thomas McMahon, a Harvard science professor, Edison and Tesla are on opposite sides again, in a dispute over an electronics wizard who creates a secret underground telephone network for the blind.


Philadelphia Ex-Judge Convicted of Extortion
LEAD: A former Common Pleas Court judge was convicted today of one of two Federal extortion counts.
He is the third Philadelphia judge convicted of corruption in six months.


Policeman Gets Reprimand For Giving Shelter in Snow
LEAD: The General Services Administration has reprimanded a Federal policeman who gave refuge in a snowstorm to a homeless man who has been living on the steps of the Federal courthouse here for much of the last eight years.


ABOUT SOFTWARE AND HARDWARE
LEAD: The article ''Computers: A Necessary Insidiousness''  [ Opinion Page, Jan. 17 ]  renders a distinct disservice to your readers.
Especially in the over-30 generation, there's enough nervousness about these marvelous machines without adding to it by maligning them, even if facetiously.
Worse yet, to tell all sorts of untruths about them!


Shorter Bout
LEAD: The International Boxing Federation has decided to limit today's title fight in England between the middleweight champion, Frank Tate, and Tony Sibson to 12 rounds instead of the 15 the I.B.F. ususally insists on for a championship fight.
In doing so, the I.B.F. appeared to be bowing to the safety concerns of British boxing authorities, who refused to sanction the fight at 15 rounds and called on the I.B.F.


PROGRAMS ARE MANY AND AT THE SAME TIME
LEAD: THIS will be another week of competing events.
Today alone, there is a dance program at 2 P.M., a violin recital at 2:30, five solo or chamber concerts at 3 and seven recitals with 4 o'clock starts.


Secrets and Surprises
LEAD:  NO WAY OUT  Starring Kevin Costner (in photo, right), Gene Hackman (in photo, left), Will Patton, Sean Young, Howard Duff.
Directed by Roger Donaldson. 1987.
HBO Video. 113 minutes. $89.95.
Rated R.


Question Of the Week; Are Free Agents Free Again in Baseball?
LEAD: Wait until October.
While George Steinbrenner and Billy Martin are toasting each other on a world-championship season, just ask Jack Clark.
KARA YORIC  Kinnelon, N.J.


OLYMPICS TAKE A FIRST STEP ON THE ROAD TO REALITY
LEAD: WHEN the Olympic athletes from 57 nations parade Saturday during the opening ceremony of the 15th Winter Games, one of the Canadian team members will be Andy Moog, the same Andy Moog who was an established goaltender for the Edmonton Oilers of the National Hockey League.
And more than any other athlete in Calgary, he will be taking the first step to Olympic reality.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.49
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.53
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.81
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
11.07
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


THOSE OTHER L.I.R.R. RIDERS
LEAD: Re: ''L.I.R.R. Main Line to Enter Electric Age,'' Jan. 17:


Birds of a Feather
LEAD: GUESTS were invited to create fantasy headdresses for the Christian Dior dinner Thursday at the New York Public Library for the opening of the exhibition ''Splendid Plumage.'' Chignons sprouted pheasant feathers, curls supported ostrich plumes and one bold spirit wore a bird's nest filled with eggs.


Evoking Childhood Isn't Kid Stuff
LEAD: Toward the end of Steven Spielberg's ''Empire of the Sun,'' there's a haunting sequence in which 13-year-old Jim Graham (Christian Bale), who has survived four years in a Japanese prisoner-of-war camp outside Shanghai, witnesses the first American air raid on the adjacent Japanese airfield.


About Men; The Magic Classroom
LEAD: I'VE BEEN MEETING FORMER students of mine lately: one on the A train, one in Zabar's, another at a street fair.
They are shy about it at first - scrutinizing me, trying to find the someone they knew behind the years, the changes. ''You're Professor Lyons, aren't you?'' one asked, and I stuttered a bit, because the last time this happened, I said ''I was,'' meaning ''without the title now'' though I am still Lyons.


CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING STAIRS
LEAD: INSTALLING a prefabricated disappearing stairway as an attic entrance is worth considering if a larger or more convenient opening is needed.
The task is simple for two people (an assistant is necessary to help maneuver the staircase), provided that the opening for the stairway can be cut so that its long sides are parallel with the existing ceiling joists, and that the roof is supported by rafters, not trusses.


CHINA'S MODERN MASTERS
LEAD: IN THE LIBRARY OF A 23-ROOM apartment on Fifth Avenue, four blocks from the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is a rug that was once in the emperor's quarters in Beijing's Forbidden Palace.
Somehow, during the turbulent years following the Opium War of 1839-42, the rug was removed from the palace and, some decades later, found its way into the hands of an American pilot who had brought a single-engine plane to China, offering his air-freight services to opium traffickers.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  COUSIN JOE: Blues From New Orleans.
By Pleasant (Cousin Joe) Joseph and Harriet J. Ottenheimer. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) On the last page of this curious memoir, the blues singer Pleasant Joseph writes: ''The good Lord gave me a chance to make a comeback.
I had messed up my whole life from drinking: from slow horses, from fast women and bad whiskey.


Is the Consumer Binge Really Over?
LEAD: FOR years, Americans have been the world's most determined, enthusiastic consumers.
The simple living conveyed in Norman Rockwell's illustrations or Grant Wood's famous painting of a severe, Midwestern farmer and his wife, has been lost in the 1980's.


Where Fabric Reigns in Italy
LEAD: PRATO is Florence's industrial alter ego, the milling ants to Florence's blithe cricket, as in the fables of La Fontaine.
But when it comes to play, it is Prato that does the chirping.
Porsches from Prato are parked outside the expensive restaurants of Florence, and it is the matrons of Prato who patronize the fashionable boutiques and jewelers of Florence.


Haugen Regains I.B.F. Lightweight Crown
LEAD: Greg Haugen is the International Boxing Federation lightweight champion again.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: World Financial Center Mall; Taking Retail Risks in What Is Considered Terra Incognita
LEAD: MANY developers of urban malls fail at the delicate art of attracting a successful mix of tenants.
Herald Center, the vertical shopping center at 34th Street and Broadway, has been a disappointment since it opened three years ago.
In lower Manhattan, dozens of retail spaces sit vacant at the South Street


Many Haitians Ignore Strike on Inaugural Eve
LEAD: On the eve of the inauguration of Leslie F. Manigat as President of Haiti, a general strike today closed most stores in the heart of the capital.
But many people who earn their living in open-air markets and street stalls went about their business as usual.


Regulators Battle To Define Turf
LEAD: The regulatory waters are still being roiled by the October market collapse.
The S.E.C. staff urged curbs on stock index futures trading, saying the technique aggravated the dive of Oct. 19.
Among other things, the 900- page report recommended that margins on futures be raised from the current 10 percent.


Police Seeking Stolen Truck And a Cargo of Nitroglycerin
LEAD: A truck believed to be carrying explosives was reported stolen in Queens yesterday, and the police appealed for help in finding it.


Correction
LEAD: Last Sunday, in his essay ''Can TV Be Taken Seriously?'', John J. O'Connor neglected to mention that the British-made ''South Bank Show,'' currently being saluted in the Museum of Broadcasting's ''New York World Television Festival,'' is also available on the Bravo cable service; it is presenting the cultural series on Thursday evenings at 10.


Primaries Don't Make Our Elections Wiser
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Headline
LEAD: It was nice to see our hero, Olympian skier Pirmin Zurbriggen, in The New York Times Magazine (''On the Edge of Greatness,'' by Trip Gabriel, Dec. 27).
But what does Mr.
Gabriel mean by calling him a ''Goody Two-shoes'' or a ''lollipop''?
What is wrong with being shy, religious and modest?
Pirmin Zurbriggen does not have to tell anyone he's good.


Insurance Woes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dance
LEAD: The Ohio Ballet, which opens a week's season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue) Monday, has the look and feel of a well-tuned single instrument.
Celebrating its 20th anniversary this year, the company is the creation of Heinz Poll, its director and chief choreographer, and Thomas Skelton, the lighting designer; and it bears the imprint of an informed and articulated artistic vision.


No Electioneering Inside the 7-Eleven
LEAD: WAL-MART STORES, the nation's third-largest retail chain, held a major voter registration drive in late January in its 650 stores in 12 of the Southern states that will be participating in the March 8 ''Super Tuesday'' Presidential primary.
The remainder of the chain's 1,114 outlets in the Southwest and Midwest will hold voter registration campaigns in September, in time to enable new registrants to vote in the November


CAROLYN CONANT TO WED MICHAEL WYATT HILEY
LEAD: Carolyn Marree Conant and Michael Wyatt Hiley, a son of Mrs.
Robert Langford of Morristown, N.J., and David B. Hiley of Katonah, N.Y., plan to marry in July, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Martin C. Conant of New Providence, N.J., have announced.


Question Of the Week; Are Free Agents Free Again in Baseball?
LEAD: Free?
Look what Jack Clark and Kirk Gibson just got for salaries!
Seems expensive to me.
RICHARD COWIT  Farmingville, L.I.


WHAT YOU SEE IS HOW YOU VOTE
LEAD:  NEWS THAT MATTERS  Television and American Opinion.
By Shanto Iyengar and Donald R. Kinder. 187 pp.
Illinois: The University of Chicago Press. $19.95.


PACE IS PICKING UP FOR THE PHILHARMONIA VIRTUOSI
LEAD: THE Philharmonia Virtuosi took January off, but February finds the ensemble back in concert action on this and the following two Sundays.
Today at 3 P.M., Cyprien Katsaris is the featured soloist at the State University of New York at Purchase, with the brilliant French pianist tackling two great concertos, the Liszt A major and Beethoven's Third.


4 HOSPITALS PLANNING TO SHARE BED SPACE
LEAD: FOUR eastern Connecticut hospitals, all facing a shortage of beds partly because of population increases, are working out an agreement to share space.


On Seeking A Better Rattrap
LEAD: RATS are not a big problem in Takoma Park, Md., but when the city moved to help homeowners who were occasionally troubled by them, it found no easy solution.


EXILED IRANIANS PRESS A POLITICAL CAUSE FROM IRAQ
LEAD: With a softened ideology and assertions of battlefield prowess, Iran's principal exiled opposition movement, crushed during the Islamic revolution, is seeking to project itself as a new force in this region's conflicts.


Lead Content in Mobil Glasses Is Questioned
LEAD: With an eight-gallon purchase of unleaded gasoline, Mobil Oil service stations around the country have been giving motorists drinking glasses decorated with the logo of a football team in leaded enamel.


Smalley on the Move
LEAD: The deals that sent Roy Smalley from the Yankees to the Chicago White Sox during the 1984 season and from the White Sox to the Minnesota Twins before the 1985 season were not your usual baseball trades.
They were more like rent-a-player deals in which the Twins and the White Sox each secured the right to return the player to his previous club in exchange for a minor leaguer.


MARY CLIFFORD PLANS TO WED JOHN TITTMANN IN JULY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Rowland Clifford of Cornwall, Vt., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Rowland Clifford, to John Tittmann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barclay Tittmann of Concord, Mass.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Clifford, a graduate of the Northfield Mount Hermon School and Connecticut College, is studying for a master's degree in international relations at the University of Chicago.


WHAT'S WHAT, WHO'S WHO, WHERE IT HAPPENS... AND KEEP AN EYE ON THOSE SKIERS CARRYING RIFLES
LEAD: IN the early years of the Winter Olympics, the most successful athletes were mainly skiers and skaters from the northern European belt of Norway, Sweden and Finland.
Then the Soviet Union joined the Olympic movement and started winning winter medals.
Then East Germany did the same.


STERN HOPES FOR TALKS DESPITE NEW UNION MOVE
LEAD: David Stern, the commissioner of the National Basketball Association, today called the move by the players to decertify their union as their bargaining agent ''a strategem'' to step up pressure on the owners.


STREETSCAPES: Pioneer Warehouses; In Brooklyn, a Romanesque Revival Repository Complex
LEAD: THE Pioneer warehouse complex, on Flatbush Avenue at the foot of Livingston Street in Brooklyn, has been a familiar sight for more than 75 years.


South Africa Police Disperse Funeral March
LEAD: Hundreds of police officers and soldiers used tear gas to disperse mourners and marching students at the funeral of a black youth leader today.


JULIE G. PRETZAT, PROFESSOR, TO MARRY B. R. MERCHANT
LEAD: Julie Griffith Pretzat, an assistant professor of music at the State University College at Oswego, N.Y., and Benjamin Ralph Merchant, the owner of Kerner &amp; Merchant Pipe Organ Builders in Syracuse, plan to be married May 21.
The announcement was made by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.


Thomas Gibbons, 83, Of Philadelphia Police
LEAD: Thomas J. Gibbons, who was Philadelphia's first Police Commissioner under the City Charter that was adopted in the early 1950's, died here Friday after a brief illness.
He was 83 years old.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Convent Station  $312,000  13 Weathervane Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old contemporary; porch, central air-conditioning, 2-car attached garage; taxes $3,087.
South Orange  $278,000  279 Beech Spring Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 44-year-old Tudor; fireplace, den, eat-in kitchen; taxes $4,318.


NORIEGA EXPECTED TO CLING TO POWER, PANAMANIANS SAY
LEAD: The indictment of Panama's military leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, in the United States on drug charges has stiffened his resistance and makes the likelihood of his peaceful departure from power more remote, Panamanian civilians, military officers and foreign diplomats say.


EXECUTIVE IS WED TO MISS PRITCHARD
LEAD: The Unitarian Church of All Souls in Manhattan was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Ruthann Mary Pritchard, an associate at the First Boston Corporation, and Howard Alan Silverstein, a general partner in Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, both in New York.
The Rev.
F.
Forrester Church performed the ceremony.


CECILY A. STEWART TO MARRY IN JUNE
LEAD: Norman W. Stewart and Dr.
Ann Roberts Stewart of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., and Hilton Head Island, S.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cecily Ann Stewart to Dr.
James Frederick Whiting, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Frederick D. Whiting of Binghamton, N.Y.
The couple plan to marry in June.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-22


MAUREEN FERGUSON WEDS T. D. STEINER
LEAD: The marriage of Maureen Elizabeth Ferguson, a daughter of Helen E. Ferguson of New York and the late Charles A. Ferguson, to Thomas Daniel Steiner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
S.
Daniel Steiner of Glen Arbor, Mich., and Longboat Key, Fla., took place yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Stockbridge, Mass.


Contra Forces Reported on Verge of 3-Way Split
LEAD: The commander of United States forces in Latin America has said that the Nicaraguan rebels are on the verge of a three-way split that will erode and possibly destroy their military strength.


Ups and Downs Aside, Iowa Has 'Middleness'
LEAD: IN Waterloo, a town that has lost 12,000 manfacturing jobs in the last decade, the John Deere foundry and tractor plant has recalled 500 workers since November.
In Albia, a rural crossroads where the farm crisis drove one bank and at least three shops out of business, a small pipe-making company plans to open a factory that will employ 100 people.


Time to Speak Truth
LEAD: When you see your best friend acting in a way that will ruin his life, do you pretend not to see?
Do you insist to others that it is really not so bad as it looks?
Do you tell yourself that it is his business, not yours?


DNA 'Fingerprinting' Tests Becoming a Factor in Courts
LEAD: Landmark discoveries of the 1970's in DNA and genetic engineering have begun creeping into the world of the courts and criminal evidence.


Question Of the Week; Are Free Agents Free Again in Baseball?
LEAD: Whoever said they were enslaved?
Shed no tears over these freewheeling, free-spending, free-spirited guys.
They never had it so good.
Some of their salaries practically rivaled the Treasury balance.
LARRY L. KUNTZ  Brooklyn


New Attention for Early Black Artist
LEAD: The surreal setting of Joshua Johnson's ''Little Girl in Pink With a Goblet Filled With Strawberries'' adds drama to this folk portrait of a small child identified as Emma Van Name, which dates from about 1805.
The painting, attributed to one of the nation's first black artists, was sold at Sotheby's last weekend for $660,000 - more than 14 times the previous record at auction for this artist - a price that represents a growing awareness of Johnson's importance.


Denial of Female Guard's Promotion Upheld
LEAD: A female deputy sheriff was properly denied a promotion to sergeant that would have placed her in an all-male wing of the Oneida County Jail, the Court of Appeals, New York's highest court, ruled this week.


BEST SELLERS: FEBRUARY 7, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
14
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom
Wolfe. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.95.) A bond
trader caught in the jungles of New York.
2
2
11
THE TOMMYKNOCKERS, by Stephen King.


Blooms for the Winter
LEAD: INDOORS sow seed of geranium, petunia, salvia, begonia, impatiens, eustoma, portulaca and coleus.
It is too early to sow vegetable seed indoors especially tomatoes, peppers, melons, eggplants; wait until March.
Pot paperwhite narcissus bulbs in pebbles, but discard any of these tender bulbs that have already bloomed; they cannot be forced again.


Reagan's Abiding Trust Is the Key to Meese's Survivability
LEAD: ONCE again, Edwin Meese 3d is under fire.
And once again, Washington is wondering how long the Attorney General, the nation's highest law enforcement officer, can keep on surmounting accusations of impropriety and misjudgment.


AN EMPHASIS ON ABUNDANCE
LEAD: WHAT memories are supposed to be triggered, one muses, crossing the threshold of Memories Cafe in Stamford?
Perhaps it is the live music heard nightly from 8:30 to about 11:30 that is intended to induce them.


DR. HELEN TOWERS MARRIES DR. WALTER WEISS IN DUBLIN
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
Helen Towers and Dr.
Walter I. Weiss, graduates of the Royal College of Surgeons in Dublin, took place last evening at the Berkeley Court Hotel in Dublin.
Rabbi Gunter Hirschberg of Temple Rodelph Sholom in New York performed the ceremony.


Failures in U.S. Dipped in '87
LEAD: After increasing for eight consecutive years, the number of business failures in the United States declined slightly in 1987, the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation said Friday.


States Assuming a New Role in Consumer Issues
LEAD: State attorneys general, working collectively on consumer issues they say are ignored by Federal agencies, are emerging as an alternative national enforcement agency in an era of deregulation.


Sikhs Kill Four at Wedding
LEAD: Sikh militants opened fire today on a Hindu wedding party, killing the bridegroom and three other people, the police said.
Four Sikh radicals arrived at the party near the town of Kapurthala, about 43 miles north of here, and began shooting AK-47 assault rifles, the police said.


Dawn Upshaw to Sing With Chamber Group
LEAD: The soprano Dawn Upshaw will be guest soloist with the Apple Hill Chamber Players on Wednesday when the group gives the first of three monthly chamber-music concerts at Merkin Concert Hall.
The ensemble, which is based in Nelson, N.H., comprises a string quartet, double bassist and two pianists.


British Air's Airbus Order
LEAD: British Airways said today that it would take delivery of all 10 A320 aircraft on order from the European Airbus consortium despite a dispute over fuel consumption.


Music: Canadian Quartet
LEAD: TOWARD the end of their Friday evening concert at the Public School 41 auditorium, the French Canadian traditional quartet La Bottine Souriante struck up a jig.
Yves Lambert, who plays accordion and harmonica, began to vocalize in an argot that suggested an American mountain auctioneer singing in French in a jazzily syncopated diction.


Networks to Broadcast Results of Caucuses
LEAD: Results of the Iowa caucuses will be broadcast tonight by all three commercial networks, with NBC and ABC airing 30-minute news specials at 10:30 P.M.
Eastern standard time, and CBS following at 11:30 (11:35 in New York City).
Cable News Network will provide live coverage from Des Moines beginning at 8 P.M.


Aaron C. Sterling, Fund-Raiser, 63
LEAD: Aaron C. Sterling, a fund-raiser and promoter of charitable causes, died of congestive heart failure Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 63 years old and lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.


DONAGED-EGG SUCCESS
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ms. Furman Weds Nathan Willensky
LEAD: The marriage of Barbara Furman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm Furman of Manasota Key, Englewood, Fla., to Nathan David Willensky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Willensky of Atlantic Beach, L.I., took place yesterday at the Stanhope in New York.
Rabbi Bernard M. Zlotowitz performed the ceremony.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-9


Nigeria Plants Finished
LEAD: Two petrochemical plants that Nigeria set out to build 18 years ago are finally ready, an official for the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation said Friday.
The plants will turn part of the country's oil and gas output into stocks that can be used to make products ranging from drugs and paints to car parts and printers ink.


Sports of The Times; Oh, What a Flight
LEAD: IT was so delightful, so delicious, so absolutely delovely that even Michael Jordan himself got embarrassed.


Judging of Breeds Starts at 9 A.M.
LEAD: The Westminster Kennel Club show will feature 2,651 dogs vying for the best-in-show title.
The sporting, hound and toy breeds will be benched and judged today, starting at 9 A.M., with the groups at 8 P.M.
On Tues-day, the working, terrier, non-sport-ing seven rings, from 8:30 A.M.


This Painting Shakes Hands And Audiences
LEAD: Sometimes you get a little grouchy, said Stephen Taylor Woodrow, when you hang on a museum wall for six hours a day, covered with black spray paint.


Gang Violence Shocks Los Angeles
LEAD: It began as a pleasant Saturday night out for Karen Toshima: dinner with a friend and a stroll through the bustling Westwood Village on the affluent West Side of Los Angeles.
A short time later Miss Toshima, a 27-year-old graphic artist, lay mortally wounded on the sidewalk next to a parking meter, a bullet through her head.


Battling Athletes Hurt Sports' Image
LEAD: For the second consecutive game, the Cornell University basketball team is involved in a fight, this one against Syracuse in the Carrier Dome.
It starts when Greg Gilda of Cornell and Derrick Brower of Syracuse begin bumping and pushing under the basket.
Punches are thrown and both are ejected, as is Derrick Coleman of


Haiti Says Philadelphia Garbage Was Dumped by Ship on Its Beach
LEAD: A cargo ship chartered in the United States has dumped about 4,000 tons of garbage from Philadelphia on a Haitian beach, according to Haitian Government officials.


Marinated in America
LEAD: At last, tonight's the night.
After watching months of campaigning, some 200,000 Iowans will assemble in gyms, firehouses and living rooms and declare for one of the six Republicans or seven Democrats running for President.
And at last, three kinds of easy criticism will have to stop.


Rafi Nelson, Resort Owner
LEAD: Rafi Nelson, a former journalist and public relations man who became the owner of a beachfront resort, died Saturday of a heart attack, the Israeli radio reported today.
He was 57 years old.
Mr.
Nelson operated Rafi Nelson's Holiday Village, a popular resort in the tiny enclave of Taba, claimed both by Egypt and Israel.


A Cautious Cushion for Banks
LEAD: It's almost a deal: the Federal Reserve Board and regulators in Western Europe and Japan have agreed to common capital requirements for commercial banks.
The reforms may crimp the style and profitability of some giant ''money center'' banks.
But that's a reasonable price to pay to cushion the world financial system against the stresses of rapid growth and integration.


Carbide Plea on Bhopal Aid
LEAD: The Union Carbide Corporation complained Friday that a court order requiring interim relief payments to victims of the Bhopal gas disaster did not specify who would get the aid, the United News of India reported.


Arts Festival Program Spans Century of Dance
LEAD: The First New York International Festival of the Arts, scheduled in June and July, is announcing its offerings by discipline.
Dance, listed below, was officially announced today.
Details of the film and television programs are to be announced on Wednesday, and theater is to follow on Friday.


PANAMA RECALLS ENVOYS FROM U.S. AS CRISIS DEEPENS
LEAD: In an action reflecting the growing crisis in relations between Panama and the United States, the Panamanian Government has recalled three senior diplomats, including its Ambassador to Washington, for ''urgent consultations,'' state-controlled radio stations and newspapers here said today.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
AVX Corp., Great Neck, L.I., which manufactures electronic components, named Charles A. Dill president and chief operating officer, replacing Donald K. Thostenson, who has been named chairman of the executive committee.


Peaceful Heavy Metal
LEAD: American and Soviet schoolchildren are becoming acquainted here under an exchange between the Soviet Embassy school and some Washington area schools.


3 Men Found Dead As Temperatures Dip During the Weekend
LEAD: Two men believed to have been homeless were found dead on Manhattan streets during the weekend, and a third was found dead in a field on Wards Island as temperatures plunged to the lowest point in three weeks, the authorities said yesterday.


TV Review; A Family Disappearance, In NBC's 'Moving Target'
LEAD: A YOUNG man returns home.


Across Soviet, Brezhnev's Name Falls
LEAD: Where a monument to Leonid I. Brezhnev once stood, there is now an uneven sidewalk, covered with a dusting of snow and frozen dirt.
The large black Cyrillic letters that spelled out his name on a nearby metal and concrete billboard have been erased.


Analysts Question Drop in Yields
LEAD: Disregarding the yellow flags waved by some economists, the credit markets have raced to lower yields in the belief that the Federal Reserve will try to stave off impending weakness in the economy by easing its monetary policy and reducing short-term interest rates.


Static for Broadcaster
LEAD: Sam Donaldson, the ABC White House correspondent who is noted for holding the President accountable for gaffes, is getting a taste of his own medicine.


Girl, 14, Slain During Errand To Buy a Paper
LEAD: A 14-year-old girl who had gone out to buy a newspaper for her family yesterday morning was found slain a few hours later on a railroad embankment in Richmond Hill, Queens, the police said.


Caracas Journal; The Reconstructed Rebel He Fights by the Rules
LEAD: Young, middle-class, well-educated and unabashedly inspired by the Cuban revolution, Teodoro Petkoff Malec was one of the leaders of the guerrilla war begun by Venezuela's Communists in the early 1960's to overthrow the country's new democracy.


Air of Zaniness Brushes Iowa Just in Time for Caucus Day
LEAD: There was the unmistakable air of carnival today, as if some zany festival of democracy had erupted in this ordinarily earnest Midwestern city.


College Basketball; Purdue Is Alone Atop the Big Ten
LEAD: Troy Lewis of Purdue scored 14 of his 20 points in the second half today as the sixth-ranked Boilermakers beat No. 11 Michigan, 91-87, to take sole possession of first place in the Big Ten Conference.


Talks Set on Savings Unit Breakup
LEAD: Federal regulators will meet on Wednesday with representatives of several California savings and loan institutions to discuss a proposal for breaking up the troubled Financial Corporation of America, a spokesman for the Federal Home Loan Bank Board said today.


Advertising; Addenda
LEAD: *
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles has agreed to acquire a majority interest in Imparc, Dusseldorf, West Germany, from BBDO Worldwide, a unit of the Omnicom Group.


Desperately Seeking Hollywood
LEAD: The seminar began at 9 A.M. on a sunny Saturday morning, but there were crowds of eager, bright-eyed hopefuls lining up even earlier.
Indeed, the offering seemed to many like the Holy Grail.


Golf; Lopez Wins Her First Opener
LEAD: Nancy Lopez has won 37 Ladies Professional Golf Association tournaments, but today's victory in the $200,000 Mazda Classic was her first in a season opener.


Advertising; Goodyear Picks HDM For Los Angeles Work
LEAD: The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, based in Akron, Ohio, has named HDM, Los Angeles, to handle its Los Angeles retail broadcast advertising.
The budget is estimated between $3 million and $5 million.


Police Chief Of Jersey City Kills Himself
LEAD: At 6:15 A.M. yesterday, the Jersey City Chief of Police, John Fritz, walked into Police Headquarters at 8 Erie Street, went to his third-floor office and locked the door.
He took his .38-caliber off-duty revolver from a safe and sometime in the next three hours, police officials said, sat down in his high-backed executive's chair and killed himself with a single shot to the right temple.


Strong Quake in Aleutians
LEAD: A strong earthquake occurred this morning near the far western end of the Aleutian Islands, the United States Geological Survey said.
It was centered in the Pacific Ocean, about 130 miles south of Shemya Island, and was felt slightly on Shemya.
The quake registered 6.1 on the Richter scale.


Air Force Panel Reverses Part Of an Officer's Adultery Case
LEAD: The adultery conviction of a female Air Force officer accused of having an affair with another officer has been set aside by the Air Force Court of Military Review, her civilian lawyer says.


Fuzzbusted
LEAD: Despite its evident good sense, banning radar detectors, or ''fuzzbusters,'' has not proved popular either in Congress or in state legislatures.
Only Virginia, Connecticut and the District of Columbia have adopted such a ban.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Haitian President Sworn In


Art: Picasso's 'Demoiselles'
LEAD: ''Les Demoiselles d'Avignon,'' the 1907 masterpiece that liberated the savage genius of Pablo Picasso and set the tone for a century of artistic discontinuity and shock, has, for a few months at least, come home.
In an exhibition of around 85 works that is itself ground-breaking, the Picasso Museum has documented the evolution of this complex and convulsive painting and presented it within its artistic context for the first time.


Regionals Rise in Bank Ranking
LEAD: As giant banks flounder and regional banks flourish, the turmoil churning the nation's banking system is beginning to show up in the rankings of the nation's largest banking companies.


127 Die in Floods and Mud Slides in Brazil
LEAD: Floods and mud slides have killed at least 127 people in Rio de Janeiro state since Friday, a civil defense spokesman said today.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''For me, time doesn't exist.


Olympic Notebook; Skipping Games To Carry A Price
LEAD: From now on, it could cost any country that does not participate in the Summer Olympics.
But not much.


Fitness; Circling the Malls to Get in Shape
LEAD: SNOW pelted car windshields and a stiff easterly wind cut through parkas one morning here recently, several hours before stores at the Aurora Mall in suburban Denver opened.


Carlucci Calls for New Tactical Missiles
LEAD: Secretary of Defense Frank C. Carlucci and ranking American legislators called upon West Germany and other European allies today to fulfill a five-year-old alliance commitment to modernize short-range nuclear weapons.


Horse Racing; Equalize Outruns 15 Rivals
LEAD: Equalize snaked his way through an overstuffed field of 16 to score a decisive 2 1/4-length victory over Yankee Affair in the $154,500 Canadian Turf Handicap today at Gulfstream Park.


Japan Given Chip Proposals
LEAD: The United States has suggested 18 specific steps that the Japanese Government and industries could take to increase imports of American-made semiconductors, and the two sides will discuss the issue this week, a Japanese official said.


Fed's Talks This Week To Yield Signs on Goals
LEAD: This week's meeting of the Federal Reserve, which stands almost alone these days in managing the economy, will provide important indications of its goals for growth and interest rates and will test its resistance to political influence.


Sports World Specials; Mark of Assistance
LEAD: As a fourth-grader, Suzie McConnell's grammar school did not have a girls' basketball team, so she did the obvious thing.


Winners Chosen In 18 Specialties
LEAD: Eighteen specialty shows were held at 12 metropolitan area sites yesterday in preparation for the Westminster Kennel Club show.


Don't Take Away Tenure of School Principals
LEAD: To the Editor:


Canadian Jobless Rate
LEAD: Canada's unemployment rate remained unchanged, at 8.1 percent, in January as the growth in jobs was matched by an increase in the labor force, Statistics Canada reported Friday.
The Government agency said that on a seasonally adjusted basis there were 12,228,000 people employed in January, up 38,000 from December.


A.M.A. Resists Giving Name Of Doctor in a Mercy Killing
LEAD: The American Medical Association says only a court order could force it to disclose the identity of a physician who wrote an essay about injecting a terminally ill patient with a lethal dose of morphine.


Groundwork and Guesswork Mark The End of Iowa Caucus Campaign
LEAD: The people of Iowa, having listened for more than two years to the men who would be President, will make their choices Monday night in nominating caucuses where the margins of victory will hinge on which campaigns do the best job of getting their supporters to attend.


Recital: Sylvia Kowalczuk
LEAD: SYLVIA KOWALCZUK'S recital at Merkin Concert Hall Saturday night addressed two problems faced by everyone who plays the harp for a living.
One is to find a consistently strong repertory; the other is to create clear, unambiguous diatonic statements - melodic lines and harmonic progressions capable of penetrating the harp's rainbow of overtones.


A Leader in Seoul Opposition Steps Down as Head of Party
LEAD: In an effort to reunify South Korea's divided opposition, Kim Young Sam resigned this morning as president of one of the nation's two main opposition parties.


Hong Kong Dollar at Issue
LEAD: A senior Hong Kong official said Friday that the colony's currency, which is linked to the United States dollar, would not be revalued and he denied that Washington had directly asked the Government to do so.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Offers Weighed By Federated
LEAD: Federated Department Stores Inc., which rejected two takeover offers by the Campeau Corporation on Friday, is exploring interest received from ''various third parties'' in acquiring some of its principal assets or the entire company, Federated said in a weekend statement to the Securities and Exchange


Rostropovich to Present New Soviet Composition
LEAD: Mstislav Rostropovich, music director of the National Symphony Orchestra, will present the world premiere next month of the first piece of music written for him by a Soviet composer since he left the Soviet Union in 1974.


Mecham's Home and Business Are Damaged
LEAD: A shotgun blast was fired Saturday at the home of Evan Mecham, the impeached Governor of Arizona, and today Mr.
Mecham's car dealership was vandalized in a glass-breaking spree, the police said.


Richard Flickinger, Politician, 71
LEAD: Mayor Richard Flickinger, who guided the passage of what may have been the nation's first municipal ban on pistols, died at his home Monday after a long illness.
He was 71 years old.


27-Year-Old Author Bemused by Success
LEAD: Ethan Canin is 27 years old, a graduate of Stanford and a fourth-year medical student at Harvard.
He is also the author of the just published ''Emperor of the Air,'' a collection of nine short stories.
His work has appeared in The Atlantic, Esquire and Ploughshares, and has been reprinted in ''The Best American Short Stories'' of 1985 and 1986.


On Your Own: Running; Motivating Kids to Exercise Can Be Child's Play
LEAD: ONE day not long ago I took our younger daughter, Jamie, who is 8 years old, out to the backyard to run.
I set up a course and asked her to circle it several times.
An active child, she'd been jogging on and off for a couple of years and began this session with a spirited stride.


Fort Chaffee Journal; From Training Ground to Film Set
LEAD: A visit to this nearly deserted Army post is a journey back in time, mostly to the grim, early days of World War II.
Since then, Fort Chaffee has been a training camp for American soldiers, jail for German prisoners of war, reception area for Vietnamese refugees and holding camp for Cuban expatriates.


Advertising; Search Is Narrowed to 3 By United Jersey Banks
LEAD: United Jersey Banks, Princeton, N.J., has narrowed its search for an ad agency.
Still in the running are three New York shops: Geer, DuBois plus Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos and McCaffrey &amp; McCall.
The previous budget was estimated at more than $2 million.


OPEC Output Cut Reported
LEAD: OPEC's oil production fell sharply last month, mainly because of cutbacks by Persian Gulf exporters, including Saudi Arabia, according to the International Energy Agency.


Advertising; People
LEAD: * Kenneth A. Glaser joins Solin Associates as executive vice president.


2 Die in Bangladesh Quake
LEAD: At least two people were killed and more than 100 injured Saturday night when a moderate earthquake shook Bangladesh and eastern India.
The Government newspaper Dainik Bangla reported today that the deaths and most of the injuries occurred in the northeastern city of Sylhet.
Walls of houses caved in around Slyhet, cracks opened up in a hospital building containing 500 beds and people ran into the streets in panic, the newspaper said.


FIVE MORE DEAD IN ARAB PROTESTS
LEAD: Israeli soldiers firing into a stone-throwing crowd killed three Palestinians in this tiny village today as demonstrations flared all along the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Facts Paint Iowa as a Civics Teacher, Gently Voicing Heartfelt Lessons
LEAD: Iowa is small, flat and remote from the great capitals of finance, government and communications.
It has neither beaches nor mountains, neither battlefields nor splendid colonial houses.


Waldheim Placed in Town of Reprisals
LEAD: A Yugoslav newspaperman has unearthed documents and interviewed witnesses that place Kurt Waldheim as the sole German Army officer in a small town when mass reprisal shootings and deportations of Yugoslav civilians were conducted during World War II.


The Dance: Premiere Of 'Shaman's Journey'
LEAD: ''ASIA and the American Indian'' was the title of a symposium at the Asia Society on Saturday that explored the role of shamanism in America and Asia, and it was a dancer of American Indian descent -Raoul Trujillo - who best summed up the daylong scholarly lectures.
In ''The Shaman's Journey,'' an extrardinarily vivid dance solo created for the occasion, Mr.


Joint Mitsui Venture Draws Lease Experts
LEAD: Peter K. Nevitt, former chairman of the BankAmerilease Group, the leasing arm of the BankAmerica Corporation, has struck out on his own in a leasing venture in conjunction with the Japanese.


PROTEST IN JAPAN OVER SOVIET-HELD ISLANDS
LEAD: Protesters marching in Tokyo during a demonstration calling for the return of four islands east of Hokkaido.
Protesters claim that the islands, held by the Soviet Union since the end of Work War II, are Japanese territory.
Portrait of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, was carrie during the march, which was sponsored by rightist groups.


Market Place; Foreign Investors Return to Tokyo
LEAD: OVERSEAS investors have jumped back into the Tokyo stock market.


Brazil Fights Back
LEAD: Brazil has mounted a major diplomatic effort to head off $105 million of trade sanctions planned by the United States in retaliation against Brazil's reluctance to buy American computer software.


'Ice' Hockey Without the Ice and the Blades
LEAD: It took two Minnesota hockey players to discover that it is possible to play a decent game of ice hockey without ice.
Brennan Olson and his brother, Scott, were rummaging around a Midwest sport shop one day in 1979 when they found an old skate with wheels attached in a straight line instead of in pairs.


Broadway Plans Benefit For Victims of AIDS
LEAD: A number of Broadway performers and other theater professionals are to take part in a free event on Feb. 10 at the St.
James Theater, 246 West 44th Street.
The show, which starts at 11:30 A.M. and is open to the public on a first-come basis, is sponsored by ''Broadway Cares,'' a support and resource organization for victims of AIDS.


Gay Rights Group Holds Protest Outside St. Patrick's Cathedral
LEAD: Demonstrators against the Roman Catholic Church's stand against homosexual activity holding a mass across from St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Later, members of the group associated with the gay rights organization Dignity marched across Fifth Avenue to the front of the church, where 23 were arrested for blocking the sidewalk.


Bridge: Some Fine Defensive Moves Are Written but Not Played
LEAD: It is often important to make a crucial play without any revealing hesitation, and declarers often plan ahead, making the decision mentally a few tricks before the fact.


Dance: XXY Troupe
LEAD: THE theater of XXY Dance/ Music might have been described best as multimedia in other times, when the point of incorporating several art forms was usually to create a smoothly-transcendent blend.
But ''Steady On,'' presented by XXY on Saturday at the Emanu-El Midtown Y Dance Center, would more properly be described as collagist.


Officer Added in Shifts At Amoskeag, Fieldcrest
LEAD: The Amoskeag Company, which controls Fieldcrest Cannon Inc., has taken a new top executive, C. Edward Midgley, from Wall Street.


Yonkers Church Is Desecrated
LEAD: Burglars broke into an Episcopal church in Yonkers for the second time in a month early today and desecrated the interior.


Burton W. Marsh, 90; City Traffic Engineer
LEAD: Burton Wallace Marsh, the first full-time city traffic engineer in the United States, died of cardiac arrest as the result of pneumonia Thursday at the Bethesda Retirement and Nursing Center in Maryland.
He was 90 years old.


Talking Business; with Glauber of Presidential Task Force; Debate on Letting 2 Markets Interact
LEAD:


Safety of All-Terrain Vehicles
LEAD: The Consumer Product Safety Commission and a Federal district judge are expected to decide soon whether to give final approval to an agreement on the future sale and production of all-terrain vehicles, which have been linked to about 900 deaths over the last five years.
Under the pact, manufacturers have agreed to end production of three-wheel ATV's, but they would be allowed to continue making four-wheel models, which are considered less dangerous.


Financings This Week Are Limited
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are limited to the bill market, starting with today's regular weekly sale of three-month and six-month issues totaling $12.8 billion and ending Thursday with a one-year issue of $9.25 billion.


Who'll Take Him To 'the Other Side'?
LEAD: In the last month of his life, my friend Bob Walden finally learned to love Mozart.


Preaching Politics and Courting Votes
LEAD: In pulpits all over Iowa this Sunday morning, the word went forth that Christians had a duty to fulfill, at once sacred and civic, in Monday's caucuses.


A Birthday Party for Grand Central
LEAD: At least two youngsters were enchanted with the magical tricks of a clown performing on the lower level of Grand Central Terminal.
The clown, along with mimes, musicians and other entertainers were taking part in an open house to celebrate the terminal's 75th anniversary. (NYT/Vic DeLucia)


14-Year-Old Girl Found Slain in Queens
LEAD: The body of a girl who had gone out to buy a newspaper for her family yesterday morning being removed from a railroad embankment in Richmond Hill.
The police would not identify the girl, who they said had apparently been bludgeoned.
Page B3. (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee)


How Students Fought Censorship in the 60's
LEAD: To the Editor:


Widow of Bukharin Fulfills Her Mission 50 Years Later
LEAD: Anna Mikhailovna Larina was barely 17 years old when the Bolshevik revolutionary Nikolai Ivanovich Bukharin proposed to her.
By the age of 22, she was his wife, a budding economist and a mother.
By 24, she was his widow, inheriting scorn and infamy.


MARCHING IN LIKE SOCIAL LIONS AND OUT TO YAWNS
LEAD: Next January a new cast of characters will take over at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue and there are some Washingtonians itching for the drama to begin.
The capital thrives on change: new faces, new issues, new personalities, new political battles.


Why Was It There?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Power-Sharing Plan Falters In a South African Province
LEAD: Since white settlers began arriving here 150 years ago, Natal has been known for its magnificent beaches and mountains, its sugar cane and a brand of racial politics as conservative as any in South Africa.
Now some of its leading citizens are promoting a plan for a multiracial government in the province, hoping that it will head off demands for black majority rule.


Film: 'Crazy Moon'
LEAD: THE Festival Theater probably did not intend to have a mini-Kiefer Sutherland series.
But after ''Promised Land,'' the new coming-of-age-in-Utah film featuring the actor, last Friday it brought in ''Crazy Moon,'' a 1986 Canadian movie in which he stars.
You can't blame Mr.
Sutherland for the lameness of either one.


Durrenmatt Event Canceled
LEAD: Two evening sessions devoted to Friedrich Durrenmatt, Feb. 20 and 22 at the 92d Street Y, have been canceled because the Swiss playwright is ill.
Ticket refunds or exchanges may be obtained at the box office.
Information: 427-4410.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A list of credits in Weekend on Jan. 29 with a film review of ''Anguish'' misidentified the screenwriter.
The film was written and directed by Bigas Luna.


Books of The Times
LEAD: OSCAR WILDE. By Richard Ellmann. Illustrated. 680 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Advertising; Ketchum Will Phase In Executive Realignment
LEAD: Ketchum Communications, Pittsburgh, has announced an executive realignment to be accomplished during a year-long transition period.
Edward L. Graf, 49, now executive vice president, will become vice chairman and remain chief financial officer.
Herbert D. Gordon, 49, president of Ketchum Yellow Pages, will become executive vice president.


Devils Relish Break After Another Loss
LEAD: The break for the National Hockey League All-Star Game couldn't have come at a better time for the Devils, who are dispirited and hurting.


Bordering on Scandal in Ulster
LEAD: The British Government won't prosecute Northern Ireland police who blocked an investigation of the police shooting in 1982 of seven unarmed men, six of whom died.
Nor will the Attorney General, Sir Patrick Mayhew, publish the report of an inquiry into these shootings.
Thus he seems to confirm a cover-up but won't do anything about it for reasons of ''national security.


Advertising; An Orderly Succession At Ogilvy
LEAD: ALTHOUGH William E. Phillips, the 58-year-old chairman and chief executive of the Ogilvy Group, said Friday that he would relinquish his title to Kenneth Roman, 57, the chairman of the Ogilvy Group's largest operating company, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, the news did not take many people by surprise.


Woman to Go on Trial As Smuggler's Helper
LEAD: Nearly two and a half years after a daredevil cocaine smuggler fell to his death on a driveway here when his parachute failed, a woman accused of being his accomplice is going on trial on drug charges.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on Jan. 16 about a call for an economic boycott to protest racism in New York City misidentified the group that urged action against WABC-TV.
The group is the Committee to Eliminate Media Offensive to African People.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article from Puerto Rico on Wednesday about the arrest of three American soldiers and a Panamanian on drug charges misstated the location of two military installations.


Strike Begins Against Ford In Britain
LEAD: A strike by production workers at the Ford Motor Company's 21 plants in Britain, which started late tonight, is the first national walkout in a decade at the nation's leading car maker.


New York Prisons Find New Work for Inmates
LEAD: At a time when some states are turning their prison workshops over to private managers, New York State prison officials are taking a different course: They are hunting for new products, new customers and new ways to put inmates to work.


CIVILIAN SWORN IN AS HAITI PRESIDENT
LEAD: A 57-year-old former political science professor was sworn in today as President of Haiti, exactly two years after the Duvalier dictatorship collapsed.


Pitcher's Salary Cut in Arbitration
LEAD: Mike Moore, the Seattle pitcher who suffered 19 losses last season, has become only the seventh player in the 13-year history of salary arbi-tration to suffer a pay cut in the procedure.
Moore and Jime Acker, an Atlanta pitcher, learned yesterday they had lost their cases.


Foreigners Buy Less U.S. Stock
LEAD: Contrary to some projections, foreigners' net purchases of United States stocks fell in 1987 from their 1986 record, an industry group said Friday.


Portugal Cuts Rates
LEAD: Portugal announced on Friday a half-point reduction in interest rates to help ease credit costs and increase investment in one of Western Europe's fastest-growing economies.
The Finance Minister, Miguel Cadilhe, said the cut, the fourth in just over a year, would take effect Monday.
He said the maximum interest rate for all loans would drop to 18 percent while the minimum rate for time deposit savings of between six months and a year would fall to 13.5 percent.


Bork Clerk Makes It
LEAD: The newest Supreme Court Justice, Anthony M. Kennedy, has hired one of Judge Robert H. Bork's former law clerks to join him when he begins work at the Court on Feb. 18.
Judge Kennedy's new law clerk, Peter D. Keisler, who now works in the White House as one of six associate counsels to the President, got to know the future Justice when he was assigned to assist him with his Senate confirmation hearings in


Results Plus
LEAD:  Speed Skating


Panama's Financial Ills Grow Worse
LEAD: Panama's central bank reserves are nearly depleted, its trade deficit is growing and it is increasingly hard-pressed in making payments to its creditors, according to United States Government officials and private bankers.


Sports World Specials; Getting a Chance
LEAD: In Division I college basketball, everyone has a story.
The paths to the big time are winding.
The tales are often legendary.
David Wagner of Iona has a story, one that is unique in a unique world.


3 Borough Presidents Urge Balance of Power
LEAD: Three of New York City's five Borough Presidents said yesterday that any new form of governance must not create an unchecked, all-powerful Mayor's office.


Pretoria Signals Move On Economic Change
LEAD: South Africa's President P. W. Botha has announced plans to privatize five major state-run corporations that employ a total of 400,000 people and have combined assets of $30 billion.


The Dance: Shamanic Rituals From Korea
LEAD: KOREAN shamanic dance was a focus of two events over the weekend in New York City, one a seminar at Asia Society and the other a performance by Hi-ah Park on Friday night at the Open Center.
The word performance is used advisedly here, for Miss Park herself stressed that the evening was a version of a shamanic ritual that was modified for the time and place.


Architecture: Shows on Stanford White
LEAD: MCKIM, Mead &amp; White are not the latest names in town, and an exhibition of this great architectural firm's work, most of which was done between the 1880's and 1910, would normally be the occasion for not much more than an appreciative nod.
But this month there are not one but two exhibitions dealing with the firm's architecture, proof that McKim, Mead &amp; White continues to possess, more than three-quarters of a century after its leading partners' deaths, nearly mythic status in New York.


Economic Calendar
LEAD:  Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday


Games Symbolic To North Korea
LEAD: North Korea's demand to be a co-host of the 1988 Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea, is tied to its desire for reunification with South Korea, a senior North Korean sports official said Saturday night.


New Income Tax Rules Mean Work and Confusion for Filers
LEAD: This year's tax filing season will be a historic, if confusing, time for American taxpayers as they grapple with the intricacies of the vastly revised Federal income tax system for the first time.


Merrill Lynch Resignation
LEAD: Ken Miller, vice chairman of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, is resigning to start a company that will invest in leveraged buyouts and other ventures.


Jazz: Sandra Reaves-Phillips
LEAD: SANDRA REAVES-PHILLIPS is a big-voiced Southern blues belter who belongs squarely in a tradition that extends from Ma Rainey through Dinah Washington.
But the singer, who is appearing at the Top of the Village Gate in a show called ''Heart to Heart, My True Confessions,'' would like to be more than that.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: The Market Index chart in Business Day last Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday carried incorrect values for all dates before Jan. 30.
The values should have been two points higher.


INDIAN HOSTAGE CASE BRINGS UP QUESTIONS ABOUT RURAL JUSTICE
LEAD: When the Rural Justice Center looked for a place exemplifying some of the most vexing problems of rural justice in the United States, it came here to Robeson County, which has a volatile population mix of whites, blacks and Indians, and a District Attorney who has put more people on death row than any prosecutor in the United States.


U.S. Role in Korean Jet Downing Merits Inquiry
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Box
LEAD: QUESTION: Babe Ruth was switched from pitching to the outfield because of his ability to hit the ball even better than he pitched it.
Just how good a hitter was Ruth as a pitcher?


KOCH AND CUOMO: A CONTRAST IN BUDGET FORECASTS
LEAD: As Governor Cuomo and Mayor Koch presented their budget plans for next year recently, a listener could be forgiven for wondering if the two men lived in the same state.
Despite the stock market plunge in October, Mr.
Cuomo, who presented his budget to the State Legislature last month, gave an optimistic appraisal of the economy.


No Way to Cut Strategic Nuclear Weapons
LEAD: To the Editor:


Murdoch Agrees to Sell The Post to Developer
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch announced yesterday that he had agreed to sell The New York Post to Peter S. Kalikow, a New York City real-estate entrepreneur.
But the $37 million sale is contingent upon significant concessions from The Post's labor unions, and Mr.
Kalikow has given no guarantee that the newspaper will be kept open in any case.


New York City, the Landlord: A Decade of Housing Decay
LEAD: A decade after it began accumulating a vast stock of rundown apartment houses, New York City finds itself unable to manage them, repair them, return them to private landlords or improve the abysmal conditions for the tens of thousands of people living in them.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; Bold on Charity, Bashful on Publicity
LEAD: When his name surfaced last month in connection with a Congressional appropriation of $8 million to build schools in France for refugees from North Africa, Zev W. Wolfson was appalled.


The Anger in Bob Dole Is One Key to His Power
LEAD: A Senate supporter of Bob Dole said recently: ''Bob Dole never forgives and never forgets.
You know if you cross him, you've got problems.''


Sports World Specials
LEAD: More Than a Fantasy The problem with fantasy sports camps is not that the average person doesn't harbor fantasies of hitting a home run to win the World Series, it's that the average person would like to sustain those fantasies.


Don't Fear for NATO
LEAD: Many Americans believe that the Soviet Union could overwhelm NATO defenses in a conventional war in Western Europe.
They must have been surprised last week when a group of European political leaders opposed the idea that the West should build up its conventional forces before the United States ratifies the treaty banning short- and medium-range missiles.


PRESS CURBS INCREASING IN COURTS
LEAD: In almost every high-profile case tried recently in the New York courts, judges have been sealing documents, holding secret hearings, curbing lawyers' out-of-court remarks or taking other actions to limit the access of news organizations and the public to sensitive information.


Second Drug Agent Is Dead After Ambush by Suspects
LEAD: A Federal drug agent was pronounced dead Saturday, a day after he was shot in an ambush by drug traffickers.
Another agent and two suspects died in the shooting.


Man Kills 3 and Himself at Party
LEAD: A man killed three people, including his father, at a family anniversary celebration before mortally wounding himself, the police said today.


Donation to Neediest Honors Accountant As Good Samaritan
LEAD: A young C.P.A. in Mamaroneck, N.Y., who was working late one recent bitter cold night, learned that the oil had run out in the home of an elderly couple.
The man was recovering from a severe throat infection, and his wife was in bed critically ill.


Dance: Biles's Company In Three of His Works
LEAD: RICHARD BILES put steps neatly together in his choreography for the Richard Biles Dance Company, which performed Saturday night at the Nikolais-Louis Choreospace.
But the resultant dances were so bland that one longed for real flights of fancy.


Music: Boston Quartet In 4 Composers' Works
LEAD: THREE of the four composers on Sunday afternoon's program by the Boston Composers String Quartet have roots in either jazz or rock-and-roll; yet there was probably no one moment during this Weill Recital Hall event when either element spoke out directly.
The pull of popular culture in all these pieces was, I think, more fundamental than imitation blues, synthesized bop chords or syncopation.


Guard Killed by Off-Duty Officer
LEAD: A New York State correction officer was fatally shot by a New York City police officer last night in the Bronx in what the police said might have been an accident.


Italian Financier Increasing Offer for Belgian Company
LEAD: Carlo de Benedetti's investment company announced tonight that it would pay 4,000 Belgian francs, or $114, a share for up to 15 percent of the outstanding stock of Societe Generale de Belgique.


Rock: Peter Himmelman
LEAD: PETER HIMMELMAN brought simple, unquestioning rock-and-roll to the Bottom Line last Wednesday.
Fronting a four-member group of friends from his hometown of Minneapolis, Mr.
Himmelman, a guitarist and songwriter, put on a sturdy, tight show that brimmed with faith in the whole rock process and in himself as a song writer.


G.M. Chief Promises To Hold '88 Car Prices
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation will hold the prices of its cars and trucks for the rest of the 1988 model year, Roger B. Smith, the company's chairman, promised dealers here.


Post's Buyer: Pursuing A Decade-Long Passion
LEAD: The official biography of Peter S. Kalikow is a bland portrait of a New York City real-estate developer: a 45-year-old, civic-minded family man who graces the city with his buildings, gives time and money to worthy causes and has received numerous awards for his generosity and humanitarian efforts.


Whalers Make Coaching Change
LEAD: Larry Pleau, coach of the Binghamton Whalers of the American Hockey Leauge, was named today to replace Jack Evans as the Hartford Whalers' coach.


Italians Fear Taint in Stock Drop
LEAD: Until recently Raul Gardini was viewed as the embodiment of the new Italian entrepreneur: glamorous, aggressive and ready to play a role in financial markets around the world.


Diverse Musical Series Planned for Tully Hall
LEAD: The Composers' Showcase series will offer three programs at Alice Tully Hall this season.
The series opens Feb. 29 with a Leonard Bernstein Song Celebration, performed by a wide range of artists from the worlds of classical music and Broadway.
They will include Betty Comden, Adolf Green, Ben Holt, Julia Migenes and William


Dassault Plane Order
LEAD: Dassault, the French aerospace company, said Friday that it had won its first export order in more than two years when Jordan agreed to buy 20 Mirage-2000 multi-role combat aircraft.
No exact value was given, but the sale ended a lean period for Avions Marcel Dassault-Breguet Aviation.
The state-controlled company's previous significant sale had been more than two years ago, when India purchased Mirage-2000 aircraft.


Depleted Rangers Topple Penguins
LEAD: Six days ago, the Rangers lost Chris Nilan and, with him, much of their limited muscle.
On Saturday night, they lost Kelly Kisio and the scoring punch he brought.
In the last week, however, they have somehow gained both momentum and ground in the Patrick Division.


Stage: Belasco Revival, 'Girl of the Golden West'
LEAD: IT'S plain as the whiskers on a miner's face why any fella in Cloudy Mountain would give his britches for a kiss from ''The Girl.'' Not only does she run the mining camp's only saloon, but she also runs its ''academy,'' where Joe Miller's joke book serves as a primer. (''Can February march? No. But April may.


U.S. Schedules Interviews On Fate of Cuban Inmates
LEAD: ''he Federal Government has begun moving to determine the fate of 2,400 Cubans transferred last year from riot-torn prisons in Georgia and Louisiana, amid criticism of the review process and of conditions under which the Cubans are now held.


Theme of Economic Forum Is a Tighter Belt for U.S.
LEAD: They came, they skied, they chatted.


Heads for Concessions at Pan Am Is Appalling
LEAD: To the Editor:


School Plan For Australia
LEAD: University of Rochester officials and Mary Lady Fairfax, the widow of the Australian financier Sir William Fairfax, have agreed to open an American-style graduate business school near Sydney, Australia, officials of the school said last week.


Lockheed Layoffs Set
LEAD: Officials at the Lockheed Corporation confirmed during the weekend that its Aeronautical Systems Company division, which builds military air transports for the Air Force, expects to lay off 9,000 employees, mostly production workers, by next January.


Let the Music Play
LEAD: A welcome court ruling that strikes down a dissonant provision of New York City's cabaret law could encourage a jazz revival in the city.





Jordan Scores 40 And Wins M.V.P.
LEAD: From the day the National Basketball Association awarded Chicago the All-Star Game, the expectation was that it would be a weekend made for Michael Jordan.
It was.


Richard Feinson Weds Lynn Riley
LEAD: The marriage of Lynn Riley, the daughter of Mary F. Riley of Bronxville, N.Y., and the late Timbes Riley, to Richard Feinson, a son of Janice Feinson of New York and Melbourne Beach, Fla., and the late Burton Feinson, took place yesterday in Bronxville at the home of the bride's grandmother, Mrs.
John M.


Metro Matters; Long After Lisa, Tragedy of Abuse Can Still Happen
LEAD: Nearly 100 days ago, Lisa Steinberg was fatally beaten in her family's Greenwich Village apartment.
Not only could it happen again to someone else, it has.


Outdoors: Hunting From an Unusual Blind
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the excuses offered by waterfowlers who fail to shoot their limit of birds are as plentiful as pinfeathers on a young duck, I have one that is, I believe, without precedent.


Dog Shows; Westminster Opens Today
LEAD: The Westminster Kennel Club, which has been holding dog shows since 1877, making its show one of the oldest continuous sporting events in the country, opens a two-day run at Madison Square Garden this morning.
There are 2,651 dogs representing 140 breeds or varieties, and they come from 48 states (North Dakota and Hawaii are the exceptions), the District of Columbia, Canada, Puerto Rico and


Advertising; Zwiren in Chicago Wins A Product of Miles Labs
LEAD: After a three-way competition, the household products division of Miles Laboratories has assigned a Chicago agency, Zwiren &amp; Partners, its SOS Glassworks cleaner and new-products account.
The annual budget is $4.4 million.


Golf; Steve Jones Earns First PGA Victory
LEAD: Steve Jones achieved the first victory of his PGA Tour career today when he sank a 20-foot birdie putt on the second hole of a playoff with Bob Tway to win the A.T.&amp;T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.


DIAMOND SHAMROCK OFFSHORE PARTNERS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAMOND SHAMROCK OFFSHORE PARTNERS LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
27,793,000
26,943,000
Net loss
11,051,000
8,349,000
Yr sales
112,736,000
100,790,000
Net loss
11,782,000
54,594,000


Sound Way Out of the Treaty Trap
LEAD: Dumb.
Deceitful.
Self-defeating.
The Reagan Administration set senators to sputtering when it offered up a new doctrine on treaties: Administration testimony during hearings on treaty approval need not be binding on Presidents.
That doctrine, intended to protect President Reagan's Star Wars dream, prompted senatorial fury over legal treachery.


Air Force Seeking to Bar Visitors From Usual Shuttle Viewing Sites
LEAD: For safety reasons, the military wants to bar all photographers, news organizations and visitors from the usual sites for watching space shuttle launchings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, officials of the Air Force and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said yesterday.


Klecko of Jets Put on Waivers
LEAD: The verdict that Joe Klecko had been grimly expecting since he failed a team physical on Dec. 28 came yesterday.


Pit Bull to Learn New Tricks or Face Death
LEAD: After a courtroom argument over whether old dogs can learn new tricks, a Superior Court judge granted a reprieve today for a pit bull terrier named Bandit who faced death by lethal injection for biting three people.


Music: The Buffalo Philharmonic
LEAD: IF one listened closely enough during the Buffalo Philharmonic's performance in Carnegie Hall on Sunday evening, it was almost possible to hear the machinery of a career in the making.
Semyon Bychkov, the ensemble's music director, was the source of this curious and distracting sound.
The 35-year-old conductor, a Soviet emigre, has lately enjoyed a flurry of attention, fueled by several well-publicized appearances with major orchestras both in this country and in Europe, not least among them with the Berlin Philharmonic, which Mr.


CREDIT MARKETS U.S. Note and Bond Prices Down
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices declined modestly yesterday as securities dealers digested the $27 billion of new issues auctioned last week.


2 G.M. Units Raise Profits
LEAD: Fourth-quarter profits were up at two subsidiaries of the General Motors Corporation and down at a third, the companies reported today.


DIASONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIASONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
75,489,000
66,545,000
Net inc
4,686,000
b23,165,000
Share earns
.07
-
Yr sales
267,585,000
217,124,000
Net inc
15,221,000
b16,701,000
Share earns
.22
-


Accounts
LEAD: * Telemundo Group, a Spanish-language television company, to Widmann &amp; Co.


Music: Schubertiade Ends First Season
LEAD: THE 92d Street Y left Schubert on Sunday afternoon where he has always seemed most comfortable - at home, among friends.
For the final concert in the first season of its projected 10-year-long Schubertiade, the Y presented music of an exclusively intimate nature: not the works composed for the concert stage but pieces written to be heard and performed in an informal, social setting.


Bridge: Superb Collection in French Contains Fine Defensive Test
LEAD: Players who fancy their defensive skill should cover the East and South hands in the diagramed deal and make a plan for West in defending four spades.


REDMEN FALL SHORT IN FINAL MINUTES
LEAD: Boston College punctured St.
John's man-to-man defense, then went on a 12-0 spurt in the closing minutes to hand the Redmen a 80-76 defeat at Alumni Hall last night.


Chip Industry Ratio Is Steady
LEAD: The chip-making industry's leading indicator was unchanged for January, as manufacturers based in the United States, Europe and Japan reported their second consecutive month with more than $1 billion in orders, the Semiconductor Industry Association reported today.


Chess: Anna Akhsharumova Wins '87 Women's Championship
LEAD: Anna Akhsharumova was expected to run away with the 1987 United States Women's Championship and she did.
The 31-year-old Soviet emigrant who now lives in Cambridge, Mass., lived up to the forecast by scoring a perfect 9-0 in the tournament, held at the Stanley Hotel in Estes Park, Colo.


TV Review; Docudrama, 'Do Guilty Go Free?'
LEAD: MURDERERS escape punishment because of court rulings; on the other hand, the courts must act as they do. ''Do the Guilty Go Free?'' weighs the exclusionary rule, and comes down squarely in the middle.
The Home Box Office documentary will be seen on the pay-cable network at 10 o'clock tonight.


A Huge Chunk of Antarctica Is Heading Out to Sea, at a Glacial Pace
LEAD: A 90-MILE-LONG Antarctic iceberg, the latest product of an extraordinary two years of glacial breakup, seems to be plowing toward the shipping lanes at the less-than-hazardous rate of about a tenth of a mile per hour.


Gretzky, Lemieux Are Guiding Stars
LEAD: For lack of anything more significant, the theme of this year's National Hockey League All-Star Game is the Gretzkys against the Lemieuxs.


RELIANCE GROUP HOLDINGS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RELIANCE GROUP HOLDINGS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
808,669,000
877,465,000
Net inc
16,236,000
b6,249,000
Share earns
.22
-
Yr rev
3,363,214,000
3,221,669,000
Net inc
125,889,000
b62,991,000
Share earns
1.68
.50


Jazz: Jack DeJohnette at Bottom Line
LEAD: OVER the last decade, the drummer Jack DeJohnette has led bands framing New York's most gifted young jazz musicians: David Murray, Arthur Blythe, John Purcell and Chico Freeman have all moved through the ranks.
His current version of his band, Special Edition, is no different, with three extraordinarily talented stars-to-be - Greg Osby on alto and soprano saxophones, Gary Thomas on tenor saxophone and flute, and Lonnie Plaxico on bass - on the ramparts.


Japan Bank Backs Holiday Inn Notes
LEAD: Holiday Inns Inc. offered $400 million of notes yesterday, using a letter of credit from a Japanese bank to raise the notes to a top-flight rating from a speculative one.


Bork Calls Kennedy Unfair in Opposing Nomination to Court
LEAD: Robert H. Bork said today that he once urged the White House to work harder to battle the campaign against his nomination to the Supreme Court, and he accused Senator Edward M. Kennedy of ''brutality.''


TEMPLE-INLAND INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEMPLE-INLAND INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
397,900,000
355,800,000
Net inc
33,700,000
27,800,000
Share earns
1.19
.90
Yr sales
1,602,700,000
1,295,800,000
Net inc
141,400,000
80,800,000
Share earns
4.69
2.64


Pleas Meet Obstinacy As Democracy Unfolds
LEAD: Lucy Reed was standing quietly underneath a blackboard with Representative Richard A. Gephardt's picture on it when her friends began urging her to round up some more Gephardt supporters.


Occidental Net Up 90%
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter net income rose 90 percent, to $38 million, or 17 cents a share, on sales of $4.4 billion, from $20 million, or 5 cents a share, on sales of $4.2 billion in the corresponding period a year earlier.


TACOMA BOATBUILDING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TACOMA BOATBUILDING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,684,000
47,168,000
Net inc
141,000
1,222,000
Share earns
-
.10
Yr rev
31,518,000
123,167,000
Net inc
17,000
3,152,000
Share earns
-
.26


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-16


CRAIG CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRAIG CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
259,401,000
239,071,000
Net inc
787,000
193,000
Share earns
.37
.11
Shares outst
2,102,000
1,860,000
6mo rev
506,663,000
466,376,000
Net inc
1,486,000
560,000
Share earns
.73
.31
Shares outst
2,023,000
1,829,000


For Paperback Industry, Fear of Paper Shortage
LEAD: Fearing a shortage of the paper on which they print their books, publishers of mass-market paperbacks are talking about cutting back print runs on certain books and possibily not printing some books at all.
Smaller paperback houses, by contrast, are scrambling to try to get enough paper to meet their production schedules.


AMCA INTERNATIONAL LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMCA INTERNATIONAL LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
309,267,000
252,677,000
Net loss
b178,504,000
c28,495,000
Yr rev
1,110,000,000
1,090,000,000
Net loss
b187,894,000
c72,671,000
b-After special charges of $185 million for both the quarter and year.


Murdoch Sets Deadline to Close Post
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch said yesterday that he would close The New York Post in 11 days unless its unions accept cuts totaling $24 million over the next three years to enable him to sell the beleaguered newspaper to a New York real-estate developer.


MOSINEE PAPER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOSINEE PAPER CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
56,301,000
49,020,000
Net inc
1,550,000
b624,000
Share earns
.20
-
Yr sales
215,982,000
195,453,000
Net inc
5,714,000
4,678,000
Share earns
.73
.60


Highly Diverse Forest
LEAD: A new survey by botanists has found that the tropical rain forest of upper Amazonia in Peru may well have the greatest diversity of tree species of any place on earth.
At two study sites near Iquitos, as many as 300 species were identified per hectare, an area equivalent to about two and a half acres.


Beanpot to Northeastern
LEAD: Northeastern won the 36th Beanpot Tournament tonight with a 6-3 victory over Boston University before a capacity crowd of 14,451 at the Boston Garden.


Race Driver Set Back
LEAD: Roberto Guerrero, the Indy-car driver who is coming back from serious head injuries, has suffered another setback, breaking a bone in his right foot.


PENTAIR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENTAIR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
196,650,000
191,103,000
Net inc
10,695,000
4,637,000
Share earns
1.15
.54
Yr sales
789,245,000
623,876,000
Net inc
21,860,000
15,228,000
Share earns
2.25
1.76


A Job for Jesse
LEAD: Carnival time in Iowa is over at last.
It is only 273 days until Election Day; patience.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the ''Fort Chaffee Journal'' article yesterday mislocated Fort Chaffee, Ark.


Kean to Block Rise For Parkway Tolls
LEAD: Governor Kean said yesterday that he would not approve any rise in the 25-cent tolls at the Garden State Parkway's 11 toll barriers until next Jan. 1 and would consider a 10-cent increase then only if the State Highway Authority improved its ''sloppy'' financial practices and capital planning.


LILLY, ELI &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LILLY, ELI &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
904,900,000
856,300,000
Net inc
b138,200,000
c124,300,000
Share ea ns
.96
.87
Yr sales
3,643,800,000
3,322,500,000
Net inc
b643,700,000
c558,200,000
Share earns
4.41
3.89


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bank of the West, San Francisco, a subsidiary of Banque Nationale de Paris, said it had offered to combine with WestAmerica Bancorp for $18.375 a share, or a total of $100 million, in cash.
WestAmerica said it would study the proposal.


Mecham Stepping Aside for Now
LEAD: Rose Mofford said today that she was confident she could be ''a healing Governor'' as she takes over the duties and authority from Gov.
Evan Mecham, who faces impeachment and has said he will move out of his office temporarily this week.


AMERICAN FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (COLO)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (COLO)(O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
6,481,000
2,298,000
Yr net loss
11,266,000
b685,000
Share earns
-
.36
b-Net income


William Narduzzi, Columbia Coach, 51
LEAD: William (Bill) Narduzzi, the defensive coordinator and linebacker coach of the Columbia University football team for the last two seasons, died of cancer on Feb. 4 at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 51 years old.


What Non-Westers Cultures Are Able to Teach; The Speed of Change
LEAD: To the Editor:


INNOVEX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INNOVEX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,412,750
4,029,966
Net inc
269,181
301,564
Share earns
.06
.07


Hanson Unit Sells A Cement Plant
LEAD: Hanson P.L.C., the British-based conglomerate, said that one of its American subsidiaries, Kaiser Cement, had agreed to sell one of its California plants for $195 million to the Mitsubishi Mining and Cement Company.


USPCI INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USPCI INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,890,000
16,786,000
Net loss
b349,000
c1,438,000
Share earns
-
.11
Yr rev
83,652,000
56,898,000
Net inc
7,275,000
6,774,000
Share earns
.54
.54
Shares outst
13,414,000
12,513,000


Medics Search, Woman Dies
LEAD: A 65-year-old woman died of a heart attack last Friday after paramedics based just a mile from her house became lost and took half an hour to reach her, the authorities said.


Jewish Settler Kills an Arab Amid Continuing Disorders
LEAD: A Jewish settler shot and killed a Palestinian youth in this remote village today, as widespread protests marking two months of unrest continued for a second day.


COMAIR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMAIR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
23,247,000
15,246,000
Net inc
1,180,000
b795,000
Share earns
.13
-
9mo rev
63,092,000
45,478,000
Net inc
4,013,000
b744,000
Share earns
.42
-
b-Net loss


Sea-Land Ships
LEAD: The Sea-Land Corporation, a subsidiary of the CSX Corporation, said it had agreed to buy 12 container ships from Econ Associates Limited Partnership for $13 million to $14 million each.
Sea-Land said that it would operate the ships for Atlantic trade.
The ships originally cost about $47.5 million each when they were built three years ago.


Sound Is Shaped Into a Dazzling Tool With Many Uses
LEAD: USING beams of intense sound pitched above the limit of human hearing, scientists are learning to create novel substances that are expected to spawn remarkable technologies in the next century.


MAGMA COPPER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAGMA COPPER (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
101,500,000
94,700,000
Net loss
b37,500,000
16,700,000
Yr rev
405,900,000
347,300,000
Net loss
40,900,000
58,100,000
b-Included a $25 million reserve for loss to close out forward sales contracts covering about 47 million pounds of copper during the first quarter of 1988.


WEIRTON STEEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEIRTON STEEL CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
331,261,000
313,764,000
Net inc
b15,694,000
b10,030,000
Yr sales
1,329,012,000
1,173,812,000
Net inc
b80,565,000
b30,057,000
b-Includes a provision for profit sharing of $7,847,000 and $40,282,000 for the latest quarter and year, respectively, compared with $5,015,000 and $15,028,000 for the year-ago periods, respectively.


Standard Shares Climb on New
LEAD: Spurred by an increased bid from the Black &amp; Decker Corporation of $65 a share, American Standard Inc.'s stock climbed $3 yesterday, to $66.875 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Analysts said Black &amp; Decker's new offer, totaling $2.1 billion, was an attempt to put pressure on American Standard directors to negotiate.


Jury in Alaska Acquits Man in In-Law's Death
LEAD: A Superior Court jury has acquitted a former Anchorage businessman of first-degree murder in the slaying of his brother-in-law, with whom he was involved in a child custody fight.


Life and Death of a Broadway Producer
LEAD: Norman Kean seemed to lead an enviable life.
He produced one of the longest-lived shows on Broadway, and it was running in his own theater.
He had a vivacious, talented wife and a teen-age son they adored, an apartment on Riverside Drive and a summer home in Montauk, L.I.
He was a tough and knowledgeable business negotiator, and his neighbors on Long


LTV, Reorganizing, Earns $140.6 Million
LEAD: The LTV Corporation said today that it had earned $140.6 million in the fourth quarter of last year, compared with a $470.1 million loss in the 1986 quarter.


ZYGO CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZYGO CORPORATION
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,837,000
5,079,000
Net loss
57,000
309,000
6mo sales
10,328,000
9,223,000
Net loss
347,000
946,000


Organizations Raise Money To Give to the Neediest Cases
LEAD: Each year, from mid-June until after Christmas, a large glass bottle stands in the vestibule of the Episcopal Church of the Atonement in the Bronx to receive donations for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
A contest is held among the church schoolchildren who are invited to guess the amount of coins and bills collected.


Sandinista Denies Leaders Are Split
LEAD: Interior Minister Tomas Borge, who has been at the center of recent reports of dissent among Sandinista leaders, says differences on the nine-man National Directorate do exist, but do not threaten Government unity.


Flemish Bolster Societe Generale
LEAD: As the stock of Societe Generale de Belgique soared 16 percent today in fevered trading, an alliance of largely Belgian institutions said it held a 27.5 percent stake in the company.


Wildflower Bill Keeps Us Competitive
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cast of 'Sarafina!' Performs in Harlem
LEAD: The cast of the South African musical ''Sarafina!'' journeyed from Broadway to Harlem yesterday to perform in the morning for more than 700 schoolchildren and in the evening to benefit an unusual Harlem theater.


REAGAN ASSAILS DRUGS AND PERMISSIVENESS OF PAST
LEAD: President Reagan came to Duke University here today to accuse past American leaders of tolerating drug abuse and to highlight the South's importance for the political fortunes of the Republican Party this year.


Iris Vinton, 82, Author Of Novels for Children
LEAD: Iris Vinton, an author of many children's books, died of breast cancer Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 82 years old.


Urgent Effort to Save Ducks Begins in U.S. and Canada
LEAD: Alarmed by a steep decline in the number of ducks and other waterfowl in North America, the United States and Canada are embarking on a last-ditch effort to rebuild the flocks of the migratory birds.


Rises After Filing
LEAD: Federated Department Stores Inc.'s shares rose $2.50, to $59.125, on the New York Stock Exchange amid speculation that the company might receive a higher takeover offer from the Campeau Corporation or a third party.
The company has spurned a $61-a-share bid from Campeau.


GENERAL SIGNAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL SIGNAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
422,188,000
374,257,000
Net inc
21,169,000
17,672,000
Share earns
.76
.62
Yr sales
1,603,026,000
1,583,368,000
Net inc
69,378,000
74,622,000
Share earns
2.46
2.60


Top Meredith Executive Adds Post of Chairman
LEAD: The Meredith Corporation, a diversified media company whose publications include Better Homes and Gardens magazine and The Ladies' Home Journal, said yesterday that its board had elected Robert A. Burnett, the president and chief executive, to the additional position of chairman.
Mr.
Burnett assumed his new duties yesterday.


ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,189,900,000
1,153,600,000
Net inc
104,200,000
71,500,000
Share earns
.85
.58
Yr rev
4,435,900,000
4,379,400,000
Net inc
323,100,000
260,900,000
Share earns
2.65
2.13


Contra Leaders Set Up a Fund For Aid in U.S.
LEAD: Nicaraguan rebel leaders said today that they had set up a fund to collect private donations in the United States and that they would postpone peace talks with the Nicaraguan Government scheduled for this week.


Change at Pepsi-Cola Brings a New Officer
LEAD: The Pepsi-Cola Company, the soft-drink subsidiary of Pepsico Inc., announced a restructuring yesterday that establishes four geographic divisions.
The restructured organization will be headed by Craig E. Weatherup, who has 14 years' experience in the company's international and domestic sales and marketing operations.


Dr. Richard Page, 76; Invented a Dental Drill
LEAD: Dr.
Richard Wilson Page, a dental surgeon and inventor who developed the first high-speed dental drill, died of bone cancer last Tuesday at Columbia Memorial Hospital in Hudson, N.Y.
He was 76 years old and lived in Churchtown, N.Y.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Skiing  McKinney and McGrath Win: Tamara McKinney, whose season was interrupted by a broken leg, overtook five others on the second run yesterday to win the women's slalom at the United States Alpine championships at Copper Mountain, Colo.
McKinney, who placed third Saturday in giant slalom in her first competition of the season, said her victory would give her confidence a needed lift heading into the Olympics.


PROGRESSIVE CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROGRESSIVE CORPORATION (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b10,399,000
c12,804,000
Share earns
.36
.45
Yr net inc
b93,460,000
c64,680,000
Share earns
3.23
1.98
b-After securities losses of $16,887,000 for the quarter and $1,566,000 for the year, and a gain of $3,705,000 for the both periods from an accounting change.


CONNECTICUT ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONNECTICUT ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
46,442,000
44,965,000
Net inc
3,569,000
3,119,000
Share earns
1.00
.89
Yr net inc
7,334,000
b7,998,000
Share earns
2.08
2.29
b-Includes a gain of $1,911,000 from an accounting change.


For Snow, the Real Action Begins After It Falls
LEAD: THE Eskimos have about four dozen words to describe snow and ice, and Sam Colbeck knows why.


Justices Favor Appeals In Occupied Territories
LEAD: Israel's High Court of Justice has urged the Government to create an appeals court in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, a step long advocated by human rights lawyers who cite the military court system as a major grievance in the current Palestinian unrest.


Hussein Attends a Meeting of Common Market Ministers
LEAD: King Hussein of Jordan with President Richard von Weizsacker, right, during welcoming ceremonies in Bonn.
The King later spoke before a meeting of Foreign Ministers of Common Market nations on Israeli handling of Palestinian protests.
Later, Ministers issued statement deploring measures. (Agence France


Alas Cabbage Patch! On to a Spaghetti-Eating Robot
LEAD: Dancing dogs and teddy bears in tutus filled the halls, electronic board games and ball games cluttered the rooms, dolls that use computers and robots that eat spaghetti lined the shelves - but not a child was in sight.


CONVEX COMPUTER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONVEX COMPUTER (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
20,172,000
12,921,000
Net inc
b2,326,000
c1,407,000
Share earns
.13
.08
Shares outst
17,882,000
16,924,000
Yr rev
69,647,000
40,182,000
Net inc
b8,845,000
c3,994,000
Share earns
.49
-
Shares outst
18,013,000
14,778,000


MOORE MCCORMACK REOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOORE MCCORMACK REOURCES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
91,613,000
84,964,000
Net inc
5,431,000
4,210,000
Share earns
.45
.36
Yr rev
357,767,000
334,148,000
Net inc
21,574,000
b116,485,000
Share earns
1.80
-


U.S. Drafting Gloomy Report on U.N.
LEAD: An official report being prepared by the United States suggests that support at the United Nations for the United States viewpoint on international affairs has fallen to a record low, but some American and United Nations officials say the report is based on misleading data.


Almost 'Got to Give God Credit,' Robertson Says in Thanking Staff
LEAD: Pat Robertson's ''invisible army'' came out in force tonight for the former television evangelist, helping him to reshape Republican Presidential politics.


SYNBIOTICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYNBIOTICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,568,000
1,355,000
Net loss
b41,000
56,000
9mo rev
5,069,000
3,420,000
Net inc
b328,000
c164,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $18,000 for the quarter; the year includes a tax credit of $144,000.


Karate-Kick Slaying Suspect To Return to New York City
LEAD: The suspect in the karate-kick slaying of a 24-year-old man in Manhattan waived extradition to New York City yesterday in a hearing in California, a police official said.


St. John the Divine Show For U.S.-Soviet Ties
LEAD: An of evening of music and dance, featuring Paul Winter, Paul Halley, the Omega Dance Company, the New York Russian Chorus and Tamir, a Russian actress, is planned tonight at 7:30 at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Stree.


Gene Gotti Allowed To Remain Out of Jail
LEAD: A Federal judge refused yesterday to revoke Gene Gotti's bail, allowing him to remain out of jail until the outcome of his new trial on racketeering and drug charges.


SALOMON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SALOMON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,329,000,000
1,727,000,000
Net loss
b74,000,000
c81,000,000
Share earns
-
.54
Yr rev
6,003,000,000
6,789,000,000
Net inc
142,000,000
516,000,000
Share earns
.86
3.45


Nicholas Roerich, Artist, Author, Peace Builder
LEAD: To the Editor:


Judge Expedites Players' Appeal
LEAD: A Federal judge today speeded up an appeal by National Basketball Association players.
The players are appealing his ruling on labor law exemptions claimed by the league but contested by the players.


Meese Will Travel This Week To Spain, Italy and Mexico
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, who faces a rising number of calls for his resignation, will make trips to Spain, Italy and Mexico in the next week.


TENERA LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TENERA LP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,300,000
9,900,000
Net inc
2,100,000
2,300,000
Share earns
.23
.27
Yr rev
36,200,000
35,300,000
Net inc
9,000,000
7,100,000
Share earns
1.00
.88
Year-ago results are pro forma.


Stage: Repertorio Espanol's 'Revoltillo'
LEAD: THE troubles of the Marquez family are as amusing in Spanish as in English, and the tongues of its members may be sharper.
Eduardo Machado's ''Revoltillo,'' one part of a trilogy about this Cuban-American clan that was first seen in English under the title ''Broken Eggs'' at the Ensemble Studio Theater in 1984, has now been added to the roster of Repertorio Espanol in


Rig Count Rises Slightly
LEAD: After falling sharply in the previous week, the number of oil and gas drilling rigs working in the United States rebounded somewhat last week, increasing by 22, to a total of 986, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
The rig count had dropped by 62 in the previous week.
This week's total reflects the number of rigs working as of last Friday.


Plan to Insure Home Value Brings Chicago Racial Rift
LEAD: Hoping to calm the fears of homeowners in racially or economically changing neighborhoods, this city is debating a plan that essentially attempts to insure against white flight.


Concert: New York City Symphony
LEAD: TAN DUN, whose music was the sole concern of Sunday's concert by the New York City Symphony at Avery Fisher Hall, is a Chinese composer working with Western materials.
He brought us, among other things, a piano concerto, a piece for violin and orchestra (''Out of the Peking Opera'') and a new symphony with vocal quartet called ''The Great Wall.


F.D.I.C. to Sell Bad Loans
LEAD: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation plans to sell $1.8 billion in bad loans it absorbed from the 1984 bailout of the Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company, an agency spokesman said today.


Within the Arms Debate, a 2d Debate
LEAD: The Reagan Administration effort to win speedy approval of the new missile treaty has been set back by a constitutional debate that seems to have nothing to do with the terms of the new accord.


Senators Soothe Europe on Arms Pacts
LEAD: A group of leading senators told the European allies today that the Senate would not cooperate in a headlong rush to approve a treaty limiting strategic nuclear weapons before the end of the Reagan Presidency.


The Latin Peace Bet
LEAD: President Oscar Arias shows a sense of urgency now in pushing for the next steps in his Central American peace plan.
He rightly hailed the House vote against aid for Nicaragua's contras as an ''opportunity'' and a ''big responsibility for us'' in Central America, not in itself decisive.


By Design; Covering Gray Hair
LEAD: Some women actually enjoy watching their hair silver as they age.
But gray has a way of draining color from the skin.


Protest Over AZT Price Led to the Arrest of 19
LEAD: Late in January, 19 people were arrested in a demonstration at the distribution center owned by the Burroughs Wellcome Company in Burlingame, Calif.


Washington Talk: The Presidency; Drug Issue May Mar Mexico Talks
LEAD: President Reagan travels to Mexico on Saturday for talks with President Miguel de la Madrid, and by all accounts the two chiefs of state intend to spend a lot of time smiling and patting each other on the back.


DIBRELL BROTHERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIBRELL BROTHERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
192,100,000
125,400,000
Net inc
3,100,590
2,856,522
Share earns
.91
.82
6mo sales
285,300,000
182,100,000
Net inc
6,408,606
5,304,562
Share earns
1.87
1.51


Addendum
LEAD: * Livingston &amp; Co., Seattle, will open a San Francisco office on March. 1.


DIAGNOSTIC-RETRIEVAL SYSEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAGNOSTIC-RETRIEVAL SYSEMS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
16,569,000
16,765,000
Net inc
753,000
918,000
Share earns
.13
.16
9mo rev
46,026,000
38,775,000
Net inc
2,552,000
1,986,000
Share earns
.45
.35


Topics of The Times; The Winter Budget Games
LEAD: The new Federal budget hasn't been printed yet, but the flim-flam has already begun.


College Hockey Notebook; Center Sparks St. Lawrence
LEAD: Pete Lappin, the senior center from St.
Charles, Ill., was in the thick of the action as usual when St.
Lawrence earned two key victories on home ice against Colgate and Cornell last weekend.


Marchi, Backing Koch, Opposes Pension Rise
LEAD: Backing Mayor Koch, a key state lawmaker said today that he would oppose a bill to increase the pensions of former New York City and state workers.


5 Charged in Texas In Savings Inquiry
LEAD: Officials heading a Federal investigation of fraudulent transactions in the Texas savings industry today disclosed the first set of what they said would be dozens of criminal charges against former industry executives and real estate brokers.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''I'm going to be the nominee.''  - Pat Robertson.  [ B6:1. ]


GENERAL MOTORS ACCEPTANCE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL MOTORS ACCEPTANCE CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
235,000,000
296,200,000
Yr net inc
1,453,200,000
1,185,100,000
The 1987 consolidated net income included the results of GMAC's financing, insurance and mortgage operations.


Brokerage's Parent Cited
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today charged the parent of London &amp; Norwich Investment Services Ltd., a firm closed last week by British authorities, with violating United States laws.


U.S. Takes a Wait-and-See Stance on Afghan Pullout Offer
LEAD: Administration officials, expressing wariness about Mikhail S. Gorbachev's plan to begin a 10-month Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan by May 15, said today that other issues besides the timetable had to be resolved before the United States would agree to end aid to the Afghan rebels.


MOMENT OF TRUTH FOR S.A.S. HEAD
LEAD: Jan Carlzon, the tall, blond 46-year-old president of Scandinavian Airlines System, is Sweden's answer to Lee A. Iacocca: a charismatic executive who revitalized a major corporation and then wrote a runaway best seller about his managerial exploits.


2 Bolshoi Dancers Defer 'Symphony in C' Debut
LEAD: Andris Liepa and Nina Ananiashvili, the two Bolshoi Ballet principals who are to be guest artists with the New York City Ballet, will not dance on Thursday as previously announced.
A City Ballet spokesman said there was insufficient rehearsal time for their debut in ''Symphony in C,'' which is to take place next week.


U.S. Officials Praised Drug Effort by Noriega
LEAD: Letters of praise for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the miltary ruler of Panama, have come back to haunt the United States Drug Enforcement Administration and the Justice Department.


What Non-Western Cultures Are Able to Teach
LEAD: To the Editor:


Adams-Millis
LEAD: The Adams-Millis Corporation said it had agreed to be acquired by the Sara Lee Corporation in a stock swap worth at least $13 a share, or about $61 million.
Adams-Millis said that amount might be raised to $16 a share, depending on its cash flow for 1988.
Adams-Millis is an apparel maker that produces Hanes brand socks under license from Sara Lee.


GM HUGHES ELECTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GM HUGHES ELECTRONICS CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,656,000,000
2,578,000,000
Net inc
b108,300,000
c69,500,000
Share earns
.36
.27
Yr rev
10,481,000,000
10,440,000,000
Net inc
b521,100,000
c445,100,000
Share earns
1.67
1.48


Kickoff Classic Picks the Aggies
LEAD: Texas A&amp;M was selected to play in the season-opening Kickoff Classic today.
There was no announcement of Texas A&amp;M's opponent for the game, set for late August, although speculation centered on Pittsburgh.


Richmond Reinstated
LEAD: Tim Richmond's Nascar license was reinstated yesterday after the driver passed a second drug test administered by the stock-car sanctioning body.


Possible Violations of Stock Rule Investigated
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange and the Securities and Exchange Commission have been investigating rumors that subversion of a key selling rule may have contributed to the October collapse, the chairman of the Big Board, John J. Phelan Jr., said yesterday.


White House Reneging On Tax-Reform Deal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollar Slips After Brief Rise Tied to Remarks of Officials
LEAD: The dollar slipped fractionally lower against most major currencies in quiet trading yesterday, while gold prices were mixed.


U.S. Faults Thais for Turning Back Refugees
LEAD: United States officials said today that they were gravely concerned about Thailand's new practice of turning away Vietnamese refugees.


CASH AMERICA INVESTMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CASH AMERICA INVESTMENT (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
16,044,000
3,779,000
Net inc
1,094,000
b37,000
Share earns
.16
-
Yr rev
39,481,000
13,189,000
Net inc
2,741,000
414,000
Share earns
.47
.15
Shares outst
5,881,705
2,834,451


Finder of Errant Files
LEAD: THE file vanished on Groundhog Day.
Not a shadow of it could be found in any of the logical hiding places.
I knew it was in there somewhere, burrowed snugly in the 40 megabytes of hard disk on my writing machine, but where?
Forty megs is a big hiding place, and I was looking for a relatively small file: a recipe for Josh's Megabite


LTV CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LTV CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,986,000,000
1,916,700,000
Net inc
140,600,000
b470,100,000
Share earns
1.17
-
Yr rev
7,581,800,000
7,271,400,000
Net inc
502,600,000
b3,268,300,000
Share earns
4.24
-


VOTRAX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VOTRAX INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,653,000
1,488,000
Net inc
205,000
b88,000
Share earns
.07
-
6mo sales
5,179,000
3,504,000
Net inc
405,000
50,000
Share earns
.13
.02
b-Net loss


One Physician Takes A Novel Stand Against Patients Who Smoke
LEAD: DR.
JOHN J. Cannell remembers how, at the age of 6, he watched his father, a cigarette smoker, die a wretched death from lung cancer.


The Ruin of a Building Owned by New Yrk
LEAD: During the month of December, the window casing in Theresa Santiago's bathroom, for months twisted and swollen by water damage, finally fell out of the wall and crashed into her bathtub.


VERIT INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERIT INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,212,000
7,640,000
Net loss
52,000
b225,000
Share earns
-
.30
6mo sales
5,597,000
18,874,000
Net loss
120,000
b445,000
Share earns
-
.59
b-Net income


Giuliani Announces Decision Not to Run For Moynihan Seat
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that he would stay on as the United States Attorney in Manhattan and would not challenge Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan this year.


Nofziger Closes Defense at Trial Without Testifying About Charges
LEAD: Lawyers for Lyn Nofziger rested their case today without calling the former White House political director as a witness against charges that he illegally lobbyied for the Wedtech Corporation and other private clients in 1982.


Children's Rights
LEAD: To the Editor:


American Brands To Sell Baker
LEAD: American Brands Inc. agreed to sell its Sunshine Biscuits Inc. unit to G. F. Industries.
American Brands declined to disclose details of the deal other than to say it was for cash.
Privately held G. F. Industries operates the Granny Goose snack food business, principally on the West Coast.


Board of Regents Faces New Attack From Politicians
LEAD: The State Board of Regents, which was set up as a semi-autonomous body to keep it isolated from political pressures, is now under attack from politicians who complain that it has failed its mission of improving the state's educational system.


ITEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ITEL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
350,100,000
70,800,000
Net loss
b900,000
c1,800,000
Yr rev
1,274,000,000
288,700,000
Net inc
b8,300,000
d55,700,000
Share earns
-
2.77
b-After an extraordinary charge of $7.3 million to cover the anticiapated costs of resolving the antitrust charges against units for the quarter and year.


COLUMBIA SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLUMBIA SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b34,826,000
c24,841,000
Share earns
-
.67
Yr net inc
119,349,000
193,526,000
Share earns
3.04
5.40
b-Reflects a pretax loss of $52,184,000 on sales of securities and a $22,372,000 provision for losses on investment securities and loans receivable.


Graphic Industries Buys Sorg Stake
LEAD: Graphic Industries said that it had bought a 6 percent stake in Sorg Inc. and that it might seek control of the New York financial printing concern.


Lightning Strikes Plane In Germany, Killing 21
LEAD: A commuter airliner was struck by lightning and crashed today, killing all 21 people aboard, the authorities said.


COACHMEN INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COACHMEN INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
78,509,250
72,231,495
Net loss
3,258,042
117,938
Yr sales
367,606,858
348,849,261
Net loss
1,763,824
b4,368,572
Share earns
-
.53
b-Net income


LAM RESEARCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAM RESEARCH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Sales
11,800,000
5,667,000
Net inc
b906,000
c984,000
Share earns
.11
-
6mo sales
22,306,000
10,246,000
Net inc
b1,572,000
c2,905,000
Share earns
.20
-


Maddox More Balky In the Brawley Case
LEAD: Alton H. Maddox Jr., the lawyer for Tawana Brawley, said last night that the 16-year-old would not cooperate with authorities until arrests were made in her case.


Buyout Bid Is Received By Stevens
LEAD: J. P. Stevens &amp; Company, the giant textile producer, has received a $696 million leveraged-buyout proposal from five of its top executives, the company's board said yesterday.


BARDEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARDEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
20,031,070
18,740,385
Net inc
1,025,084
616,501
Share earns
.64
.39


Shearson Is Charged By Gencorp
LEAD: Gencorp Inc. today accused Shearson Lehman Brothers of improperly giving privileged information to hostile bidders during a 1987 takeover battle.


LEE GOODMAN, AN ACTOR AND COMEDIAN, 64
LEAD: Lee Goodman, an actor and nightclub comedian, died Saturday at his home in Manhattan at the age of 64.


CINCINNATI FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINCINNATI FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b21,650,000
c18,584,000
Share earns
1.35
1.15
Yr net inc
b93,154,000
c93,471,000
Share earns
5.81
5.79
b-After a realized capital loss of $4,923,000 for the quarter and a realized capital gain of $2,440,000 for the year.


GREYHOUND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREYHOUND CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
714,614,000
559,004,000
Net loss
b43,227,000
de100,865,000
Share earns
-
2.29
Yr rev
2,501,360,000
2,280,736,000
Net inc
c25,102,000
e188,805,000
Share earns
.62
4.18


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Friday about a dispute over bids submitted to the General Services Administration described Bell Atlantic's position incorrectly.
The company maintains that it has done nothing wrong, and it has not offered to give up its contracts.


EASTERN UTILITIES ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTERN UTILITIES ASSOCIATES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
97,296,422
85,530,512
Net inc
10,984,949
b7,722,872
Share earns
.85
.66
Shares outst
12,934,459
11,634,441
Yr rev
367,128,525
343,323,930
Net inc
43,545,672
32,489,580
Share earns
3.46
2.82
Shares outst
12,596,381
11,537,677


Inquiry for Austria Declares Waldheim Knew of War Crimes
LEAD: A commission of historians charged by the Austrian Government to look into President Kurt Waldheim's wartime record reported today that he must have been aware of atrocities committed around him and did nothing about them, and that he tried to conceal his military past.
But the panel said it had no evidence that Mr.


Our Towns; Trying to Tell Us We're Too Young For Blackjack
LEAD: You are supposed to be 21 to gamble in an Atlantic City casino, but Kim Cohen started at 15, first with slots, then blackjack. ''My girlfriend said: 'Why waste time on the slots?
Make it faster at blackjack,' '' Kim said.
One day, this friend had 10 minutes to kill before her after-school job - and won $40.


Air Cleaners At Plants Recalled
LEAD: Citing workplace contamination by a low-level radioactive substance, the Government today announced the recall of more than 1,000 dust-catching devices used in the bottling of beverages, cosmetics and drugs.


FIRST-MORTGAGE ISSUE BY UTILITY
LEAD: The Commonwealth Edison Company offered $200 million of 10 1/4 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2018 at a price of 99 1/4 to yield 10.332 percent through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.


Court Backs Fed on Bank Underwriting
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled unanimously yesterday that the Federal Reserve Board was legally correct in allowing banks to underwrite certain types of securities through special subsidiaries.


All Together Now
LEAD: FOR many users of I.B.M.
PC's and compatibles, Better Working Eight-in-One may be the only computer program they will ever need.
Even people who have more ambitious requirements in one or two areas may find that Eight-in-One is just fine in the others.


SOVIET SETS MAY 15 AS GOAL TO START AFGHANISTAN EXIT
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev announced today that the Soviet Union would begin withdrawing its troops from Afghanistan on May 15 if the Geneva talks on the war there result in a settlement two months before that date.


The Shame of New Jersey's Mental Hospitals
LEAD: To the Editor:


ADAMS-MILLIS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADAMS-MILLIS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
58,109,000
58,012,000
Net inc
2,015,000
2,254,000
Share earns
.43
.47
Yr sales
198,358,000
178,264,000
Net inc
5,961,000
6,036,000
Share earns
1.26
1.28


HOLLY SUGAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOLLY SUGAR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
101,904,000
80,798,000
Net inc
198,000
1,782,000
Share earns
.18
1.59
9mo rev
286,653,000
236,499,000
Net inc
3,932,000
4,068,000
Share earns
3.51
3.63


TRUDY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRUDY CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,985,500
1,636,000
Net inc
21,100
1,300
9mo sales
5,308,100
5,080,000
Net loss
17,200
36,100


Richmond Hill Grieves for Girl Beaten to Death
LEAD: Jamie Antomattei stopped his bicycle yesterday afternoon in front of the wooden stairs on 89th Avenue near 122d Street in Richmond Hill, Queens, where the police had put up yellow tape to keep people out.


Calcutta Journal; A Communist Who's Gone Far, but Not Far Left
LEAD: For as long as anyone can remember, this crowded and squalid old city has danced to the rhythm of labor strikes, political agitations and Marxist theorizing.


Primerica Will Sell 81% Musicland Stake
LEAD: The Primerica Corporation agreed today to sell its 81 percent stake in Musicland Group Inc. for about $330 million in a move to reduce the debt from its takeover of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company last year.


WHEELABRATOR TECHNOLOIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WHEELABRATOR TECHNOLOIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
260,900,000
258,200,000
Net inc
6,600,000
1,300,000
Share earns
.23
-
Yr rev
1,004,100,000
849,200,000
Net inc
25,100,000
4,800,000
Share earns
.83
-


Books of The Times
LEAD: THE PAPERCLIP CONSPIRACY.
The Hunt for the Nazi Scientists.
By Tom Bower. 309 pages.
Little, Brown. $17.95.


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Washington Talk: Briefing; Mail Order Business
LEAD: Along with just about every other outfit in the free enterprise system, it seems, the Government Printing Office is getting into the mail order business.
Later this month, mailing lists of subscribers to and buyers of Government periodicals and publications will be made available by the office's Superintendent of


JWP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JWP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
191,340,000
134,300,000
Net inc
6,095,000
4,120,000
Share earns
.49
.34
Yr rev
637,100,000
378,900,000
Net inc
22,200,000
13,510,000
Share earns
1.80
1.20


Fire Damages Office Building
LEAD: A smoky fire broke out shortly before midnight yesterday in a six-story Midtown office building and was still burning out of control at 2:25 A.M. today.
About 135 firemen battled the three-alarm blaze, which began on the fourth floor of the building at 552 Seventh Avenue near 40th Street, fire officials said.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From 86
AMCA International Ltd.
[178,500,000)
-
Brunswick Corp.
33,800,000
+32.0
Electronic Data Systems
104,200,000
+45.7
GM Hughes Electronics Corp.


XL-DATACOMP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XL-DATACOMP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
48,573,000
33,228,000
Net inc
2,477,000
b193,000
Share earns
.35
-
b-Net loss and includes a one-time charge resulting from elimination of the investment of credit; the company did not give the amount of the charge.


Careers; How to Help Out-of-Work Managers
LEAD: NO man is an island, the poet John Donne wrote years ago, and out-of-work middle managers surely appreciate the importance of networking.


Washington Talk: Congress; Bradley About-Face on Contras Proves Intriguing
LEAD: Senator Bill Bradley has long been known as a maverick.


Alien Amnesty Effort Is Found to Be Falling Short
LEAD: Participation in the Government's immigration amnesty program is likely to fall well below original projections, according to a comprehensive study made public yesterday.


INTERNATIONAL FLAVORS &amp; FRAGRANCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL FLAVORS &amp; FRAGRANCES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
179,290,000
145,654,000
Net inc
21,314,000
16,959,000
Share earns
.56
.45
Yr rev
745,861,000
620,679,000
Net inc
107,017,000
85,683,000
Share earns
2.83
2.29


Space Station Chief Announces Retirement
LEAD: An-drew J. Stofan, the head of the Govern-ment's program to build a space sta-tion, announced his retirement today.


CHEROKEE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEROKEE GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
33,178,000
24,603,000
Net inc
2,276,000
1,627,000
Share earns
.17
.14
Shares outst
12,953,083
11,255,174
Yr sales
139,631,000
104,001,000
Net inc
10,397,000
6,792,000
Share earns
.83
.60
Shares outst
12,476,007
11,255,174


CHECKPOINT SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHECKPOINT SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,802,000
11,234,000
Net inc
902,000
2,669,000
Share earns
.10
.28
Shares outst
8,894,000
9,615,000
Yr rev
35,430,000
35,649,000
Net inc
2,056,000
6,208,000
Share earns
.22
.65
Shares outst
9,486,000
9,581,000


Dionne Proceeds With No Apologies
LEAD: MARCEL DIONNE was ending his post-game news conference in the middle of a rapidly emptying locker room Sunday afternoon, eager to get to the showers and then to the trainer's table for treatment of his chronically arthritic left knee.
But as he turned and began to limp off, a final question was called at him.


Action Due on Times Sq. Plan
LEAD: The huge, long-awaited plan for redevelopment of Times Square is moving closer to reality as the directors of the Urban Development Corporation are expected today to authorize long-term leases with one of the project's largest development concerns.


PITT STAR ENTERS PLEA
LEAD: Craig Heyward, Pitt's all-America running back, was ordered yesterday to perform 50 hours of community service after pleading guilty in Pittsburgh to disorderly conduct.
Heyward, 22 years old, was also ordered by Magistrate Joan Melvin to pay $150 in restitution to a University of Pittsburgh police officer whose glasses were broken during a Jan.


NORTHWEST NATURAL GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHWEST NATURAL GAS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
41,415,000
36,142,000
Net inc
10,716,000
6,612,000
Share earns
.99
.56
Yr rev
136,447,000
134,872,000
Net inc
b24,716,000
19,629,000
Share earns
2.21
1.74


MILITARY SATELLITE LAUNCHED TO TEST ANTI-MISSILE PLAN
LEAD: An unmanned Delta rocket launched a three-ton military satellite into space yesterday afternoon as part of the most complex and costly experiment yet in President Reagan's anti-missile program.


NRM ENERGY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NRM ENERGY CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,315,000
11,477,000
Net loss
12,532,000
14,346,000
Yr rev
56,282,000
52,925,000
Net loss
44,197,000
24,300,000


Responsible for Leafs
LEAD: John Brophy, the Toronto Maple Leafs' coach, has been given added responsibilities following the dismissal of Gerry McNamara, the club's general manager.


TIDEWATER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIDEWATER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
41,532,000
36,390,000
Net loss
10,391,000
17,575,000
9mo rev
111,291,000
114,110,000
Net loss
b20,186,000
c44,042,000
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $1,068,000 and a gain on disposal of assets of $13 million.


37 Pit Bulls and a Man Held In Colorado Dog Fight Raid
LEAD: The authorities have raided a suspected illegal dog-fighting operation here, arresting a man and seizing 37 pit bull terriers leashed to their dog houses.


Japan-Pretoria Trade
LEAD: Japan's leading business organization urged member companies today to restrain their trade with South Africa, following a Government plea.
The Federation of Economic Organizations ''asked member firms to voluntarily restrain themselves from trading with South Africa,'' the director, Masaya Miyoshi, said.


The Troubling Cost of Drugs That Offer Hope
LEAD: The Armour Pharmaceutical Company introduced a major drug in October - the first blood-clotting factor for hemophiliacs made using the tools of biotechnology.
This purer version of Factor VIII virtually eliminated any chance that hemophiliacs would contract AIDS, hepatitis or other diseases from treatment.


TERADYNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TERADYNE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
96,122,000
85,095,000
Net loss
b11,219,000
1,885,000
Yr sales
377,658,000
351,068,000
Net loss
21,107,000
11,826,000
b-Includes charges of $10,455,000 related to product line restructuring and merger and consolidation expenses.


How Jersey City Team Rose to Top
LEAD: Although it probably won't get him back his No. 1 national ranking, Bob Hurley Sr., the basketball coach at St.
Anthony High School in Jersey City, got a measure of revenge last week.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Airline Delays Up in December
LEAD: Flight delays increased sharply in December, partly because of harsh weather that disrupted traffic at some of the busiest airports, the Transportation Department said today.


Sleaze Control for City Politics
LEAD: A bill now before the City Council offers a promising antidote to sleaze.
It would establish public financing of city election campaigns, similar to the system used in national Presidential races since 1976.
Today's Council vote on the measure will reverberate in Albany and across the country.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Unexpected Proposal
LEAD: An inside Washington brouhaha erupted a few days ago when officials at the Federal Reserve Board let it be known that the Treasury's rather shy and professorial chief economist, Michael R. Darby, had sent a letter to some of the board's governors advising them that they allow interest rates to go down.


McDonald's Test
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company are teaming up in a test that offers hamburgers from the fast-food chain at Sears stores.
McDonald's and Sears are trying the idea at a store in Pittsburgh and investigating ''a few other locations,'' Sears told The Chicago Sun-Times.


Administrator For Surrogates Will Resign
LEAD: The Manhattan Public Administrator, whom state officials recently accused of mismanaging the estates of people who die without proper wills, said yesterday that he would resign upon the appointment of a successor.


WICOR INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WICOR INC (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
677,602,000
740,054,000
Net inc
20,533,000
21,103,000
Share earns
2.85
3.18


Key Rates
LEAD:  In percent
$
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.61
6.58
6.29
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.65
5.69
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.95
5.96
5.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.99
7.94
7.05
30-YR.


ULTIMATE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ULTIMATE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
51,702,381
41,665,897
Net inc
4,196,246
4,130,091
Share earns
.43
.42
9mo rev
149,985,579
120,300,735
Net inc
13,005,821
9,395,346
Share earns
1.32
.98


Market Place; Mutual Fund Investors Wary
LEAD: IN the aftermath of the October market slump, mutual fund investors continue to tread the path of caution.
They are shying away from aggressive stock funds and, in the fixed-income area, they tend to favor bond funds with short maturities.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q. Why do trees grow straight up all over the world?
Why don't they point toward the sun?


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Saturday about Dr.
Edward S. Tauber, a psychiatrist and writer, misstated the date of his death.
Dr.
Tauber died last Wednesday.


Stake Is Increased In Postal Instant
LEAD: A New York insurance holding company, the Orion Capital Corporation, has raised its stake in Postal Instant Press Inc. to 12.7 percent and might increase its stake ''to 20 percent or more.'' The move could revive a takeover battle between Postal Instant Press and the Kane-Miller Corporation.


Advertising; Marketers Prepare for Cup Races
LEAD: Dennis Conner and his crew are not the only ones scrambling to get ready for the America's Cup races to be held off Long Beach, Calif., in September, three years earlier than the defenders had planned.


Six Climbers Die in Britain
LEAD: Rescuers today found the bodies of two mountain climbers lost in a blizzard in Wales, bringing to six the number of climbers killed in weekend accidents.
Air force and volunteer teams found the bodies in northern Wales, one in Snowdonia's Ogwen Valley and the other in the Garn area of the mountains.


2 Admit to Arson to Fight Drugs
LEAD: Two men upset over drug trafficking in their neighborhood admit they have set fires to drive out crack dealers.
They say it has worked.


Dole Wins in Iowa, With Robertson Next
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole of Kansas won a clear victory in the Iowa Republican caucuses tonight, and Pat Robertson, the former television evangelist, pushed Vice President Bush into third place.


Tickets to Michael Jackson Concerts Sell Out in 4 Hours
LEAD: Prospective concertgoers outside Madison Square Garden to obtain tickets for the Michael Jackson concerts on March 5 and 6.
Tickets sold out in four hours after a lottery was held to see who could purchase them. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


Korean Surplus Grows
LEAD: Helped by rising exports and increased tourism, South Korea's current account surplus reached $9.8 billion in 1987, Bank of Korea officials said today.
The current account, which includes trade in goods and services, was up sharply from $4.6 billion in 1986, officials of the central bank said.
The December current account surplus widened to $942 million, from $857 million in November and $478 million in December 1986.


CHEMED CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEMED CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
99,653,000
92,803,000
Net inc
4,733,000
21,293,000
Share earns
.54
2.38
Yr sales
391,004,000
359,476,000
Net inc
20,362,000
37,633,000
Share earns
2.28
4.21


ADVANCED TELECOMMUNICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANCED TELECOMMUNICAIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,352,000
18,254,000
Net inc
2,387,000
1,295,000
Share earns
.30
.23
Shares outst
8,046,000
5,618,000
9mo rev
63,503,000
43,177,000
Net inc
7,057,000
3,099,000
Share earns
.87
.55
Shares outst
8,158,000
5,645,000


Topics of The Times; Vital Partnership
LEAD: Next month, Towers on the Park, a 600-unit condominium at Central Park West and 110th Street, opens its doors.
It's the latest monument to the work of the New York City Partnership, whose founder and chairman, David Rockefeller, stepped down yesterday.


PATTERNS
LEAD:  7th Ave. Meets Wall St.


Patrick V. Doyle Hotelier, 65
LEAD: Patrick Vincent Doyle, Ireland's leading hotelier, died Saturday after undergoing heart surgery.
He was 65 years old.


DURR-FILLAUER MEDICAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DURR-FILLAUER MEDICAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
140,038,000
126,026,000
Net inc
2,318,000
1,879,000
Share earns
.30
.24
Yr rev
533,881,000
488,747,000
Net inc
6,802,000
6,460,000
Share earns
.87
.82


ADAGE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADAGE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
9,026,000
11,610,000
Net loss
21,973,000
1,913,000
9mo rev
30,904,000
31,487,000
Net loss
26,186,000
8,574,000
The company said the latest third quarter includes a charge of $19,360,000 related to writedown of inventory, capital equipment and goodwill pertaining to the consolidation of product lines, and the 9 months includes a charge of $20,460,000 for the expenses of consolidating product lines, plus separation costs associated with employment reduction


Official Promoting, Too, Went Off Into Space
LEAD: Conflicting desires for secrecy and publicity have been apparent in the military's planning for yesterday's launching of a research satellite as a test of a missile defense in space proposed by the Reagan Administration.


Tiny Balloons May Help Open Fallopian Tubes
LEAD: GYNECOLOGISTS in Chicago have borrowed a technique used to unclog coronary arteries to clear blocked fallopian tubes, a major cause of infertility in women.


Nebraska's Governor Bounces Back
LEAD: When the members of Nebraska's one-house Legislature returned here for a new session recently, they were greeted by the Governor handing out bouquets of flowers.
Later, Kay A. Orr, the first Republican woman to become the governor of a state, fondly remembered one comment: ''Maybe she's confident enough to still be feminine.


Some New and Old Tactics For Last-Minute Tax Trims
LEAD: With the sweeping revisions in the tax law, taxpayers searching for last-minute ways to trim their income tax bills will need to turn to some new strategies, as well as some old ones.


DIVERSIFIED INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIVERSIFIED INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
46,696,000
36,218,000
Net loss
b3,258,000
c2,863,000
Yr sales
156,769,000
149,369,000
Net loss
b2,192,000
c1,128,000
b-After net from discontinued operations of $529,000 and $995,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and the quarter also includes a loss of $253,000 from the reversal of a tax loss carryforward.


JEFFERSON-PILOT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERSON-PILOT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b17,766,000
c29,749,000
Share earns
.45
.74
Yr net inc
b147,696,000
c123,113,000
Share earns
3.72
3.02
b-After a loss of $2,328,000 for the quarter and a gain of $56,489,000 for the year, both on investments.


Farmers Group
LEAD: B.A.T.
Industries said it would hold an extraordinary general meeting Feb. 24 to seek shareholder approval for its previously announced proposal to buy Farmers Group Inc. for $4.2 billion.
The board of Farmers, a Los Angeles-based insurance company, has rejected the $60-a-share offer.


CENTRAL JERSEY SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL JERSEY SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,123,156
865,004
Share earns
.88
.68
9mo net inc
3,116,460
2,423,228
Share earns
2.44
1.99


Virus Bars Diabetes In Mice
LEAD: VIRUSES have been described as pieces of bad news wrapped in protein, but a new study suggests that a virus infection can be life-saving good news, at least in mice prone to diabetes.
Also, there may be lessons in the research for treatment of human disease, according to a report in the journal Science.


Raw Sugar Prices Plunge; Less Soviet Demand Feared
LEAD: Raw sugar futures prices plunged the limit allowed for daily trading yesterday on indications of weakening Soviet demand, analysts said.


HASBRO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HASBRO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
378,431,000
358,817,000
Net inc
6,783,000
17,235,000
Share earns
.11
.29
Shares outst
55,181,000
58,479,000
Yr rev
1,345,089,000
1,344,653,000
Net inc
48,223,000
99,159,000
Share earns
.82
1.70
Shares outst
55,563,000
58,569,000


FERNANDEZ AGREES TO METS' TERMS
LEAD: The Mets reduced their salary arbitration load yesterday by reaching agreement with Sid Fernandez on a $580,000 salary for the coming season.
The biggest salaries of the day, however, were gained by two other pitchers, Ted Higuera of Milwaukee and Orel Hershiser of Los Angeles, who had been two of a dozen players seeking $1 million or more in arbitration.


ELDORADO MOTOR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELDORADO MOTOR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
17,098,152
17,871,905
Net loss
214,281
b30,057
Share earns
-
.01
6mo sales
37,157,647
35,271,716
Net loss
113,163
b229,888
Share earns
-
.09
b


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Atlantic Bank of New York, a subsidiary of the National Bank of Greece S.A., appointed as senior vice presidents: Marcy S. Cohen, John Gomilas, William O'Louglin and Peter Xanthopoulos.


SOUTHMARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHMARK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
200,197,000
167,553,000
Net inc
10,871,000
12,095,000
Share earns
.02
.07
6mo rev
434,041,000
374,704,000
Net inc
30,382,000
24,368,000
Share earns
.23
.16


As Hems Dither, Pants March On
LEAD: Pants, including pants suits, are on the march.
Out of the mainstream of fashion for the last few seasons, overshadowed by the rage for fluttery clothes and short skirts, they are back in strength.
Last month in Paris, couture designers, who never paid much attention to trouser fashions even in their heyday in the 1970's, gave them a surprisingly strong place in their spring and summer collections.


THERMEDICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THERMEDICS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
5,195,000
4,705,000
Net inc
357,000
122,000
Share earns
.02
.01
Yr rev
20,103,000
15,848,000
Net inc
b1,216,000
c596,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Includes a tax benefit of $231,000.


OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,389,000,000
4,169,000,000
Net inc
bc38,000,000
20,000,000
Share earns
.17
.05
Yr sales
17,096,000,000
15,344,000,000
Net inc
bc240,000,000
bc181,000,000
Share earns
1.06
.72


The Post: 187-Year Fight to Survive Wildly Political and Violent Heritage
LEAD: ''It was a terrible headache,'' said Dorothy Schiff, the 84-year-old former owner of The New York Post, as she looked back yesterday on the 37 years she owned the paper before selling it to Rupert Murdoch in 1976.


Hypothermia Researchers Take a Frigid Dip
LEAD: HOT water bottles, electric heaters and warm blankets may be no help at all to people suffering the effects of extreme cold, according to six Canadian researchers who found out the hard way.


8 Somalis Sentenced to Die; Charge Is Plotting Sabotage
LEAD: A special court has sentenced a former Vice President and seven other people to death by firing squad for plotting against the Government of President Mohammed Siad Barre.


Breathe Life Into Amnesty for Aliens
LEAD: Time runs out for many undocumented aliens hoping to stay in the United States.
The 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act provided amnesty for those in this country since 1982.
But it's a painstaking process, and they must apply by May 4.
There would be real justice in extending it, but that means


Poppe Tyson Picked By Summit Banks
LEAD: Poppe Tyson, which just moved its New Jersey office from Union to Morris Plains, has been selected to handle the Summit Bancorporation account after a two-month review of a half-dozen agencies.
The budget, which is more than $1 million, will be primarily devoted to print campaigns, possibly followed by some local radio spots.


Michael Jackson Shows Sell Out in 4 Hours
LEAD: Tickets for Michael Jackson's concerts at Madison Square Garden next month sold out yesterday in slightly more than four hours.


WESTERN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSOCIATION (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,641,000
b3,923,000
Per share
.27
-
Yr net inc
33,406,000
30,171,000
Per share
2.23
1.80
b-Net loss


Samaranch Blasts Drugs and Boycotts
LEAD: The 93d session of the International Olympic Committee opened today with Juan Antonio Samaranch, the I.O.C. president, strongly criticizing athletes who cheat by using drugs and nations that cheat their athletes by boycotting the Olympics.


Stunning Result Carries a Grim Message for Bush
LEAD: Iowa produced a stunning Republican result tonight, one that promised to alter dramatically the course of the 1988 Presidential campaign.
A surprisingly feeble showing by Vice President Bush raised insistent questions about his chances of winning the nomination, even though almost every major politician had been decribing him for months as the favorite.


Baker Proposes a 'Club' of Free-Trading Nations
LEAD: Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d threatened today to form a club of free-trading countries that would keep out nations that do not reduce their barriers to imports.


NEECO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEECO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
31,147,000
18,974,000
Net inc
1,347,000
794,000
Share earns
.31
.25
Shares outst
4,420,263
3,269,108
9mo sales
77,239,000
40,400,000
Net inc
3,351,000
1,530,000
Share earns
.75
.51
Shares outst
4,494,868
2,992,218


SUNGARD DATA SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNGARD DATA SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
24,934,000
20,020,000
Net inc
2,298,000
929,000
Share earns
.22
.10
Shares outst
10,499,000
9,095,000
Yr rev
91,118,000
69,053,000
Net inc
8,215,000
5,490,000
Share earns
.81
.64
Shaes outst
10,190,000
8,636,000


76 NAME LYNAM COACH
LEAD: Matt Guokas, who stepped out of the broadcast booth of the Philadelphia 76ers on June 1, 1985, to succeed Billy Cunningham as the coach of the team, was dismissed yesterday.
He was replaced by Jimmy Lynam, his chief assistant, who will handle the team for the remainder of the season.


Sedona Journal; 'Psychic Energy' and the Pot of Gold
LEAD: Entrepreneurs in this picturesque hamlet in northern Arizona recently discovered a new source of income: driving jeep-loads of tourists into the surrounding rose-colored mountains in search of ''psychic energy.''


U.S. General Tells of 'Shady' Dealings by Noriega
LEAD: The former commanding general of the United State Southern Command, based in Panama, said today that although Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega of Panama was a ''venal'' politician, American Embassy officials described him as extremely cooperative in helping the United States crack down on drug trafficking.


JEPSON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEPSON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
116,409,000
101,823,000
Net inc
2,434,000
2,379,000
Share earns
.12
.14
Shares outst
19,341,000
17,500,000
Yr sales
530,064,000
446,794,000
Net inc
18,286,000
b16,012,000
Share earns
1.01
.92


Air Decontrol Benefits Cited
LEAD: Airline deregulation has lowered fares, saving consumers $100 billion, the Federal Trade Commission said in a report issued today.
The number of airline passengers increased 50 percent between 1978 and 1986.


Text of Gorbachev Statement Setting Forth Soviet Position on Afghan War
LEAD:


People
LEAD: *
Patrick T. Furey, Linda Honan and Vicki J. Tencati have been promoted to senior vice presidents, management supervisors at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton.


BRUNSWICK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRUNSWICK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
798,400,000
471,300,000
Net inc
33,800,000
25,600,000
Share earns
.38
.31
Shares outst
89,300,000
83,600,000
Yr sales
3,086,400,000
1,717,400,000
Net inc
168,800,000
110,300,000
Share earns
1.90
1.32
Shares outst
89,000,000
83,800,000


DOUGLAS &amp; LOMASON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOUGLAS &amp; LOMASON CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
83,159,140
72,898,661
Net inc
2,675,601
189,509
Share earns
1.29
.09
Yr rev
296,722,695
286,535,826
Net inc
6,239,481
3,192,826
Share earns
3.07
1.66


CUMMINS ENGINE CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CUMMINS ENGINE CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
754,342,000
638,654,000
Net loss
4,449,000
b2,458,000
Share earns
-
.16
Yr sales
2,767,363,000
2,303,731,000
Net inc
13,879,000
c107,331,000
Share earns
.55
-


Washington Talk: Briefing; Belt Tightening
LEAD: A popular summer education program for Federal judges is being discontinued this year, the victim of budget tightening throughout the judicial branch.


CANADIAN PACIFIC LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANADIAN PACIFIC LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b35,000,000
d194,000,000
Share earns
.11
.65
Yr net inc
b826,000,000
cd80,000,000
Share earns
2.75
-
b-After special charges of $164 million for the quarter, and gains of $190 million for the year.


3 Advance to Westminster Show Final
LEAD: Ch.
NMK's Brittania V. Sibelstein, a German short-haired pointer from California, became the first finalist in the 112th annual Westminster Kennel Club show, which opened a two-day run in Madison Square Garden yesterday.


Measles Cases Decline After 3 Years on Rise
LEAD: Measles is on the decline again after rising for three years, Federal health researchers report, but eradication, once believed to be at hand, may not come soon.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Justice's Autobiography
LEAD: Justice Thurgood Marshall, the only black to sit on the Supreme Court, has agreed to do an autobiography with the help of the columnist Carl Rowan.
Justice Marshall told a reporter he had signed a contract with Little, Brown &amp; Company for the project and hoped for publication in the spring of 1989.


ARITECH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARITECH CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
31,914,000
25,844,000
Net inc
820,000
843,000
Share earns
.27
.29
Yr sales
118,063,000
103,508,000
Net inc
3,622,000
3,110,000
Share earns
1.20
1.05


GENRAD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENRAD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
50,688,000
53,564,000
Net inc
b1,118,000
cd1,527,000
Share earns
.07
-
Yr rev
193,771,000
177,059,000
Net loss
b37,045,000
d29,895,000
b-After net of $1,864,000 for the quarter and a loss of $39,125,000 for the year, both from discontinued operations.


Jersey Agriculture
LEAD: The New Jersey Department of Agriculture has retained Gillespie Advertising, Princeton, N.J., as its agency of record after a five-way review of local agencies lasting three months.
The budget is $1 million.
Gillespie, which created the ''Jersey Fresh'' slogan for the department's first major campaign, was initially chosen to handle the account four years ago.


THE KNICK FROM QUEENS
LEAD: HIS father used to come up with seats in the red section, which wasn't easy in the middle 1970's, but Mark Jackson wanted a closer look.
As soon as he was old enough to go to the Garden on his own, he would wait outside the players' entrance.


CNW CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CNW CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
252,375,000
239,990,000
Net inc
2,314,000
16,703,000
Share earns
.04
.93
Yr rev
957,152,000
959,490,000
Net inc
b27,553,000
43,040,000
Share earns
1.29
2.31


Viacom Owner Acts on Orion
LEAD: A group led by Sumner M. Redstone, the owner of Viacom International Inc., said yesterday that it had asked Federal antitrust regulators for clearance to increase its stake in the Orion Pictures Corporation.
If approved, the Redstone group said, it would increase its holdings to 36 percent of Orion's stock, from 26.8 percent.


Antimissile Byproducts
LEAD: The ''Star Wars'' antimissile program may not save the nation from nuclear Armageddon anytime soon, but it at least might help give the President a new and improved lightweight flak jacket.


DOWNEY SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOWNEY SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,742,000
8,436,000
Share earns
.35
.79
Yr net inc
b33,191,000
55,155,000
Share earns
3.10
5.36
b-Includes about $4.1 million in writedown of assets for both the quarter and year.


India Tests Alternatives In Bid to Control Malaria
LEAD: India, which spends millions of dollars on pesticides to fight malaria-bearing mosquitoes, is starting to concentrate on cheaper, environmentally safer ways of controlling the insects.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Settler Kills Palestinian  A Jewish settler killed a Palestinian youth in the West Bank as protests called to mark two months of unrest continued for a second day.
Page A6.
U.S.
Troops and Panama  Panama's leader called for American military headquarters for Latin America to be withdrawn.


DATA-DESIGN LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA-DESIGN LABORATORIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,420,000
18,316,000
Net inc
1,795,000
25,000
Share earns
.27
-
6mo rev
53,379,000
35,571,000
Net inc
3,515,000
6,187,000
Share earns
.53
.94


Noriega Calls for U.S. Military to Leave
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the military ruler of Panama, said today that he wanted United States military headquarters in Latin America to be withdrawn from Panama.


The Stage: Five One-Act Comedies
LEAD: IN Mary Gallagher's one-act play, ''Perfect,'' two single women compare notes on prospective mates.
Mary Testa (an actress not averse to mugging) has found a man who is her match in every department, with the possible exception of politics.
As she confides to her friend, the appealing Janet Zarish, ''I will not sleep with anybody who voted for him.


American Perfects 'Ultimate Sledding'
LEAD: There are not many people who enjoy swooshing down a mountain at approximately 80 miles per hour, on their backs, no less.
Most of those who do enjoy it live in Europe.
But who can blame Americans for disdaining the luge?
If 80 m.p.h. is considered speeding on a highway, what must it feel like to go that fast on a small sled, feet dangling, in a posture more conducive to sleeping?


Marghanita Laski, 72, An Author and Critic
LEAD: Marghanita Laski, a novelist, critic and prolific amateur lexicographer, died Saturday, according to her family.
She was 72 years old.


ALLIANT COMPUTER SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIANT COMPUTER SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,238,000
12,260,000
Net inc
b1,872,000
c2,080,000
Share earns
.18
.24
Yr sales
53,798,000
30,763,000
Net inc
b6,581,000
c4,532,000
Share earns
.64
.53
Shares outst
10,640,000
8,498,000


ANACOMP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANACOMP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
100,664,000
26,998,000
Net inc
b11,652,000
b2,824,000
Share earns
.30
.09
b-Includes tax credits of $3,575,000 for the latest quarter and $1,352,000 for the year-earlier period.


Inquiry in Britain
LEAD: The British Boxing Board of Control says it will investigate the turmoil that broke out in the arena before Frank Tate's successful defense of his International Boxing Federation middleweight title against Tony Sibson of Britain.


TRANSAMERICA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSAMERICA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,907,000,000
1,596,322,000
Net inc
b72,400,000
c54,723,000
Share earns
.91
.69
Yr rev
7,174,000,000
6,232,403,000
Net inc
b427,200,000
c275,998,000
Share earns
5.47
3.54


Salomon Loses $74 Million in Quarter
LEAD: Salomon Inc., the parent of one of Wall Street's largest securities firms, announced late yesterday that it lost $74 million in the fourth quarter because of trading losses stemming from the stock market collapse and a series of moves to restructure its troubled operations.


Business and Health; Why I.M.S. Lures Dun &amp; Bradstreet
LEAD: THERE was wonderment, not to mention a dash of skepticism, in some financial circles when the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation announced Sunday that it was buying I.M.S.
International, a medium-sized company that collects and sells facts about the drug industry.
Why, some people wanted to know, would Dun &amp; Bradstreet, the big information services company, agree to exchange more than $1.5 billion in stock for I.M.S., which had estimated earnings in 1987 of less than $45 million?


QUEBECOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUEBECOR INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
316,657,000
133,950,000
Net inc
8,966,000
5,331,000
Share earns
.48
.30
Shares outst
18,590,000
17,831,000
The company said the revenue increase resulted from its purchase last year of a stake in Donohue Inc., as well as the acquisition of printing plants in the U.S., and a general increase at its other businesses.


NASHUA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NASHUA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
235,974,000
184,160,000
Net inc
7,156,000
b4,181,000
Share earns
.73
.43
Yr sales
865,102,000
704,221,000
Net inc
26,613,000
b20,635,000
Share earns
2.72
2.13


Richard A. Gephardt: Facing the Challenge Of Winning Again On Less Familiar Turf
LEAD: Every four years the early primaries and caucuses produce more losers than winners, but sometimes they produce more than one winner at a time.
Monday night, Iowans sent forth two official winners, Bob Dole and Richard Gephardt; a loser who seemed to win by placing, Pat Robertson; and a loser nobody was calling a winner, Vice President Bush.


Inmate Accused of Data Fraud
LEAD: A prisoner serving a 30-year term for embezzlement has been accused of tampering with computer records at the State Penitentiary, allowing him to sell about 100,000 pounds of cotton and possibly to seek early release.


10 Accused of Commodity Schemes
LEAD: In a renewed crackdown on commodity fraud, 10 people were charged today with taking part in illegal trading schemes at the Chicago Board of Trade, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Film and TV Programs Included in Arts Festival
LEAD: Experimental film making and the performing arts are the influences most strongly reflected in the film and television programming of the First New York International Festival of the Arts, officially announced today.
The festival's attention to Hollywood film making and to television qua television, on the other hand, is considerably less intense.


Canada Trade Accord Draws Fire in House
LEAD: The Reagan Administration today asked Congress to ratify a free-trade pact with Canada, saying it would provide a huge improvement in overall access for American companies in the Canadian market.
Not to ratify, it added, would be thinking small.


Santa Rosa, Calif.
LEAD: CALIFORNIANS are fond of discovering good restaurants hidden away in unlikely towns, preferably near redwoods.
If you must drive forever to get there, so much the better.
In that case, however, there must be a nice bed and breakfast nearby.


SAMNA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAMNA CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,334,000
2,154,000
Net inc
420,000
c354,000
Share earns
.17
.18
Shares outst
2,540,000
2,939,000
Yr rev
11,709,000
7,447,000
Net inc
b1,848,000
c1,365,000
Share earns
.83
.70
Shares outst
2,222,000
1,939,000


MCDERMOTT INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MCDERMOTT INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
921,291,000
792,949,000
Net inc
b106,334,000
c31,472,000
Share earns
2.86
-
9mo rev
2,562,428,000
2,338,752,000
Net loss
b219,271,000
d157,606,000
Share earns
-
4.26


Court Rejects Arson Liability
LEAD: A service-station chain cannot be held liable for damages occurring when arsonists used gasoline bought at one of its stations to set a fire that killed 25 people at a social club in the South Bronx, the state's highest court said today.


Westminster Show; Pomeranian Takes Top Dog Ribbon
LEAD: The smallest dog in the ring, a four-and-a-half-pound Pomeranian, scored the biggest victory of his career last night when he was selected by Michele Billings as the best of 2,651 dogs at the 112th annual Westminster Kennel Club show in Madison Square Garden.


Charleston May Acquire Ancient Oak
LEAD: Charleston, S.C., is within its rights to acquire a tree estimated to be 1,511 years old, according to the State Attorney General's office.
Mayor Joseph P. Riley Jr. has proposed that the city use its condemnation powers to acquire the tree and land around it for a park.
However, S. E. (Speedy) Felkel, who has owned the tree since 1963, says it's not for sale and that he'll go to court if the city tries to seize it.


SCHLUMBERGER LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCHLUMBERGER LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,297,409,000
1,094,429,000
Net inc
b315,800,000
c2,179,057,000
Share earns
1.15
-
Yr rev
4,727,019,000
4,938,420,000
Net inc
b352,640,000
c2,017,591,000
Share earns
1.27
-


Lemieux's 3d Goal Wins For Wales in Overtime
LEAD: Mario Lemieux reached another plateau here tonight in the 39th showcase game of the National Hockey League.


AMERICAN MEDICAL ELECTRONCS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MEDICAL ELECTRONCS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,102,220
2,240,680
Net inc
b277,705
c464,784
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
2,819,894
2,310,887
Yr rev
7,609,144
3,937,922
Net inc
b1,087,638
c1,044,183
Share earns
.38
-
Shares outst
2,846,992
2,100,807


Of Yarmulkes And a Rabbi At the Lords
LEAD: The question for Shimon Cohen today was this: When had there been so many yarmulkes in the Peers' Lobby at the House of Lords?


ANHEUSER-BUSCH COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANHEUSER-BUSCH COMPANIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,217,896,000
2,097,924,000
Net inc
109,579,000
93,743,000
Share earns
.37
.31
Shares outst
298,944,000
302,761,000
Yr sales
9,019,106,000
8,401,665,000
Net inc
614,679,000
517,966,000
Share earns
2.04
1.69
Shares outst
301,492,000
306,623,000


Assistance Of Lawyer Is Sought
LEAD: The assistant attorney general investigating the Tawana Brawley case said today that if Alton H. Maddox Jr. knows who assaulted the Dutchess County teen-ager, Mr.
Maddox should tell him.


Daredevils Hoping to Ski Into the Hearts of Olympic Officials
LEAD: No matter who wins what medals at the Winter Olympics in Calgary over the next two weeks, among the most watched skiing events are bound to be the freestyle competitions - both by spectators and Olympic officials.


CIRCLE FINE ART CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CIRCLE FINE ART CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,827,000
4,489,000
Net inc
304,000
143,000
Share earns
.13
.06


Nova-Polysar
LEAD: Nova, an Alberta Corporation, said that merger talks with the Polysar Energy and Chemical Corporation had failed last weekend over ''wide and irreconcilable differences over price.'' Polysar last week announced a reorganization plan that would distribute $900 million (Canadian) as an alternative to Nova's $14-a-share offer.


Pilot Found Guilty of Lying About Near Miss of Reagan
LEAD: An Army private who flew close to a helicopter carrying President Reagan last year was found guilty Monday of making false statements to investigators.


NEW YORK ADOPTS PUBLIC FINANCING OF POLITICAL RACES
LEAD: The New York City Council easily passed a bill yesterday that provides public funds to candidates in municipal elections who voluntarily agree to limits on campaign contributions and spending.


INTERSTATE SECURITIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERSTATE SECURITIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
29,364,557
25,469,287
Net loss
999,779
b817,752
Share earns
-
.16
b-Net income


Sweet and Sour: A Marriage That's International
LEAD: AS commonplace as sweet and sour may be to diners at Chinese restaurants, these flavors are now often showing up in the cuisine of leading chefs in this country and in Europe.


Big Board Seat Price Off
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange said Monday that a seat on the exchange had sold for $625,000, down $25,000 from the last seat sale Friday.
The current bid for a stock exchange seat is $575,000, and $650,000 is asked, a spokeswoman for the exchange said.


GOODYEAR TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOODYEAR TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,624,400,000
2,340,500,000
Net inc
167,000,000
b112,800,000
Share earns
2.92
-
Yr sales
9,905,200,000
9,040,000,000
Net inc
770,900,000
c124,100,000
Share earns
12.73
1.16
Shares outst
60,564,981
107,092,197


COMPUTER TASK GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER TASK GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
46,398,000
38,738,000
Net inc
1,210,000
1,260,000
Share earns
.15
.17
Yr rev
170,052,000
143,366,000
Net inc
5,110,000
5,081,000
Share earns
.66
.68
Shares outst
7,784,000
7,482,000


The Stage: 'Serious Money'
LEAD: IN its transfer to Broadway's Royale Theater, Caryl Churchill's ''Serious Money'' retains its vituperative sense of humor.
This is a neo-Restoration comedy crossed with a Jacobean revenger's tale.
As the author indicates, with all malice intended, there is no end to greed.


Head of Seminary Will Lead New York City Rights Agency
LEAD: The president of an Ohio seminary will head the New York City Human Rights Commission, Mayor Koch announced yesterday.


INTERNATIONAL HOLDING CAPIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL HOLDING CAPIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,317,000
1,888,000
Share earns
1.33
1.89
6mo net
2,188,000
2,828,000
Share earns
2.19
2.83


PETROLANE PARTNERS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PETROLANE PARTNERS LP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
172,242,000
179,483,000
Net inc
22,352,000
16,726,000
Share earns
.95
.71
Yr rev
603,151,000
614,844,000
Net inc
45,904,000
36,629,000
Share earns
1.95
1.55


Survival in China Is Like Riding a Bicycle
LEAD: To the Editor:


Advertising; Times Mirror Magazine Units
LEAD: Times Mirror Magazines has formed two publishing groups for its eight magazines, naming Robert Beauregard, 48 years old, and John Crawley, 42, as group publishers.
Mr.
Beauregard, previously a senior vice president at J. Walter Thompson, will oversee Golf magazine and Ski magazine, as well as Skiing and Yachting magazines.


PLAINS PETROLEUM LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLAINS PETROLEUM LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,231,000
4,396,000
Net inc
2,045,000
1,172,000
Share earns
.22
.13
Yr rev
24,789,000
14,101,000
Net inc
b6,930,000
9,130,000
Share earns
.76
1.00


U.S. Is Now Upbeat on Value Of Afghan Withdrawal Plan
LEAD: The White House said today that a Soviet proposal to begin a troop withdrawal from Afghanistan on May 15 was ''a positive step,'' but that more details were needed before a final judgment could be made.


Racial Case Is Detailed By Maddox
LEAD: Alton H. Maddox Jr., the Brooklyn civil rights lawyer, spoke without notes for two hours Monday night to a friendly audience at the Star of Bethlehem Baptist Church here, detailing how a young black woman from Wappingers Falls had entered the troubled history of race relations in New York.


COMPUTER NETWORK TECHOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER NETWORK TECHOLOGY
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,635,105
258,712
Net loss
140,406
655,457
Yr rev
2,873,790
349,070
Net loss
1,871,396
2,725,882


2 Bolshoi Dancers Learn New Style at City Ballet
LEAD: ''Everyone knows we're here studying Balanchine,'' Nina Ananiashvili said. ''Everyone is waiting impatiently for us to come back and show them something.'' Miss Ananiashvili and Andris Liepa looked like dancers the world over, in a recent conversation backstage at the New York State Theater.
She wore an ''I Love New York'' sweatshirt and chic leather pants and boots.


Clement G. Hurd, 80, Illustrator Of Many Children's Books, Dies
LEAD: Clement G. Hurd, illustrator of ''Goodnight Moon'' and almost 100 other books for children, died last Friday in a convalescent hospital in San Francisco.
He was 80 years old and had been ill with Alzheimer's disease for about two years.


Betting Big on a New Type of Jet Engine
LEAD: IN an increasingly competitive battle to supply the world's airlines with new planes, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and the General Electric Company are gambling on developing a new aircraft powered by a fuel-saving engine of an unusual design.


PAY-FONE SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAY-FONE SYSTEMS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,494,050
1,998,386
Net loss
48,709
b327,602
Share earns
-
.22
6mo rev
3,022,617
3,743,911
Net inc
24,532
525,343
Share earns
.02
.35
b-Net income


The Editorial Notebook; The Hazards of Arms Control
LEAD: What did the rise of Japanese militarism 60 years ago and the German pocket battleships of World War II have in common?
Both may have been fostered by the major arms control agreements of the interwar years.
With Mikhail Gorbachev pressing new treaties on the White House, the pitfalls of past attempts to control weapons are worth trying to avoid.


U.S. Opposes Job Equality Bill
LEAD: The Reagan Administration said today that it opposes a House bill that would require Federal agencies to document their efforts to comply with equal employment laws.


Levin's Injuries Are Described By a Physician
LEAD: ''Pinpoint hemorrhages'' in the soft tissue around Jennifer Levin's eyes showed evidence of a compression of her neck, indicating she had apparently been strangled, a doctor testified yesterday.


John D. Tracy, Biaggi Aide, 88
LEAD: John D. Tracy, the executive assistant to Representative Mario Biaggi, died of a heart attack Friday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 88 years old and lived in the Bronx.


CULBRO CORP reports earnings for 14wks to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CULBRO CORP (NYSE)
14wks to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
242,811,000
206,055,000
Net inc
3,570,000
c2,402,000
Share earns
.83
.56
Shares outst
4,287,000
4,284,000
53wk rev
915,646,000
952,180,000
Net inc
b31,468,000
c25,649,000
Share earns
7.34
6.00
Shares outst
4,287,000
4,278,000


Chinatowns Find New Venues and New Dishes
LEAD: CHINATOWNS are on the move: from the city centers of San Francisco, Los Angeles and New York to the suburbs and outer boroughs.
And Chinese food is following, from Cantonese and Sichuan menus featuring dishes like orange beef and moo shu pork, to a sophisticated cuisine from Hong Kong emphasizing artfully presented seafood.


FORT HOWARD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORT HOWARD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
421,194,000
385,608,000
Net inc
28,859,000
20,131,000
Share earns
.43
.30
Yr sales
1,757,728,000
1,549,290,000
Net inc
157,738,000
146,391,000
Share earns
2.34
2.18


Williams Is Given Keys To Open Road
LEAD: In a couple of hours, Doug Williams would at last be back in Zachary and he had every desire that the sparkling red sports car next to him on the New York City ballroom floor should arrive in that tiny Louisiana municipality shortly thereafter.


About Real Estate; Office Complexes Displace Jersey Barns
LEAD: Until the mid-1970's, Freehold, a Monmouth County town in central New Jersey, depended for its economic well-being mostly on fertile farmland and to a lesser extent on an influx of summer visitors drawn by the county's oceanfront resorts.


CILCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CILCORP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
101,450,000
119,117,000
Net loss
6,401,000
b6,449,000
Share earns
-
.47
Yr rev
454,523,000
489,621,000
Net inc
34,240,000
49,831,000
Share earns
2.52
3.67


PANTERA'S CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PANTERA'S CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
40,371,000
6,574,000
Net loss
1,784,000
b581,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo rev
69,487,000
12,062,000
Net loss
2,502,000
b788,000
Share earns
-
.14
b-Net income


Massachusetts Ratings Raised
LEAD: The bond ratings of Massachusetts were raised yesterday by Moody's Investors Service and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, just a few days before the commonwealth plans to sell $200 million of bonds.


Oh What A Lovely Life
LEAD: Movies often inspire the young with dreams of the future.


For the Poor of Calcutta, a Threat to Mobility
LEAD: To some, the hand-pulled rickshaw makes life a little more efficient in one of the world's most unlivable cities.
To others, it is a degrading anachronism symbolizing the city's inhumanity.


CHILI'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHILI'S INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
52,011,000
42,513,000
Net inc
1,268,000
1,520,000
Share earns
.21
.27
6mo rev
104,623,000
84,078,000
Net inc
4,210,000
3,124,000
Share earns
.70
.55


Advertising; Martin/Williams Wins Mercruiser Account
LEAD: The Mercury Marine division of the Brunswick Corporation, based in Fond du Lac, Wis., has assigned its Mercruiser brand of boat stern drives and inboard propulsion systems to Martin/Williams Advertising in Minneapolis.
Its budget is $1.5 million.
The previous agency was Carmichael-Lynch, also of Minneapolis.


In Soviet Baltic, an Unintended Openness
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev's calls for increased openness and democracy have had the unintended effect of encouraging the Soviet Union's nationalist groups to step out of the shadows and agitate more openly for greater autonomy.


STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS REEARCH reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS REEARCH (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
17,302,000
14,617,000
Net inc
1,435,000
989,000
Share earns
.23
.21
Shares outst
6,249,000
4,713,000
Yr rev
61,206,000
51,570,000
Net inc
3,588,000
1,865,000
Share earns
.69
.40
Shares outst
5,220,000
4,713,000


Death of Black Man After Arrest in Texas Is Ruled a Homicide
LEAD: The death of a black truck driver who witnesses say was beaten by the police after his arrest in Hemphill, Tex., was ruled a homicide at an inquest today.


BROWN &amp; SHARPE MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROWN &amp; SHARPE MANUFACTURING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
46,163,000
42,640,000
Net inc
485,000
b933,000
Share earns
.14
-
Yr sales
152,045,000
137,684,000
Net loss
1,167,000
1,246,000
b-Net loss


Miners Approve Pact as Separate Talks Continue
LEAD: Members of the United Mine Workers have approved a five-year contract with major coal operators, and talks are scheduled to resume here Wednesday on a separate contract with the Pittston Coal Group.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: MAMA DAY. By Gloria Naylor. 312 pages. Ticknor &amp; Fields. $17.95.


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 10, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


GTE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GTE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,074,827,000
3,993,867,000
Net inc
b334,220,000
c268,245,000
Share earns
.99
.79
Shares outst
327,546,000
331,284,000
Yr sales
15,421,030,000
15,111,528,000
Net inc
1,118,817,000
1,184,312,000
Share earns
3.29
3.53
Shares outst
329,171,000
326,309,000


HEIST, C H CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEIST, C H CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,001,000
10,419,000
Net inc
486,000
102,000
Share earns
.34
.06
Shares outst
1,423,210
1,530,337
6mo sales
24,843,000
21,932,000
Net inc
1,123,000
420,000
Share earns
.79
.27
Shares outst
1,424,112
1,530,337


WASHINGTON POST CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON POST CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
355,022,000
333,494,000
Net inc
b64,418,000
36,271,000
Share earns
5.01
2.82
Yr rev
1,315,422,000
1,215,064,000
Net inc
c186,743,000
100,173,000
Share earns
14.52
7.80


In Iowa, Networks Address the Robertson Factor
LEAD: BRYANT GUMBEL asked Pat Robertson on NBC's ''Today'' show yesterday morning why he had been so mad at Tom Brokaw on Monday night.
Mr.
Robertson didn't answer, although he did say he was a ''religious broadcaster'' and not an ''evangelist.'' In the television coverage of the Iowa caucuses, an issue had arisen.


Education; Turnover Speeds Search for College Presidents
LEAD: Ever since 1637, when a board of 12 overseers elected Nathaniel Eaton as the first head of Harvard, colleges and universities have been trying to refine the process by which they select their presidents.


Court Backs New York's Right To Order Building's Top Razed
LEAD: New York State's highest court ruled yesterday that New York City can force the developer of a 31-story apartment building, erected on a site zoned for no more than 19 stories, to tear down the top 12 floors.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Saturday about telephone companies' earnings misstated Bell Atlantic's involvement in computer hardware.


Hodel's Plea to Abby
LEAD: His wife hasn't ditched him, his boss isn't picking on him and his children aren't hanging out with the wrong kind of crowd, but Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel has written a ''Dear Abby'' letter.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An architecture review of ''Stanford White's New York'' on Monday misstated the address of the exhibition site, the New York School of Interior Design.
It is 155 East 56th Street.


SILVERCREST INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SILVERCREST INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
16,189,000
16,542,000
Net inc
b38,000
c510,000
Share earns
.01
.16
6mo rev
36,187,000
31,507,000
Net inc
b603,000
c1,012,000
Share earns
.18
.31


Why the Delay
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Nanci Griffith


Ambrose Nugent, 78, Korean War Prisoner
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Ambrose H. Nugent, a prisoner of war in Korea who was later tried and acquitted of charges of collaborating with the enemy, died after a long illness Monday in Spohn Hospital in Corpus Christi, Tex..
He was 78 years old and lived in Corpus Christi.


College Basketball; Smith Opens Up as Georgetown Wins
LEAD: It seems that at some point in nearly every Georgetown game this season, Coach John Thompson has had to remind Charles Smith that he always has the green light to shoot.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Edward Haymes will join J. Walter Thompson later this month as executive vice president for finance and administration.


PIONEER GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIONEER GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
13,260,000
14,037,000
Net inc
2,642,000
2,588,000
Share earns
.43
.42
Yr rev
61,434,000
55,180,000
Net inc
b13,464,000
10,184,000
Share earns
2.19
1.66


Giuliani Had Veto Power Over Successor, D'Amato Says
LEAD: Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said today that he had given the United States Attorney in Manhattan, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the right to approve his own successor.


About New York; Kvetch, Kvetch: A Little Shop Of Hardware
LEAD: Somewhere in the back of the hardware store, amid the jumble of what an impractical eye could only catalog as arcana, was a letter that George Washington wrote to Thomas Jefferson.
Jack Gasnick, the owner of the letter and the co-owner of the shop, along with his brother Walter, had called to say he had the letter, this being the season of Washington's birthday and all, but then he had forgotten he had called.


COMDIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMDIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,207,000
22,308,000
Net loss
4,819,000
b2,158,000
Yr rev
88,764,000
78,396,000
Net loss
7,504,000
b4,601,000
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $375,000 for the quarter and $1,201,000 for the year.


California's High Court Broadens Use of Illegally Obtained Evidence
LEAD: The California Supreme Court has ruled that statements by suspects that were illegally obtained by the police may be admitted as evidence if the suspects choose to testify at their trial.
The decision upset longstanding rules barring the use of illegally seized evidence in criminal trials in the state.


The Next Generation at Cray
LEAD: Cray Research Inc. will introduce its newest and most powerful supercomputer on Wednesday, hoping it will be viewed as a symbol not of what the company was but of what it will be.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


McKesson Sale Of Stationer
LEAD: The McKesson Corporation plans to divest itself of its unprofitable office products operation.
McKesson said on Monday that it had agreed to combine the unit with the Stationers Distributing Company Inc. of Fort Worth, a wholly owned subsidiary of the privately held SDC Corporation, exchanging inventory and certain other assets in return for a 20 percent equity interest in the combined operation.


Director of San Francisco Opera Resigns
LEAD: Terence A. McEwen, general director of the San Francisco Opera since 1982, resigned yesterday afternoon.
The announcement was made at a news conference in San Francisco by Tully M. Friedman, president of the San Francisco Opera Association.


GENERAL DEVELOPMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL DEVELOPMENT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
132,044,000
101,721,000
Net inc
5,572,000
6,313,000
Share earns
.64
.71
Yr rev
475,946,000
388,627,000
Net inc
23,096,000
22,604,000
Share earns
2.60
2.67
Shares outst
8,890,000
8,462,000


Sports People; Virginia Bound
LEAD: While his father was searching in Iowa for delegates to the Democratic National Convention, Yusef Jackson was sifting through athletic scholarship offers from such universities as Duke, Syracuse, Wake Forest, Richmond, Rutgers and William &amp; Mary.
On Monday, the son of Jesse Jackson cast his vote.
The 6-foot-3-inch, 215-pound linebacker at St.


PHOENIX RE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHOENIX RE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,165,542
9,820,853
Net inc
1,730,136
530,955
Share earns
.43
.41
Shares outst
4,055,271
1,303,470
Yr rev
39,852,915
17,047,037
Net inc
5,531,806
1,083,549
Share earns
1.61
.83
Shares outst
3,428,582
1,303,470


'Frugal Gourmet': A Minister Makes Food His Mission
LEAD: ON a misty morning, just up the steep hill from Puget Sound, Jeff Smith was charging through the bustle of the Pike Place Market here, working his way from steelhead to salmon to squid.
He was brought to a halt in front of Jack's Fish Spot and Crab Pot by a stranger who stuck out his hand and introduced himself as Chris Peters of Seattle.


Roswell Journal; The Darker Side Of a Beloved Founder
LEAD: When Roswell King Sr. founded this town just north of Atlanta in 1838, he built the flour and cotton mills that would drive its economy.
He and his son Barrington laid out the village, donated land for public buildings and churches, and lured plantation owners from Georgia's mosquito-infested coastal lowland.


TERMIFLEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TERMIFLEX CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,411,804
1,259,704
Net inc
67,852
99,988
Share earns
.05
.07
6mo sales
2,617,125
2,759,294
Net inc
132,504
196,144
Share earns
.10
.14


And Still the Hostages Remain in Beirut
LEAD: To the Editor:


Superior Industries
LEAD: The Vista Group Ltd. said it and Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. had made a $16-a-share, $96 million offer to cquire Superior Industries of Van Nuys, Calif., in a leveraged buyout.
Superior, a manufacturer of aluminum and custom-made auto wheels said it was uninterested in holding talks.
Superior said in a statement that the offer to discuss such a transaction had come from both companies.


CINCINNATI MICROWAVE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINCINNATI MICROWAVE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
20,914,000
28,365,000
Net inc
b2,719,000
c449,000
Share earns
.17
.03
Yr sales
80,886,000
99,540,000
Net inc
b10,912,000
c11,488,000
Share earns
.68
.70


Test Program Monitors Parolees With Electronic Sensor on Ankle
LEAD: The Justice Department announced today that it had begun strapping electronic sensors to the ankles of a small group of Federal parolees as part of an experiment to monitor their movements outside prison.


Economic Scene; The Implications Of Iowa Results
LEAD: WITH Richard A. Gephardt, Paul Simon and Michael S. Dukakis finishing a tight 1-2-3 in the Iowa Democratic caucuses, it is hard to assess who gained an edge in the race for the Presidential nomination.
But there is a clear conclusion to be drawn from the Iowa contest.
While some Americans may be disillusioned with the Reagan


Henley Petitions Santa Fe Accord
LEAD: The Henley Group Inc. asked the Delaware Chancery Court yesterday to invalidate an agreement between the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation and Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. of Canada as a ''sweetheart deal.''


ARK RESTAURANTS reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARK RESTAURANTS (AMEX)
13wks to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
7,234,139
5,851,211
Net inc
454,803
b78,718
Share earns
.14
-
b-Net loss and included a charge to operations of $161,000 after taxes, in connection with the closing of a restaurant in northern New Jersey.


HELIX TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HELIX TECHNOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,922,000
12,614,000
Net inc
1,045,000
710,000
Share earns
.42
.29
Yr sales
49,131,000
45,525,000
Net inc
3,406,000
2,572,000
Share earns
1.36
1.03


DRAVO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DRAVO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
56,641,000
53,804,000
Net loss
b72,393,000
d18,469,000
Yr rev
248,106,000
243,981,000
Net loss
b126,466,000
cd14,170,000
Share earns
-
.99
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $76,603,000 and $145,404,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and the year also includes an extrarodinary gain of $8 million.


Party Time: Wall St. Goes Broadway
LEAD: The opening of the Broadway production of ''Serious Money'' was an evening of coincidences and odd juxtapositions.


Attica Alibi Clears a Suspect
LEAD: A Brooklyn judge dismissed a murder indictment yesterday against a suspect who was in prison the day of the crime.


SCAN-OPTICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCAN-OPTICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,740,000
8,507,000
Net loss
1,220,000
b751,000
Share earns
-
.11
Yr rev
42,644,000
29,032,000
Net loss
1,139,000
b3,019,000
Share earns
-
.45


ENVIRONMENTAL TREATMENT &amp; TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENVIRONMENTAL TREATMENT &amp; TECHNOLOGIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
33,946,000
30,403,000
Net loss
3,006,000
b1,764,000
Share earns
-
.15
Yr rev
137,027,000
101,420,000
Net inc
2,418,000
c2,785,000
Share earns
.20
.23


AMERICAN ECOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN ECOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
22,000,000
15,500,000
Net inc
2,100,000
700,000
Share earns
.73
.23
Yr rev
68,100,000
47,900,000
Net inc
4,600,000
3,200,000
Share earns
1.56
1.10


Deductions Are Now More Limited
LEAD: Like guests arriving late for a dinner party, most taxpayers will find the pickings meager when they look over the list of personal deductions that remain in the wake of the Tax Reform Act of 1986.


In a Cold City, a Bit of Romance Helps
LEAD: ARM in arm, a young couple pause at Fifth Avenue and 59th Street to watch a clown twist balloons into forms and figures and, with an eye to Feb. 14, a red heart, which they carry away.


RYDER SYSTEM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RYDER SYSTEM INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,216,019,000
1,020,423,000
Net inc
45,717,000
b43,005,000
Share earns
.56
.55
Yr rev
4,609,060,000
3,768,328,000
Net inc
187,113,000
160,933,000
Share earns
2.29
2.09


How Council Voted on Campaign Limits
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote by which the New York City Council adopted a bill yesterday to provide partial public financing of city election campaigns for candidates who accept contribution and spending limits.
Susan Molinari is a Republican; all others are Democrats.
FOR THE BILL - 24


BUSH AND SIMON SEEN AS HOBBLED BY IOWA'S VOTING
LEAD: Iowa's winners and most of Iowa's losers flew east today for their final drives in New Hampshire, some drafting new messages and others renewing old attacks.


QUESTAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUESTAR CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
132,356,000
127,257,000
Net inc
b5,031,000
18,072,000
Share earns
.24
1.02
Shares outst
19,207,258
17,455,850
Yr rev
492,631,000
528,304,000
Net inc
b25,930,000
c43,164,000
Share earns
1.33
2.39
Shares outst
18,508,142
17,473,270


NATURE'S BOUNTY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATURE'S BOUNTY INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,644,745
9,960,260
Net inc
b18,540
c1,063,066
b-Includes a tax credit of $6,304.
c-Net loss and after a charge of $121,875.


Jersey Man Accused of Rape and Quackery
LEAD: A 63-year-old New Jersey man was arrested at his Bronx office yesterday afternoon and charged with rape, sodomy and unlawfully practicing dentistry, the police said.


Sports People; Undisputed Marriage
LEAD: Mike Tyson, the undisputed heavyweight champion, was married again yesterday, and this time he was licensed.
The 21-year-old fighter and the actress Robin Givens, 23, were married by the Rev.
George Clements Sunday in Chicago, but the couple did not have an Illinois license. ''In Chicago he grabbed me and said lets get married,'' Givens said last night in New York.


Little Change Reported in Prices
LEAD: A steep late-afternoon drop in the overnight rate for bank loans yesterday kept alive suspicions that the Federal Reserve might be encouraging lower short-term interest rates.
But those suspicions caused little change in prices or in rates, partly because interest rates have already fallen sharply in the last month.


Martha Graham at Work After Hospitalization
LEAD: Martha Graham has returned to work after being hospitalized for 10 days at New York Hospital for dizziness and exhaustion.
Miss Graham began work Sunday with her company on new choreography for her ''Persephone,'' on the reconstruction of her 1937 ''Deep Song,'' and preparations for a tour of Holland, Poland and Czechoslovakia in April.


Ashton-Tate's New Products
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Corporation, the third-largest personal computer software company, will initiate a thrust into the market for Macintosh software Wednesday.
That market is dominated by its rival, the Microsoft Corporation.


TRUST AMERICA SERVICE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRUST AMERICA SERVICE (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
611,000
625,000
Share earns
.17
.26
6mo net inc
1,091,000
-
Share earns
.31
-
The company's initial public offering was in December 1986.
Results reflect a 3-for-2 stock split on Sept.


LPL INVESTMENT GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LPL INVESTMENT GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
128,017,000
22,312,000
Net inc
2,354,000
508,000
Share earns
.34
.03
Yr sales
347,349,000
91,789,000
Net inc
5,147,000
b5,204,000
Share earns
.62
-


Education; Picking a Principal: Where Experience Fits In
LEAD: In a development provoking keen national interest, the New Jersey State Board of Education is considering removing a requirement that candidates for principal have three years' experience in a school.


WHEN PROTEST IS TOO CLOSE TO EAST BERLIN
LEAD: When demonstrators in East Berlin disrupted a march last month in memory of German revolutionaries, the head of East Germany's PEN club, Heinz Kamnitzer, called the action ''as reprehensible as blasphemy.''


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 10, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-15


DEERFIELD FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEERFIELD FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
920,000
591,000
Per share
.80
-
The bank went public in March 1987.


Under New Rule, Auditors Must Search Out Fraud
LEAD: The chief regulatory body for accountants made it indisputably clear yesterday that accountants have a responsibility to look actively for financial fraud inside companies and not simply to detect fraud if it comes their way.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A brief article in Business Day on Monday about a graduate business school planned for Australia gave an incorrect name for the school.
It will be the William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Administration.


T-Shirts for Sale
LEAD: Call it the Crossed Flag Caper, or why House Speaker Jim Wright is not really in the T-shirt business.


GIBSON, C R CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GIBSON, C R CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,686,000
7,052,000
Net inc
206,000
186,000
Share earns
.07
.06
Yr sales
39,366,000
31,146,000
Net inc
1,621,000
1,205,000
Share earns
.52
.39
The share earnings reflect a 5-for-4 stock split payable to shareholders of record Oct.


Arizona Leader Urges Dr. King Day Restored
LEAD: Acting Gov.
Rose Mofford urged the Arizona Legislature on Monday to reinstate the Martin Luther King holiday.


BAYLY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAYLY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
34,410,000
31,245,000
Net loss
b14,607,000
d680,000
Yr rev
193,125,000
174,012,000
Net loss
b15,965,000
cd2,528,000
Share earns
-
1.06
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $671,000 for the quarter and $2,085,000 for the year.


J. P. Stevens Bidder Called Likely to Win
LEAD: J. P. Stevens &amp; Company's stock has risen above the $43-a-share price offered by a management group led by the company's chairman and chief executive, Whitney Stevens.
But associates of Mr.
Stevens and textile industry analysts said yesterday that the management group was likely to succeed, no matter what the price.


WISCONSIN POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WISCONSIN POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
141,400,000
149,100,000
Net inc
17,200,000
19,3009,000
Share earns
1.23
1.39
Yr rev
549,400,000
569,200,000
Net inc
58,800,000
60,500,000
Share earns
4.15
4.28


College Basketball Notebook; With Seasoning, Temple Rises to No. 1
LEAD: John Chaney's coaching ability has long been appreciated.
What most people haven't known is that the Temple basketball coach is also quite a cook.


Cabaret: Steven Davis Sings
LEAD: EARLY in his cabaret act, Steven Davis reminisces about his Nebraska boyhood and growing up across the street from a cornfield.
Instead of going outside to play baseball, Mr.
Davis remembers, he became entranced by Fred Astaire movies on television. ''Today, the old world seems to have rocked itself out of romance,'' he remarked wistfully at the second of four Monday night shows at Jan Wallman's, 49 West 44th


Charges Faced by 52 In Protest Dismissed
LEAD: Charges against 52 of the 73 people arrested at a Brooklyn subway station during a protest against racism in December were dropped by the District Attorney's office yesterday because of legal insufficiencies.


Speaker Asks Reagan's Help on Contras
LEAD: Jim Wright of Texas, the Speaker of the House, solicited the Reagan Administration's help today in fashioning a bipartisan aid package for the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras.


CHAMPION SPARK PLUG CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAMPION SPARK PLUG CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
184,300,000
164,800,000
Net loss
b200,000
c1,500,000
Share earns
-
.04
Yr sales
719,900,000
631,700,000
Net inc
b19,100,000
d17,200,000
Share earns
.50
-


Revenge Of the Reverends
LEAD: Pray for the Republic - the ministers are coming!


Advances; A Bicycle Easy to Ride, Hard to Sell
LEAD: FOR more than a century, people have been propelling bicycles by pushing pedals round and round so that a gear turns a chain connected to a wheel.
This system is, to say the least, an example of an entrenched technology, something that works well and that most people see no need to change.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Friday about Iraq's denial that it had sought Israeli guarantees in talks on an oil pipeline misstated the relationship between the Bechtel Group and E. Robert Wallach, a San Francisco lawyer.
Mr.
Wallach had a financial interest in the project, but there is no evidence that Bechtel entrusted him with obtaining Israeli guarantees.


CHEMICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEMICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
153,621,000
122,293,000
Net inc
23,604,000
15,782,000
Share earns
.24
.16
Yr rev
558,610,000
418,070,000
Net inc
86,787,000
52,246,000
Share earns
.87
.56


Advertising; Sherwood &amp; Schneider
LEAD: After a three-way review, Curtain Country, a bed and bath retail chain of 33 stores in six states, has awarded its $2 million business to Sherwood &amp; Schneider Advertising.
The agency will focus on newspaper advertising, as well as the yearly production of 7.5 million circulars.
Previous advertising was handled in-house.


TV Reviews; Lanford Wilson's 'Lemon Sky,' on Channel 13
LEAD: LANFORD WILSON'S ''Lemon Sky,'' heavily autobiographical, was first produced for the stage in 1970.
Christopher Walken and Charles Durning played the father-and-son leads.
I saw that production, which had a very brief run on Broadway, and found it a good deal less than memorable.
Now, after having had a successful revival in 1985, ''Lemon Sky'' is an ''American PLayhouse'' presentation on Channel 13 tonight at 9, and it's terrific.


Japanese Are Expected to Bid for California's Union Bank
LEAD: Japanese banks without a foothold in California are the most likely suitors of Union Bank, the state's fifth-largest bank, industry analysts said today.


Goalie Gets Vengeance In Beanpot Tournament
LEAD: It is wonderful to win.
But it is even better to get even, according to Bruce Racine, the victorious goalie as Northeastern demolished Boston University, 6-3, to capture the 36th Beanpot Tournament, this city's annual college hockey gala.


Blanche Lasker, Principal, 79
LEAD: Blanche Lasker, a retired principal in School District 10 in the Bronx, died of cancer Sunday in the Tally Ho Manor in Boonton, N.J., where she lived.
She was 79 years old.


CHRIS CRAFT INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHRIS CRAFT INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
70,560,000
67,571,000
Net inc
7,632,000
c12,452,000
Share earns
.34
.57
Yr rev
241,344,000
223,992,000
Net inc
b10,554,000
c14,747,000
Share earns
.46
.66


ONE PRICE CLOTHING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONE PRICE CLOTHING (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,239,997
10,559,531
Net inc
1,279,196
959,995
Share earns
.20
.17
Shares outst
6,491,396
5,647,369
Yr sales
41,235,958
24,999,305
Net inc
2,727,546
5,647,369
Share earns
.44
.36
Shares outst
6,225,969
5,647,369


INFINITY BROADCASTING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INFINITY BROADCASTING (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
24,574,000
16,083,000
Net inc
995,000
b6,504,000
Share earns
.11
.71
Yr rev
85,323,000
51,896,000
Net inc
2,945,000
c2,892,000
Share earns
.32
-


John Jennings, Lyricist And a Producer, at 54
LEAD: John Jennings, who sang out the songs from his show ''Riverwind'' on a flatbed truck in Shubert Alley when a newspaper strike kept people from reading the reviews, died on Feb. 4 at Deaconess Hospital in Evansville, Ind.
He was 54 years old and lived in Evansville.


P&amp;C FOODS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*P&amp;C FOODS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
246,500,000
222,100,000
Net inc
3,100,000
2,000,000
Share earns
.39
.25
Yr rev
993,500,000
950,300,000
Net inc
10,200,000
6,500,000
Share earns
1.30
.88


The Shallowness of the Campaign
LEAD: Mr.
Robertson's performance cannot readily be explained just by his own strength.
It's unlikely that a relative unknown could bring in enough supporters to score so well against the Vice President unless Mr.
Bush's own support were shallow.
In the shadow of the Iran-contra crisis, the Reagan record is a hard one for someone else to ride.


Education; Lessons
LEAD: If education and discipline really begin at home, then certain failures of our age - the decline of learning, the disorder of the classroom and the scourge of drugs in schools - must first be fixed where they belong, at the warm spot by the hearth.


Jury Rules ABC Documentary Did Not Libel Conservative Author
LEAD: Victor Lasky, a conservative author, lost his libel case yesterday when a jury rejected his charge that an ABC television documentary had portrayed him falsely.


The House of Lords Seats Its First Rabbi
LEAD: Immanuel Jakobovits, the Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregation and of the Commonwealth, in the robing room of the House of Lords with Lord Young.
He swore an oath of loyalty under his new title, Lord Jakobovits, Baron of Regent's Park, to become the first rabbi to sit in the House of Lords.


Bridge: Top Players Are More Likely To Use a Strong Club System
LEAD: The higher one looks in the hierarchy of tournament players, the greater the frequency of strong club systems, with a corresponding diminution of standard methods.


Education; S.A.T. Coaching Disparaged
LEAD: The admissions director at Harvard said today that a new study suggested that special classes to improve scores on the Scholastic Aptitude Test might not be effective.


Soviet Withdrawal Offer Raises Stakes for an Afghan Compromise
LEAD: The Soviet offer to start withdrawing from Afghanistan in May is putting new pressure on the other parties in the civil war to reach a compromise peace settlement next month, according to officials involved in the United Nations effort for a settlement and other experts on the conflict.


Bonn Angst On Missiles; Kohl Seeks to Delay Replacing 88 Lances
LEAD: West Germany and its principal NATO partners are heading for a confrontation over the alliance's commitment to replace an aging short-range missile system, Western diplomats and German politicians say.


STOCKHOLDER SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STOCKHOLDER SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,211,000
4,265,000
Net inc
870,000
734,000
Share earns
.22
.18
Shares outst
4,028,000
4,045,000
9mo rev
14,227,000
12,121,000
Net inc
2,341,000
1,966,000
Share earns
.58
.48
Shares outst
4,039,000
4,134,000


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There really are no more Everests to climb, no more blank spots on the map to fill in.


KENTUCKY CENTRAL LIFE INURANCE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KENTUCKY CENTRAL LIFE INURANCE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,601,918
c5,770,428
Share earns
.40
.47
Yr net inc
b36,680,598
c23,032,372
Share earns
2.81
1.87
Shares outst
13,049,646
12,314,244


CHAMPION PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAMPION PRODUCTS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
51,843,000
43,821,000
Net inc
2,372,000
1,938,000
Share earns
.70
.58
Yr sales
177,545,000
141,008,000
Net inc
6,961,000
4,932,000
Share earns
2.05
1.47


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on Monday about Peter S. Kalikow, prospective buyer of The New York Post, misstated the ownership of the building in which he lives, at 1001 Fifth Avenue.
While Mr.
Kalikow built the building, it is now a cooperative.


Mysteries of Oil
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rewarding Bad Service?
LEAD: To The Living Section:


A 10-Year Term Given by Judge To Crime Figure
LEAD: A 76-year-old former leader of the Gambino organized-crime family was sentenced yesterday to 10 years in Federal prison and ordered to pay fines totaling $380,000.


CENTRAL HOLDING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL HOLDING (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,018,000
1,020,000
Share earns
.27
.39
6mo net inc
1,113,000
1,973,000
Share earns
.30
.75


Fuxin Journal; MAYOR ALMOST SELLS HIS CITY ON THE PROFIT MOTIVE
LEAD: Put simply, the city was broke.


INDIANA FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDIANA FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
858,000
492,000
Per share
.31
-
Yr net inc
3,207,000
2,650,000
Per share
1.11
-
The company went public in February 1987.


Scottish Cooking
LEAD: To The Living Section:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Ambac Indemnity Corp., a Citicorp company, named R. Daniel Massey senior executive vice president to head the underwriting department, replacing Nancy Newcomb, who became chief financial officer at Citicorp.


Economic Panel Is Said To Question Fed Policy
LEAD: The President's Council of Economic Advisers will argue in its annual report next week that the Federal Reserve bears some blame for the slowing of the economy after the October stock market collapse, an Administration official said today.


VERSAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERSAR INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
13,422,000
10,180,000
Net inc
161,000
184,000
Share earns
.04
.06
Shares outst
3,694,000
3,117,000
6mo rev
27,350,000
20,146,000
Net inc
610,000
636,000
Share earns
.16
.22
Shares outst
3,720,000
2,921,000


A CRADLE-TO-GRAVE 'GODFATHER' OF FOREIGN SERVICE: GEORGE S. VEST
LEAD: In his post as director general of the United States Foreign Service, George S. Vest sees himself as combining the roles of Mafia godfather and Rodney Dangerfield.


ALLEN ORGAN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEN ORGAN CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,401,918
6,259,222
Net inc
1,553,145
1,116,682
Share earns
1.08
.78
Yr sales
24,224,474
23,108,800
Net inc
4,458,821
3,655,692
Share earns
3.11
2.55
Shares outst
1,432,940
1,433,165


Film Makers in a Race Over 'Les Liaisons'
LEAD: A 200-year-old French novel has suddenly become the object of a race to the screen.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Medical International Inc. is issuing 100 million Swiss francs of 5 percent Eurobonds, due in 1996, at 101, through Goldman, Sachs Finance A.G.


American Standard Exploring Its Options
LEAD: American Standard Inc., responding to an unwelcome takeover bid from the Black &amp; Decker Corporation, disclosed in documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday that it had been approached by several companies interested in buying it.


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (HARISBURG) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (HARISBURG)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
758,000
b1,300,000
Per share
1.06
-
Yr net inc
2,000,000
c2,600,000
Per share
2.84
-
b-Included a gain of $730,000 from a sale of a branch building.


CHELSEA INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHELSEA INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
41,697,000
38,384,000
Net inc
142,000
544,000
Share earns
.07
.21
Shares outst
2,137,000
2,539,000


U.S. ENVOY MEETS SHAMIR ON PEACE
LEAD: An American envoy arrived tonight with a new proposal for peace in the occupied territories, even as Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir was sharply criticizing a possible feature of the plan: the acceleration of the Camp David plan for extending autonomy to the Palestinians.


CHATTEM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHATTEM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,734,000
16,092,000
Net inc
352,000
362,000
Share earns
.23
.21
Shares outst
1,561,000
1,695,000
6mo sales
24,592,000
17,838,000
Net loss
553,000
b618,000
Share earns
-
.36


TIMBERLINE SOFTWARE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIMBERLINE SOFTWARE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,082,000
2,105,000
Net inc
209,000
256,000
Share earns
.08
.10
Yr rev
7,653,000
7,200,000
Net inc
413,000
b152,000
Share earns
.16
-
b-Net loss





Texaco Data Plea Denied
LEAD: Federal District Judge Charles L. Brieant yesterday denied a request that Texaco Inc. be required to add more information to the description of its bankruptcy reorganization plan that it is mailing to the 230,000 shareholders who will vote on it.


Fire Kills 4 of 21 Living in Rockland House
LEAD: Firefighters standing in front of a frame house gutted by flames early yesterday morning in Spring Valley, N.Y.
Authorities said that 4 of the 21 or more Haitian immigrants who lived there were killed and nine others were injured.
Beds and cots were found in the attic and basement in violation of building code provisions, officials said.


PACER TECHNOLOGY &amp; RESOURCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACER TECHNOLOGY &amp; RESOURCES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b35,345
c83,575
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo net inc
b73,132
c140,291
Share earns
.01
.01
b-Includes a tax credit of $15,640 and $25,550 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Citicorp Rates Fall
LEAD: Interest rates fell yesterday at Citicorp's weekly auction of commercial paper.
The bank holding company said it sold $50 million of 91-day commercial paper at an average rate of 6.431 percent, down from 6.61 percent last week.
Another $50 million of 182-day paper was sold at an average rate of 6.4306, down from 6.635 percent.


Sympathy for the Homeless Expressed in Gifts to Neediest
LEAD: Vivian Rivkin Friedman and her husband, Sidney, a native of South Carolina, met and fell in love in New York City and say, ''The city has been good to us.'' Both professionals, they bought a home here, had a child and plan to stay.


DE GUSTIBUS
LEAD: THE Occidental Restaurant in Washington, a landmark that opened in 1906, provided the ultimate culinary nostalgia trip down an American memory lane last Sunday.
The food would have been of interest to ardent historical cooking buffs, but a little nostalgia goes a long way.


Israel Nathan Herstein, Mathematician, 64
LEAD: Israel Nathan Herstein, a leading mathematician and educator at the University of Chicago, died of cancer Monday night at his home in Chicago.
He was 64 years old.
Dr.
Herstein was the author of the widely used textbook ''Topics in Algebra.'' His own work included pioneering advances in the theory of rings, an algebraic system.


Baseball Teams Win Arbitration Round
LEAD: Club owners gained a significant double-barreled victory yesterday when two arbitrators selected the clubs' salaries over those submitted by two noted relief pitchers, Tom Henke of Toronto and John Franco of Cincinnati.
The outcomes had instant ramifications for salary arbitration cases involving three other relievers.


Panamanian Charges Cover-Up in Killing
LEAD: Jose I. Blandon, a former aide to Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, Panama's de facto leader, testifying yesterday before a Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee in Washington.
Mr.
Blandon testified that a Central Intelligence Agency official was involved in a cover-up of the 1985 murder of a political opponent of General Noriega.


Pete C. Sianis, Hanoi Raids' Planner, 68
LEAD: Maj.
Gen.
Pete C. Sianis, retired, an Air Force officer who planned devastating B-52 bombing raids on North Vietnam, died Saturday after a long illness.
He was 68 years old and lived in Bellevue.


Royalty Rides the Bobsled
LEAD: What makes Albert Grimaldi, the Prince of Monaco, unique among the 87 members of the International Olympic Committee is not his royal bearing.
There are several other members of ruling families in the group, including Princess Nora of Liechtenstein and Sheik Fahad al-Ahmad al-Sabah of Kuwait.


HBO &amp; CO (ATLANTA, GA)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HBO &amp; CO (ATLANTA, GA)(O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
49,134,000
40,095,000
Net inc
6,683,000
974,000
Share earns
.39
.04
Shares outst
17,195,000
23,201,000
Yr rev
175,230,000
154,822,000
Net inc
13,321,000
b3,612,000
Share earns
.62
-


Strength of Robertson and Gephardt Spoke to Moral Anxiety and Economic Discontent
LEAD: The Iowa caucuses delivered twin messages of protest on Monday night, as participants used the candidacies of Pat Robertson and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri to say that something in the nation has gone awry.


H. E. Reeves, 51, Dies; A Business Executive
LEAD: Hazard Earl Reeves 3d, an executive in the real estate and communications industries, died of heart failure Jan. 30 in Danbury (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 51 years old and lived in Monroe, Conn.


AMERICA WEST AIRLINES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICA WEST AIRLINES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
164,156,000
96,166,000
Net loss
18,823,000
b2,545,000
Share earns
-
.20
Yr rev
575,447,000
328,926,000
Net loss
45,675,000
b3,027,000
Share earns
-
.11


UNITED TELECOMMUNICATIONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED TELECOMMUNICATIONS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
792,251,000
737,986,000
Net inc
29,123,000
b28,255,000
Share earns
.29
.28
Yr rev
2,982,205,000
3,058,783,000
Net loss
51,534,000
bc180,561,000
Share earns
-
1.81


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Affiliated Publications Inc., Boston, said its McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. affiliate had agreed to acquire privately held McCaw Communications Cos. for about 11.5 million class B common shares.


Republic National Yield Put at 9.10%
LEAD: The Republic National Bank of New York is offering $100 million of 9 percent notes, due in 1998, at a price of 99.35 to yield 9.10 percent, through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


Dart Raises Bid To $37 a Share
LEAD: The Dart Group Corporation said it had increased its cash tender offer for the Stop and Shop Companies to $37 a share, from $31, in a move Wall Street investors said was designed to increase pressure on the company's directors.


STANDARD HAVENS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD HAVENS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,286,753
11,958,934
Net loss
269,214
b464,777
Share earns
-
.12
b-Net income


Times Mirror Net Off; Washington Post Up
LEAD: The Times Mirror Company, publisher of The Los Angeles Times and Newsday, yesterday reported a 45 percent drop in fourth-quarter income.
Meanwhile, the Washington Post Company reported a 77.4 percent improvement.


Slow Gasoline Leak Rattles Nerves on L.I.
LEAD: On Robin Hood Lane today, residents anxiously traded news about an 800,000-gallon gasoline leak oozing underground toward their homes.


Union Leader Rejects Concessions Sought by Post
LEAD: New York City's top newspaper union leader said yesterday that the unions at the New York Post would ''absolutely not'' meet Rupert Murdoch's demand that they grant $24 million in concessions by Feb. 19.
Without the cuts, Mr.
Murdoch said, he will shut down the paper.


IDEAL BASIC INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IDEAL BASIC INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
54,398,000
51,193,000
Net loss
b3,024,000
c60,348,000
Share earns
-
3.98
Yr sales
234,748,000
252,304,000
Net loss
b8,367,000
c45,436,000
Share earns
-
2.64


CONTINENTAL MEDICAL SYSEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONTINENTAL MEDICAL SYSEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
28,023,000
9,983,000
Net inc
1,201,000
b316,000
Share earns
.09
.03
6mo rev
52,627,000
16,898,000
Net inc
2,010,000
b504,000
Share earns
.15
.05


Marvin Schwartz, Lawyer, 65
LEAD: Marvin Schwartz, a lawyer, died of a stroke Feb. 2 at his home in Kingston, N.Y.
He was 65 years old.


Ex-Shearson Official Gets 5 Years in Fraud
LEAD: A former senior vice president at Shearson Lehman Hutton was sentenced in Federal court yesterday to five years in prison for checking account manipulations that allowed him to divert about $19 million from the firm into his own outside accounts and investments.


Advertising; Visa Aims At American Express
LEAD: LIKE the cola and beer wars, credit card marketing has never been a gentle business.
Consider the current Visa International campaign, which is tied to the Winter Olympics and takes dead aim at American Express.


Memory Chip From Korea
LEAD: A consortium of three major South Korean semiconductor companies has developed a four-megabit semiconductor memory chip, industry officials said today.
The Samsung Semiconductor


TIMES MIRROR CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIMES MIRROR CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
863,115,000
806,764,000
Net inc
54,704,000
99,324,000
Share earns
.42
.77
Yr rev
3,154,571,000
2,948,136,000
Net inc
266,491,000
408,085,000
Share earns
2.06
3.16


Hyde May Raise High Voltage Bid
LEAD: The New York investment firm Hyde Park Partners L.P. said it was willing to ''substantially increase'' its latest $17 a share tender offer for the High Voltage Engineering Corporation, but only if the management of the electrical products concern negotiates the terms of the deal.


SUPERIOR ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUPERIOR ELECTRIC CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
13,135,000
13,308,000
Net inc
28,000
c1,429,000
Share earns
.01
-
Yr sales
52,221,000
52,077,000
Net loss
b638,000
b4,487,000
b-Includes a charge for restructuring costs of $2,651,000 and gains on the sale of land of $3,671,000 for the latest year; the prior year includes a $1 million provision for discontinuance of certain products.


NORTON ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTON ENTERPRISES
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
65,781,888
50,789,272
Net inc
1,829,435
b1,072,528
Share earns
1.00
.66
Shares outst
1,826,849
1,630,615
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $177,617.


MASCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MASCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
543,300,000
421,010,000
Net inc
30,840,000
52,920,000
Share earns
.23
.41
Yr sales
2,023,300,000
1,452,010,000
Net inc
218,840,000
203,420,000
Share earns
1.65
1.56


Brewer Named Editor Of Times News Service
LEAD: The New York Times Company yesterday named John C. Brewer as executive editor of The New York Times News Service, replacing H. W. (Paddy) Thornberry, who will leave the position March 1 in preparation for retirement.


OLD REPUBLIC INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OLD REPUBLIC INTERNATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b20,491,494
c1,991,282
Share earns
1.01
.04
Yr net inc
b102,803,053
c67,707,122
Share earns
5.09
3.23
b-Includes for the quarter realized investment losses of $152,016, and for the year, realized investment gains of $9,505,779.


PACIFICARE HEALTH SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFICARE HEALTH SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
92,115,000
62,270,000
Net inc
450,000
599,000
Share earns
.08
.10


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
5.58
6.68
6.33
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.62
5.64
5.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.83
5.95
5.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.95
7.99
7.14
30-YR.


West German Wines of '86 Yield Surprises in the Top Tier
LEAD: WEST GERMAN bottlings from the 1986 vintage, which are arriving across the United States, are workmanlike wines for all seasons.


Writer From India Wins World Literature Prize
LEAD: Raja Rao of India, the author of five novels and several collections of short stories, has won the 10th Neustadt International Prize for Literature.


CYTOGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CYTOGEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,486,000
1,953,000
Net loss
2,339,000
b51,000
Yr rev
11,423,000
4,497,000
Net loss
4,193,000
2,240,000
b-Net income


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD:
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 5
Jan. 29
Feb. 6
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
6.6
6.7
6.2
Distillate production, daily
2.8
3.0
2.8
Gasoline stocks
240.7
235.6
253.8
Distillate stocks
123.3
125.6
138.3
Crude imports, daily
4.7
4.6
3.9
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.4
2.3
Crude stocks
338.1
339.0
329.4
Crude production, daily
8.2
8.2
8.4
Refinery utilization (%)
83.1
84.1
80.2


Cleveland-Cliffs
LEAD: Cleveland-Cliffs Inc., an iron-ore supplier based in Cleveland, said it would spin off to its shareholders its 4.1 million shares in the MLX Corporation of Troy, Mich., a 26 percent holding valued at $12.8 million, based on Monday's closing price.
This would amount to a one-time special dividend of about 78 cents for every share of Cleveland-Cliffs, the company said.


The Inglefinger Rule
LEAD: To the Editor:


Education; Volunteers In Dual Role On Campus
LEAD: Between tomorrow's term paper and yesterday's social gathering, somewhere within the harried run of events that make up ''the college experience,'' more and more students are likely to be found working in soup kitchens or in other public service jobs but pursuing apparently different goals.


Memorial for Kleban
LEAD: A memorial tribute to Edward Kleban, the lyricist for ''A Chorus Line,'' will be held at 12:30 P.M. tomorrow in the Susan Anspacher Theater at the New York Shakespeare Festival Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street.
Mr.
Kleban died in December at the age of 48.
Among the speakers are to be Betty Buckley, Bob Balaban, Avery Corman, Marvin Hamlisch, Sheldon Harnick, Priscilla Lopez, Peter Stone and Wendy Wasserstein.


High-Tech Executive Signs On With Priam
LEAD: The Priam Corporation, a struggling producer of disk drives based in San Jose, Calif., said yesterday that John V. Titsworth had been appointed president and chief executive.
For Mr.
Titsworth, who worked at the Control Data Corporation and the Xerox Corporation, the move is a return to management of a high-tech manufacturing concern after several years in venture capital.


RLI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RLI CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
29,100,681
28,902,072
Net inc
b2,092,368
c3,028,893
Share earns
.34
.50
Yr rev
104,360,782
108,495,186
Net inc
b13,965,174
c10,978,773
Share earns
2.27
1.82


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: SALMON seems to maintain its freshness better than any other fish.
Whether from Atlantic or Pacific waters, it comes to the kitchen in prime condition, provided it has been properly refrigerated.


Pavulon Discovered In Six More Bodies Of Nurse's Patients
LEAD: Preliminary tests indicate that the presence of the drug Pavulon was found in six more bodies of former patients of Good Samaritian Hospital, a source close to the investigation said today.


FINNIGAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FINNIGAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
32,196,000
23,244,000
Net inc
b2,117,000
c1,677,000
Share earns
.41
-
Yr rev
110,313,000
87,795,000
Net inc
b5,112,000
c1,470,000
Share earns
1.00
-


Sports People; Cutting Ties
LEAD: According to a message sent by Zola Budd to a friend and adviser in Johannesburg, the South Africa-born running star, a target of protesters whenever she competes because of her strong identification with the apartheid nation, has broken her allegiances to her native country and will return there only to see her family at Christmas.


Beijing Tries to Skewer a Cultural Sacred Cow
LEAD: What many people here consider the fertile core of the Central Kingdom, the sanctum of Chinese civilization, is suddenly endangered.


Shultz Answers Democrats in Treaty Dispute
LEAD: In an effort to avoid a delay in Senate action on the new missile treaty, Secretary of State George P. Shultz has prepared a letter to Senate Democratic leaders responding to their concerns on the key issue of how treaties are made and interpreted, Administration officials said tonight.


Porter's Absence Aired
LEAD: After missing practice without permission last week, Michael Porter, St.
John's 6-foot-1-inch junior guard, was held out of the starting lineup in the Redmen's 80-76 loss to Boston College at Alumni Hall Monday night.
Steve Shurina replaced him.


Consul Asserts C.I.A. Aided in Panama Cover-Up
LEAD: A Central Intelligence Agency official was involved in a cover-up of the 1985 murder of a political opponent of Panama's military leader, a former Panamanian official testified today.


IMEX MEDICAL SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMEX MEDICAL SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,207,345
867,250
Net inc
66,546
7,697
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
2,283,616
1,598,880
Net inc
98,372
19,859
Share earns
.02
-


Outsider in Inner Circle?
LEAD: Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., the author and professor at the City University of New York, has received many honors in his lifetime.
But none quite so unexpected, and perhaps so inappropriate, as that bestowed on him last month.


Anti-Abortion Move Creates Chaos
LEAD: When Senator John C. Danforth recently called for a vote on an anti-abortion amendment to a civil rights bill, the matter was deemed so important that Senator Bob Dole and Vice President Bush broke off their Presidential campaigns in Iowa to be on hand to support it.
Senator Paul Simon, another Presidential hopeful, interrupted a trip to


New Hampshire Ponders Robertson
LEAD: The voters of New Hampshire, their voices thick with the flinty accents of northern New England, like to speak of their first-in-the-nation primary and their refusal to follow anyone's lead in voting for President, especially a lead from those ''unrepresentative'' caucus-goers in Iowa.


Accusation Of Phone Bid Collusion
LEAD: Some regional Bell telephone companies had access to the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's secret bid price for Government telephone switch contracts and may have shared the information and used it to calculate competing bids, an official of one regional phone company said yesterday.


Salomon Expands at Top; Key Executive Resigning
LEAD: Salomon Brothers Inc. announced a series of high-level management changes yesterday, suggesting continued turmoil at the top of the securities giant.


DEFIANCE PRECISION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEFIANCE PRECISION
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
15,917,000
4,786,000
Net loss
1,144,000
371,000
6mo rev
29,657,000
7,737,000
Net loss
3,156,000
348,000


BADGER METER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BADGER METER INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,233,000
14,019,000
Net inc
392,000
131,000
Share earns
.27
.09
Yr sales
66,737,000
60,947,000
Net inc
1,799,000
1,172,000
Share earns
1.21
.80


Two Former Policemen in Miami Are Found Guilty of Drug Charges
LEAD: Two former Miami policemen were found guilty on drug charges today, bringing to 13 the number of officers who have been convicted in a two-year Federal investigation of the Miami Police Department.


Military Satellite Test Is Rated Success
LEAD: Despite one problem, a three-ton military satellite launched Monday succeeded in using a battery of sensors to track 15 mock enemy targets for President Reagan's anti-missile program, military officials said yesterday.


Profit Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Anheuser-Busch Cos.
$109,600,000
+17.0
Dravo Corp.
(72,400,000)
-
Fort Howard Corp.
28,900,000
+43.8
General Motors Corp.
835,800,000
+118.6
GTE Corp.
334,200,000
+24.6
Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co.


Koch Is Rebuffed on Pension Limits
LEAD: Raising the political stakes on the most highly charged issue of the legislative session, Mayor Koch and union leaders came here today to force lawmakers to choose between them on a measure to increase pensions for former New York City and state workers.


PRATT HOTEL CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRATT HOTEL CORP (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
226,000,000
224,200,000
Net loss
7,600,000
b4,061,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income and includes an extraordinary credit of $3,388,000.


Bob Dole: Happy Kansan Talks to New Hampshire On Foreign Policy
LEAD: Every four years the early primaries and caucuses produce more losers than winners, but sometimes they produce more than one winner at a time.
Monday night, Iowans sent forth two official winners, Bob Dole and Richard Gephardt; a loser who seemed to win by placing, Pat Robertson; and a loser nobody was calling a winner, Vice President Bush.


Art Galleries Told to Post Prices
LEAD: The New York City Department of Consumer Affairs announced yesterday that beginning March 1 it would enforce a city law requiring the price of paintings and sculptures in art galleries to be ''conspicuously displayed'' within sight of customers.


OLSTEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OLSTEN CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
119,052,000
84,231,000
Net inc
3,942,000
2,662,000
Share earns
.32
.22
Yr rev
409,956,000
313,480,000
Net inc
13,023,000
9,265,000
Share earns
1.06
.75


Sports People; Blue Wants to Return
LEAD: About one year after announcing his retirement from baseball, Vida Blue, 38 years old, now says that his drug problems are a thing of the past and that he hopes to make a comeback as a major league pitcher this season.
After pitching one scoreless inning on Sunday in ''Dream Game 88'' between the 1972 Oakland A's and the Cincinnati Reds in Phoenix, the left-hander said: ''I've already gotten a couple of nibbles from a couple of major league teams.


ASSOCIATED HOSTS INC reports earnings for 14wks to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASSOCIATED HOSTS INC (OTC)
14wks to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,383,000
17,901,000
Net inc
643,000
463,000
Share earns
.14
.10


RTE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RTE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
86,702,000
81,101,000
Net inc
3,545,000
4,135,000
Share earns
.50
.55
Yr sales
347,661,000
330,098,000
Net inc
16,186,000
b11,417,000
Share earns
2.21
1.50


Food Notes
LEAD:  A Pastry First


Pat Robertson: After Surprise Finish, He Wants to Shed Image as TV Preacher
LEAD: Every four years the early primaries and caucuses produce more losers than winners, but sometimes they produce more than one winner at a time.
Monday night, Iowans sent forth two official winners, Bob Dole and Richard Gephardt; a loser who seemed to win by placing, Pat Robertson; and a loser nobody was calling a winner, Vice President Bush.


Employee of Market Shoots Clerk and Then Kills Himself
LEAD: A porter at an East Side supermarket shot a coworker during an argument last night, then fatally shot himself, the police said.


Catholic Bishops Defend Their Actions to Combat Child Abuse by Priests
LEAD: The nation's Roman Catholic bishops, accused of failing to do enough about priests who molest young boys and girls, yesterday defended their actions in such cases.


BALDOR ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALDOR ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
50,016,000
46,070,000
Net loss
1,233,000
c1,284,000
Share earns
-
.20
Yr sales
200,099,000
181,656,000
Net inc
b6,948,000
6,944,000
Share earns
1.08
1.07


CHAMBERS DEVELOPMENT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAMBERS DEVELOPMENT CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,123,000
10,863,000
Net inc
b3,227,000
1,830,000
Share earns
.28
.21
Shares outst
11,577,253
8,900,000
Yr sales
58,785,000
31,443,000
Net inc
b10,031,000
c5,138,000
Share earns
.93
.58
Shares outst
10,774,771
8,900,000


Dollar Weakens at Close; Gold Up a Bit in New York
LEAD: The dollar edged lower against nearly all other major currencies yesterday after rising overseas.


George Bush: Trying to Rebound, He Embraces New England Roots
LEAD: Every four years the early primaries and caucuses produce more losers than winners, but sometimes they produce more than one winner at a time.
Monday night, Iowans sent forth two official winners, Bob Dole and Richard Gephardt; a loser who seemed to win by placing, Pat Robertson; and a loser nobody was calling a winner, Vice President Bush.


NUCLEAR SUPPORT SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUCLEAR SUPPORT SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,568,031
8,194,018
Net inc
b690,640
563,935
Share earns
.35
.27
Shares outst
1,955,866
2,071,705
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $600,000 from accounting changes relating to FASB 96 on tax accruals.


Wilkins 49, Barkley 47
LEAD: Dominique Wilkins scored 49 points, including a tie-breaking layup with two seconds remaining, and the Atlanta Hawks beat Philadelphia, 112-110, tonight in Jim Lynam's debut as the 76ers' coach.


COLONIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLONIAL GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
20,096,000
21,363,000
Net inc
2,197,000
4,036,000
Share earns
.28
.51
Yr rev
89,403,000
74,395,000
Net inc
13,089,000
12,654,000
Share earns
1.65
1.59


Accounting on New York Coliseum Sale Passed Two Reviews
LEAD: To the Editor:


Life in the 30's
LEAD: THE law is of necessity shrouded in words.


William E. Woodman, Insurance Executive, 68
LEAD: William E. Woodman, a retired insurance executive, died of heart failure Saturday at his home in Fort Myers, Fla.
He was 68 years old and also lived in Short Hills, N.J.


Lost Fitzgerald Story to Be Published
LEAD: A half-century after it was written, an unpublished short story by F. Scott Fitzgerald - rejected by Redbook but now seen by scholars as a forerunner of black humor and a new insight into the author's time of despair - is finally going to appear in print next week.


PENOBSCOT SHOE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENOBSCOT SHOE CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 27
1987
1986
Sales
4,438,294
3,587,015
Net inc
445,802
389,828
Share earns
.29
.24
Yr sales
17,450,779
12,512,384
Net inc
b1,554,207
b624,963
Share earns
1.01
.37


Advertising; Addendum
LEAD: * Advance Publications, Staten Island, has acquired Details magazine.


PROVIDENCE ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROVIDENCE ENERGY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
42,305,000
36,386,000
Net inc
3,184,000
b3,291,000
Share earns
1.38
1.46
b-Includes a gain from an accounting adjustment of $434,000.


Dow Chemical Japan's Paper Is a First for Tokyo Market
LEAD: Japan's efforts to broaden the scope of its capital market and allow more financing in yen by foreign companies moved ahead another step yesterday when Dow Chemical Japan issued 600 million yen, or about $4.6 million, of commercial paper in Tokyo.


Sports of The Times; Ironhead's Dilemma
LEAD: IRONHEAD HEYWARD'S mother says that her son - she refers to him, in fact, as Craig, the name she gave him, and not by the nickname, Ironhead, which he generally answers to - is 21 years old, an adult, and ought to determine for himself what he'll do with his life.


Pork Prices Sharply Higher On Small Rise in Slaughter
LEAD: Pork futures prices rose sharply in heavy trading yesterday as traders reacted to a surprisingly small increase in slaughter numbers.


NORTHWESTERN PUBLIC SERVCE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHWESTERN PUBLIC SERVCE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,121,512
27,954,902
Net inc
2,996,431
2,765,675
Share earns
.73
.64
Yr rev
108,066,828
117,380,235
Net inc
13,658,536
13,691,818
Share earns
3.33
3.20


RADIONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RADIONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
9,043,000
7,892,000
Net inc
851,000
584,000
Share earns
.20
.14
Yr sales
35,021,000
28,171,000
Net inc
3,116,000
2,038,000
Share earns
.74
.49


Jury Hears Final Arguments In Monthlong Nofziger Trial
LEAD: Final arguments in the monthlong Federal ethics trial of Lyn Nofziger were presented to the jury today and deliberations were expected to begin Wednesday.


Concert: String Music From Ottoman Court
LEAD: NEW YORK has a voracious appetite for music from beyond the mainstream, whether it be from Cajun Louisiana or Anatolia.
This creates a performance problem.
Shows featuring functional music - music for weddings, for dancing or for rituals -don't have a context, and they can become museum exhibits, disemboweled parts of a culture, tough to make sense of.


Journal Punishes News Agency Over Report
LEAD: The New England Journal of Medicine has suspended prepublication delivery of its weekly magazine to the British news service Reuters for six months, saying the agency broke an agreement on how soon it could release information from the journal.


Uncommon Treasures As a Source of Nutrients
LEAD: COULD it be that such fashionable ingredients as broccoli di rape, chilies, morels, carambola, passion fruit and cherimoyas add not only variety to the modern diet but also a generous dose of good health?


EG&amp;G INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EG&amp;G INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Revenue
315,726,000
310,989,000
Net inc
14,300,000
11,466,000
Share earns
.52
.41
Yr rev
1,247,483,000
1,186,836,000
Net inc
55,453,000
46,000,000
Share earns
2.00
1.66


WINE TALK
LEAD: About 150 French wine makers and exporters gathered here last week to find out why they are losing ground in the American market.
Harold Binstein was happy to give his analysis.


Thais Accuse U.S. of Theft Of Temple Art
LEAD: A low-key campaign has been under way to bring a thousand-year-old temple carving back to Thailand from an American museum, but the campaign took an unexpected turn this week.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Gasoline Leak on L.I.


TELLABS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELLABS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
44,752,000
34,394,000
Net inc
3,868,000
3,494,000
Share earns
.30
.27
Yr sales
136,098,000
115,811,000
Net inc
10,725,000
8,410,000
Share earns
.82
.64


Federated Stock
LEAD: Shares of Federated Department Stores Inc. dropped $1.25 yesterday, to $57.875 a share, after the head of the Canadian concern seeking to buy the group said he would not pay more than $61 a share.
The decline in the stock of Federated, which owns such leading department stores as Bloomingdale's of New York, Filene's of Boston and I.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Itel Corporation is offering $175 million of 12 5/8 percent senior subordinated notes, due in 1998, at a price of 99.303 to yield about 12.75 percent, through underwriters led by Prudential-Bache Capital Funding.


Week's Steel Output Off
LEAD: Steel production fell 3.3 percent last week, to 1.88 million tons, from the previous week's 1.94 million tons, according to the American Iron and Steel Institute.
The output equaled 87.3 percent of capacity, down from 90.3 percent.
Production so far this year totals 9.83 million tons, up 39.1 percent from 7.07 million tons a year earlier.


2 Suitors May Unite in Belgian Battle
LEAD: Andre Leysen of Belgium and Carlo de Benedetti of Italy announced tonight that they were considering joining forces for the ''effective management'' of Societe Generale de Belgique, providing a new twist in the three-week wrangle for control of Belgium's largest and most important company.


Lives Were at Stake in Aspirin-Heart Study
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nets Press Bullets, But Lose, 126-117
LEAD: Bernard King scored 34 points and Frank Johnson had 23, both season highs, to lead the undermanned Washington Bullets to a 126-117 overtime victory over the Nets tonight.


HOUSEHOLD INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOUSEHOLD INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
942,200,000
719,300,000
Net inc
51,100,000
b51,700,000
Share earns
1.36
1.18
Yr rev
3,440,500,000
2,829,600,000
Net inc
221,500,000
b208,600,000
Share earns
5.57
4.48


Wisconsin Plans to Sue Chrysler on Plant Loss
LEAD: The State of Wisconsin will sue the Chrysler Corporation in an effort to overturn the auto maker's decision to close its Kenosha plant, Attorney General Donald Hanaway said today.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


Earth Moves as Rivals Arrive for Next Test
LEAD: A light earthquake rattled parts of southern New Hampshire today as Democratic and Republican Presidential candidates arrived for the final week of campaigning before next week's crucial primary.


PEERLESS TUBE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PEERLESS TUBE CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
11,923,067
12,239,941
Net inc
8,882
135,260
Share earns
.01
.06
Yr sales
50,792,569
47,075,429
Net inc
1,456,279
b908,320
Share earns
.60
.37
b-Includes a pretax gain of about $240,000 from a change in the method of determining the cost of its inventory from LIFO to FIFO.


TECOGEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TECOGEN INC
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
3,219,000
3,642,000
Net inc
18,000
17,000
Shares outst
8,006,000
6,165,000


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: THE scene, witnessed by Caroline F. Cannon, occurred during the morning rush hour at Broadway and 79th Street, where a panhandler was jingling coins in a paper coffee cup.


ACTION INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ACTION INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
60,826,700
51,540,300
Net inc
2,711,600
c1,675,300
Share earns
.49
.30
6mo sales
92,960,800
75,059,600
Net inc
b3,613,800
c1,837,900
Share earns
.66
.31


Scoring the Coliseum Match-Up
LEAD: When two New York City Mayors disagree, it's a good bet that each is half right.
That's the case in the showdown of Mayor Koch and former Mayor Beame over accounting for sale of the old Coliseum site at Columbus Circle.


MACK TRUCKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACK TRUCKS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
483,024,000
477,065,000
Net loss
b10,783,000
c6,747,000
Share earns
-
.23
Yr sales
1,857,748,000
1,711,844,000
Net inc
b4,090,000
d30,569,000
Share earns
.14
-


Waldheim Report Leaves Austria as Divided as Before
LEAD: The findings of the historians' commission about President Kurt Waldheim's war record appeared to confirm what most Austrians had feared, that an end to the punishing and divisive controversy has come no nearer.


KELLY SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KELLY SERVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
311,269,000
266,287,000
Net inc
13,595,000
8,487,000
Share earns
.56
.35
Yr sales
1,161,438,000
1,033,560,000
Net inc
50,461,000
36,436,000
Share earns
2.10
1.51


ATLANTIC ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTIC ENERGY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
144,700,000
132,700,000
Net inc
9,500,000
b1,600,000
Share earns
.52
-
Yr rev
648,200,000
583,000,000
Net inc
73,800,000
54,900,000
Share earns
4.03
3.00


ALLIANCE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLIANCE FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
571,000
691,000
Share earns
.52
.61
Yr net inc
2,614,000
2,874,000
Share earns
2.35
3.00


A Tool to Track That Odd Noise
LEAD: AMONG the automotive maladies that frustrate drivers most, mysterious noises and vibrations surely rank near the top.
And it seems there are few mechanics who can determine the cause.
The General Motors Corporation, which has 11,000 dealerships, has only one expert, Frank Pavlovcic, in all facets of vibration problems.


OPEC Asks Price Support
LEAD: The president of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries has urged non-member countries to help support oil prices and says a price range of $18 to $20 a barrel can be maintained throughout the year.


CNS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CNS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
555,223
312,994
Net loss
489,781
453,540
Yr sales
1,750,698
626,792
Net loss
1,561,434
1,855,960


Lessons of Round One; The Iowa-ness of Iowa
LEAD: Whew: after months of chafing, students of the Presidential campaign finally have real results to chew on.
But before the world drowns in commentary, it's worth registering what actually happened in the Iowa caucuses:


Panama's Beleaguered Leader Finds an Enthusiastic Haven
LEAD: Abroad, he is now wanted as a criminal, and in the capital there are daily demands for his ouster.
But in this small provincial town tonight, a smiling Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega heard himself acclaimed as the defender of Panamanian sovereignty against Yankee colonialism and ''domestic traitors.''


The Dance: Ohio Ballet At the Joyce
LEAD: THE Ohio Ballet presented the local premiere of Heinz Poll's ''Games'' at its opening last night at the Joyce Theater, along with two other Poll ballets and Laura Dean's ''Patterns of Change.''


Music: Dorian Wind Quintet
LEAD: LEE HOIBY joined the Dorian Wind Quintet at Hunter College Monday evening for two piano-and-wind pieces: His own 12-year-old ''Sextet'' (newly revised), and an arrangement of the theme and variations from Tchaikovsky's Suite for Orchestra (Op. 55).
One could infer from either piece Mr.
Hoiby's easy affinity for Tchaikovsky's music; the ''Sextet'' has some of the celebratory brightness and rambling energy that we value in the heavy parts of the


Asian Tradition at War With American Laws
LEAD: The ancient traditions of Southeast Asia and the laws of 20th-century America are increasingly causing conflicts in the lives of the 30,000 Hmong and Mien tribespeople who settled in the Fresno area after fleeing Laos, Thailand and Vietnam.


Excerpts From Report on Waldheim
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the conclusions to a report, made public today, by a commission of historians on President Kurt Waldheim's wartime record, as translated by The Associated Press from the German:


X-RITE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*X-RITE INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,869,000
3,849,000
Net inc
1,099,000
467,000
Share earns
.42
.18
Yr sales
19,100,000
14,315,000
Net inc
3,412,000
1,875,000
Share earns
1.31
.79


GENERAL MOTORS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL MOTORS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,378,300,000
25,527,300,000
Net inc
835,800,000
382,300,000
Share earns
2.36
.97
Yr rev
101,781,900,000
102,813,700,000
Net inc
3,550,900,000
2,944,700,000
Share earns
10.06
8.21


Nesting
LEAD: To The Living Section:


G.M. Profit Up, Mainly Overseas
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation reported today that its fourth-quarter earnings more than doubled, while its earnings for all of 1987 rose 21 percent.


THERMO PROCESS SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THERMO PROCESS SYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
7,941,000
3,309,000
Net inc
68,000
70,000
Share earns
.01
.03
9mo rev
20,482,000
16,189,000
Net inc
272,000
415,000
Share earns
.05
.18


REDLAW INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REDLAW INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
18,856,000
18,247,000
Net inc
1,413,000
1,219,000
Share earns
.21
.21
Shares outst
6,798,607
5,840,607
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Next, U.S. and Soviet Will Exchange Humor
LEAD: Since the thaw in relations between the United States and the Soviet Union began, there have been cultural exchanges of art, music and dance.
Now comes laughter.


QUBIX GRAPHIC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUBIX GRAPHIC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
352,000
195,000
Net loss
946,000
953,000
9mo rev
2,106,000
250,000
Net loss
2,209,000
3,138,000


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Dino Ciccarelli of the Minnesota North Stars surrendered to the police yesterday in Toronto and was charged with assault in connection with a high-sticking incident at Maple Leaf Gardens last month.
Ciccarelli, who arrived from Minneapolis with his lawyer, was arrested and released without bail.
He is scheduled to appear in provincial court in Toronto on May 30.


DSC COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DSC COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
79,593,000
74,492,000
Net inc
b5,208,000
c5,358,000
Share earns
.13
.13
Yr rev
312,376,000
303,951,000
Net inc
b18,368,000
c16,951,000
Share earns
.44
.41


PENTRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENTRON CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 30
1987
1986
Sales
12,846,500
8,684,100
Net inc
393,300
615,900
Share earns
.02
.03
6mo sales
24,931,000
18,121,200
Net inc
538,000
1,212,000
Share earns
.03
.06


WESTERN AUTO SUPPLY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN AUTO SUPPLY CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
250,200,000
231,300,000
Net inc
4,900,000
3,300,000
Share earns
.37
.25
Yr sales
930,800,000
857,400,000
Net inc
b10,500,000
9,400,000
Share earns
.84
.72


AMERICAN PASSAGE MARKETNG reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN PASSAGE MARKETNG (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
8,368,000
7,637,000
Net loss
b733,000
c178,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-After an extraordinary loss of $1,362,000 from settlement of a lawsuit and a gain of $400,000 from a change in accounting for income taxes.


Market Place; Behind the Slide Of Kodak's Stock
LEAD: THE price action in the Eastman Kodak Company's stock shows how quickly a Wall Street favorite can undergo reappraisal by the investment community.


John D. Tracy, Biaggi Aide, 88
LEAD: John D. Tracy, the executive assistant to Representative Mario Biaggi, died of a heart attack Friday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 88 years old and lived in the Bronx.


TYSON'S ATTENTION TURNS TO DIFFERENT KIND OF RING
LEAD: Tony Tubbs slipped into his seat a few minutes before the satellite news conference linking New York and Tokyo was to begin.


Recital: Marian Thompson
LEAD: IN Merkin Concert Hall Sunday evening, Marian Thompson gave an honest, devoted and unaffected performance of Schubert's master work in song, ''Die Winterreise.'' She did not sing any of the 24 songs in an unusual or surprising way, nor did any of them seem to slip through her without contact, as happens when temperamentally unsuited artists essay the work.


U.S. Bond Prices Up a Half-Point
LEAD: Treasury bond prices rose about a half-point yesterday, while interest rates were little changed on short-term bills.


Workshop Opens Doors In Directing for Women
LEAD: For 10 years Randa Haines worked as a script supervisor on other people's movies - all of them directed by men.
Then she heard about Directing Workshop for Women, sponsored by the American Film Institute.
She applied, was accepted, directed her own project for the workshop and began a new career, going on to win an Academy Award nomination as best director for ''Children of a Lesser God.


TENNECO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TENNECO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,968,000,000
3,535,000,000
Net loss
b176,000,000
cd3,000,000
Yr rev
14,790,000,000
14,235,000,000
Net loss
b218,000,000
c39,000,000
b-Includes a pre-tax charge of $250 million for the quarter; the year includes a loss from discontinued operations of $86 million.


Corrections
LEAD: A news analysis article on Tuesday about the Iowa caucuses misstated the percentage of Republican voters for Pat Robertson who said in a New York Times/CBS News Poll that one reason for their support was that they did not like any of the other candidates.
It was 5 percent, not almost half.


CASTLE ENERGY reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CASTLE ENERGY
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,869,519
-
Net inc
b2,502,106
-
Share earns
.87
-
b-Includes a credit of $1,672,319 from the settlement of debt.
Prior year results aren't available due to the company's switch to a fiscal year ended Sept.


INTERNATIONAL TELECHARGE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL TELECHARGE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,352,088
781,161
Net inc
1,045,828
b1,298,437
Share earns
.06
-
Yr rev
36,923,318
1,469,927
Net loss
1,403,266
2,707,226
b-Net loss


Verdict Due Today in Death of Artist
LEAD: For three weeks, a judge in State Supreme Court in Manhattan has been hearing testimony in the murder trial of the sculptor Carl Andre, who is accused of pushing his wife through a window of their 34th-floor apartment in Greenwich Village.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Nat Cohen Dies at 82; British Film Executive
LEAD: Nat Cohen, a Cockney butcher's son who produced such films as ''Darling'' and ''Murder on the Orient Express,'' died today after a heart attack.
He was 82 years old.


Jazz: Bill Frisell Quartet
LEAD: BILL FRISELL'S music dances on quicksand.
Nothing is solid or dependable; his guitar notes slide off the beat, his tone mutates from glassy clarity to echoes and noisy distortion.
His better pieces are equally unstable; they start out as country tunes or boppish jazz lines, only to add extra beats or dissolve to new tempos partway through.


Charity From Gooden
LEAD: Dwight Gooden announced yesterday that he would give $1,000 to a children's hospital every time he pitched a victory for the Mets this season.
He will select a hospital in each city in the National League and make a donation wherever he wins.
He opened the program by giving $1,000 to the All-Children's Hospital in St.


AMISTAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMISTAR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,923,000
5,812,000
Net inc
29,000
216,000
Share earns
.01
.06
Yr sales
19,947,000
17,733,000
Net inc
153,000
172,000
Share earns
.04
.05


TRW President Named Chairman and Chief
LEAD: TRW Inc. said yesterday that Joseph T. Gorman, its president and chief operating officer, would succeed Ruben F. Mettler as chairman and chief executive later this year.


CBS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CBS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
773,000,000
795,000,000
Net inc
b251,600,000
c223,000,000
Share earns
9.73
9.35
Yr sales
2,761,800,000
2,807,900,000
Net inc
b452,500,000
c375,100,000
Share earns
17.74
15.42


The U.S. Should Go on Omaha Mean Time
LEAD: To the Editor:


Eaton Profits Fall 44.9%
LEAD: The Eaton Corporation, a manufacturer of vehicle components and electronic equipment, said today that it earned $25.8 million, or 97 cents a share, in the final quarter, down 44.9 percent from $46.8 million, or $1.53 a share, in the final three months of 1986.
In October, Eaton announced it would sell its military electronics business, and from that point it accounted for that segment's performance as a discontinued operation.


REUTERS HOLDINGS PLC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REUTERS HOLDINGS PLC (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,638,400,000
1,173,500,000
Net inc
207,100,000
152,400,000
Share earns
2.95
2.20
The U.S. dollar equivalents for both years have been converted from sterling at the noon buying rate on Dec.


OCE-VAN DER GRINTEN NV reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OCE-VAN DER GRINTEN NV (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
268,000,000
271,000,000
Net inc
10,300,000
14,200,000
Share earns
3.49
4.97
12mo rev
990,400,000
1,025,000,000
Net inc
40,700,000
45,600,000
Share earns
13.93
15.98


Brass in Myriad Forms
LEAD: ''IT'S organized chaos here,'' said Carole Benson, who with her husband, Gerry, runs the Ben Karpen Brass Corporation in Manhattan.


20% of Claims For Medicare Termed Faulty
LEAD: Hospitals inaccurately report one out of five Medicare claims, and most of the discrepancies result in overpayments to the hospitals by the Government, according to a study issued today by the Department of Health and Human Services.


Suffolk County Executive Proposes Wide-Ranging Agenda
LEAD: Patrick G. Halpin addressing the Suffolk County legislature in Hauppauge, L.I.
Mr.
Halpin, the first Democrat to lead Suffolk County in 16 years, said:


EMERALD HOMES LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMERALD HOMES LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
26,583,000
33,335,000
Net inc
3,280,000
1,423,000
Share earns
.62
.27
Yr rev
84,677,000
94,638,000
Net inc
6,653,000
5,275,000
Share earns
1.26
1.00


Contras to Resume Cease-Fire Negotiations
LEAD: A Nicaraguan rebel leader said today that the contras would resume cease-fire negotiations with the Sandinistas in Guatemala next week.


FLORIDA FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLORIDA FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
11,621,000
b11,398,000
6mo net loss
17,311,000
b18,606,000
b-After a charge of $14,211,000 from the prepayment of Federal Home Loan Bank advances for the quarter and 6 months.


TEKELEC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEKELEC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,001,000
3,756,000
Net inc
500,000
272,000
Share earns
.13
.07
Yr rev
16,991,000
13,987,000
Net inc
749,000
1,384,000
Share earns
.20
.40
Results for the 1987 year include a $381,000 charge from the discontinuance of two product lines.


Buckling Up The Young
LEAD: Kermit the Frog hopped up to Capitol Hill on Tuesday to join lawmakers and safety advocates in the observance of this week as National Child Passenger Safety Awareness Week.
The week is intended to call attention to the need for adults to buckle children properly into safety seats in automobiles.


News Agency Defiance May Change How Medical Findings Are Reported
LEAD: In a move that could dramatically change the way medical news is reported, Reuters will no longer feel bound to observe restrictions on when it can report material from The New England Journal of Medicine, according to the head of the British news agency's operation in this country.


Personal Health
LEAD: ''I've tried liniment and aspirin and my arm still aches.
Can you suggest anything else?''


LONE STAR TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LONE STAR TECHNOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
158,300,000
48,600,000
Net inc
6,400,000
b42,900,000
Share earns
.31
2.15
Yr sales
412,500,000
196,700,000
Net inc
60,000
c9,700,000
Share earns
.03
-


Bush Does an About-Face After Iowa
LEAD: Vice President Bush is in so much trouble in New Hampshire that he came here to a forum with his opponents tonight that he had repeatedly said he would not attend.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Boise Cascade Corp., Boise, Idaho, a forest products company, elected as a director Edson W. Spencer, chairman of Honeywell Inc., Minneapolis.


FRIEDMAN INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRIEDMAN INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,747,854
13,783,627
Net inc
1,113,959
895,760
Share earns
.29
.23
9mo sales
44,195,691
34,739,460
Net inc
2,836,661
1,584,484
Share earns
.74
.41


Florida County Administrator Quits as Allegations Continue
LEAD: Dade County Manager Sergio Pereira, under fire for alleged indiscretions that included a secret land deal that was said to have netted him $120,000, announced tonight that he was resigning.


WOLVERINE TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WOLVERINE TECHNOLOGIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
23,173,000
22,217,000
Net inc
1,233,000
c1,239,000
Share earns
.35
.35
Yr sales
110,695,000
99,760,000
Net inc
b4,623,000
c4,245,000
Share earns
1.29
1.26


Shultz Rebuts Asian Official
LEAD: An Asian official's public attack on a recent United States trade decision sparked a face-to-face confrontation rarely seen in a diplomatic setting and a toughly worded lecture today from Secretary of State George P. Shultz.


Small Manufacturers Lead Revival
LEAD: A neatly lettered sign sits behind Dick Swennumson's desk at the LDI Manufacturing Company on the outskirts of this gritty old railroad town. ''In the final analysis,'' it proclaims with deceptive simplicity, ''success is measured in profit, not volume.''


Peres Welcomes a U.S. Plan on Palestinian Rule
LEAD: Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said today that Israel welcomed a new American peace plan calling for Palestinian autonomy, but there was no indication of an immediate breakthrough.


New Chairman At Rockwell
LEAD: As expected, the Rockwell International Corporation today named Donald R. Beall, who is 49 years old, chairman and chief executive.
He succeeds Robert Anderson, 67, who has served as chairman of the aerospace giant since 1979 and announced plans to resign in October.


MASCO INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MASCO INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
393,950,000
226,500,000
Net loss
b18,680,000
c22,830,000
Yr sales
1,470,420,000
712,260,000
Net inc
b44,300,000
c9,390,000
Share earns
.45
.10
b-Includes a gain of $5,390,000 from early extinguishment of debt and the cumulative effect of an accounting change for the quarter; the year includes an extraordinary charge of $930,000; both periods include an expense provision of 54 cents a share for decline in marketable securities.


ROGERS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROGERS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
40,898,000
32,861,000
Net inc
1,197,000
796,000
Share earns
.40
.27
Yr sales
145,314,000
128,777,000
Net inc
3,377,000
2,327,000
Share earns
1.13
.78


EECO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EECO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
22,763,000
19,185,000
Net inc
717,000
606,000
Share earns
.18
.15
Yr sales
77,728,000
62,583,000
Net inc
1,526,000
2,385,000
Share earns
.38
.61


2 Senate Democrats End Threat to Delay Pact
LEAD: Two Senate Democratic leaders announced today that they were dropping their threat to delay hearings on the new missile treaty with the Soviet Union after receiving a letter from Secretary of State George P. Shultz addressing their concerns about how treaties are made and interpreted.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Horse Racing  Wind Chill Wins: Wind Chill fought off an early challenge by Derby Wish and drew away through the stretch to score a 6 1/2-length victory in the $47,000 allowance feature yesterday at Aqueduct.
Ridden by Chris Antley, Wind Chill carried 115 pounds over 1 mile 70 yards on the fast track in 1:44 3/5 to earn $28,200 for his owner, Topofthepines Farm.


Concert: Quartet From Duke
LEAD: AT the end of the slow movement in Beethoven's ''Harp'' Quartet (Op. 74), there are a series of short, delicate phrases separated by rests - nothing out of the ordinary but the sort of telltale gestures that require from the players a difficult blend of precision and grace.
To make this passage really glow, which is what the Ciompi Quartet accomplished on Monday evening at Merkin Concert Hall, it takes more: a genuine warmth of expression and an effortless sense of coordination among the musicians.


Assembly Chief Leads Attack on Koch
LEAD: The Speaker of the Assembly, Mel Miller, declaring that Mayor Koch ''has lost all credibility'' in Albany, said today that Assembly Democrats were considering changing the way some state aid to New York City was allocated so the Mayor had less direct control over it.


EATON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EATON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
805,100,000
700,000,000
Net inc
b25,800,000
c46,800,000
Share earns
.97
1.53
Shares outst
26,355,000
30,580,000
Yr sales
3,137,900,000
2,759,800,000
Net inc
b201,200,000
c137,600,000
Share earns
7.16
4.29
Shares outst
27,989,000
31,860,000


NETS SCORE VICTORY DESPITE JORDAN'S 34
LEAD: Michael Jordan, the National Basketball Association's master showman, helped draw 16,567 fans tonight to Byrne Meadowlands Arena, where the Nets usually play to a lot of empty seats.


Thompson Aims for Biathlon Medal
LEAD: Josh Thompson says there are certain advantages to being a biathlete.


Tilting Skyscrapers
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Admirality Island Journal; In Drilling for Treasure, Miners Protect the Wild
LEAD: The nation's largest silver mine is taking shape here alongside a sparkling salmon stream in the heart of a lush and wild rain forest.


Advertising; A Bonus System for Agencies
LEAD: ADVERTISING agencies and their clients have been talking for years about coming up with a better way of paying agencies for their services.
R.
J.
Reynolds Tobacco U.S.A., the domestic cigarette marketing arm of RJR Nabisco Inc., has developed a system that some of its agencies think is the best solution yet.


NAC RE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NAC RE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
41,529,000
42,905,000
Net inc
b3,453,000
c1,023,000
Share earns
.48
.19
Shares outsd
7,262,004
5,311,415
Yr rev
162,717,000
96,807,000
Net inc
b11,113,000
c6,143,000
Share earns
1.53
1.17
Shares outst
7,246,032
5,260,496


Washington Talk: Briefing; Toughening the Marines
LEAD: Gen.
Alfred M. Gray, the new Commandant of the Marine Corps who is seeking to restore certain tough traditions among his troops, has ordered a change in the name of marine units that are poised aboard ships to intervene in foreign nations.
They have dropped the word ''amphibious'' in favor of ''expeditionary.


CURTISS WRIGHT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CURTISS WRIGHT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
37,288,000
41,120,000
Net inc
b5,234,000
c6,516,000
Share earns
1.07
1.33
Yr sales
165,064,000
166,444,000
Net inc
b31,612,000
c22,747,000
Share earns
6.48
4.67


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1988
LEAD:  International


T.W.A. Nominates 5 to Texaco Board
LEAD: Trans World Airlines Inc., which is controlled by Carl C. Icahn, said yesterday that it had nominated a slate of candidates to oppose the five Texaco directors up for re-election at the oil company's annual meeting in May.


Otto Nuttli, Seismologist, 61
LEAD: Otto Nuttli, an earthquake expert and professor of geophysics at St.
Louis University, died Tuesday of cancer at the age of 61.


Israeli Doves Call for End Of Occupation
LEAD: A growing minority of Israelis, including some well-known artists and writers, are reacting to the harsh measures being used to quell the Palestinian protests by calling for an end to the Israeli military occupation.


Palestinians Are Using the News Organizations; Playing the Loser
LEAD: To the Editor:


Meese Postpones Announcement On Closing P.L.O.'s U.N. Mission
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, who was expected to announce today that he would order the closing of the Palestine Liberation Organization's observer mission to the United Nations next month, postponed the announcement this afternoon.


Old One-Armed Bandits for the Nostalgia Market
LEAD: Dale Fowler said he thinks there is a strong market for antique chrome-faced one-armed bandits, made during the golden years of slot machines decades ago.


HARMON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARMON INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,525,000
13,980,000
Net inc
757,000
690,000
Share earns
.17
.14
Yr sales
57,068,000
47,223,000
Net inc
1,692,000
2,099,000
Share earns
.38
.43


New York State Sets Bond Sale
LEAD: New York State is offering $180 million in general obligation bonds with a maximum yield of 7.40 percent for bonds due in 30 years through underwriters led by Chase Manhattan Capital Markets.


CONSOLIDATED FIBRES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED FIBRES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
33,688,000
27,992,000
Net inc
b501,000
c420,000
Share earns
.25
.21
6mo sales
64,495,000
55,305,000
Net inc
b1,298,000
c823,000
Share earns
.65
.41


GULF RESOURCES &amp; CHEMICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GULF RESOURCES &amp; CHEMICAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
29,307,000
32,662,000
Net loss
b1,228,000
c2,713,000
Yr rev
162,190,000
126,932,000
Net inc
b37,290,000
cd3,676,000
Share earns
3.76
-
b-After a charge of $2,359,000 from the reversal of a tax credit for the quarter and a tax benefit of $12,912,000 for the year.


20-Year Note Sale By Pitney Bowes
LEAD: The Pitney Bowes Credit Corporation is offering 8 5/8 percent noncallable notes due in 2008 for 100 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


CLEVETRUST REALTY INVESORS SBI reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLEVETRUST REALTY INVESORS SBI (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b498,000
c306,000
Share earns
-
.15
b-Includes a gain of $2,000 from the sale of real estate.
c-Net income and includes a $199,000 gain from the early extinguishment of debt.


WASHINGTON TALK: Working Profile: David E. Price; Professor in Congress Is Doing Homework On Theory and Reality
LEAD: For 17 years, David E. Price taught political science.
His specialty was Congress, his subspecialty the Congressional committee system.


NFS FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NFS FINANCIAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
893,000
538,000
Per share
.29
.18
Yr net inc
2,937,000
1,831,000
Per share
.96
.60


Foundations Contributing To Neediest
LEAD: On behalf of the Ernst Foundation of Manhattan, a trustee, Howard Ernst, sent a gift of $250 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund with the request that it be used to aid the homeless.


Events: Tours, Shows and a Symposium
LEAD: Backstage Tour


ACCOUNTS
LEAD: *
Camp socks, Chain Store Age Executive magazine and the Victrex line of ICI Advanced Materials to Baron &amp; Zaretsky.


Airline Traffic Rises
LEAD: Leading United States airlines reported yesterday that the number of passengers they carried in January rose by a surprisingly strong 6 percent - a gain analysts said came at the expense of smaller regional and national carriers.
January is usually a slow month for air travel, according to analysts.


Common Operation Aimed at Strokes Faces New Questions About Safety
LEAD: Major clinical tests have begun in an attempt to resolve one of the more troubling controversies in medical practice: whether surgery to clear clogged arteries to the brain is worth the risk.


Palestinians Are Using the News Organizations; Jewish Self-Hatred
LEAD: To the Editor:


COPPER ABOVE $1 A POUND; ENERGY PRICES POST DECLINE
LEAD: Prices of copper futures rallied and settled above $1 a pound yesterday, while sharp losses in refined products led energy futures lower.


Savings Unit Deposits
LEAD: Deposits at the nation's savings institutions increased in December for the third consecutive month, continuing a trend that began after the October stock plunge, the Government said Tuesday.
Net deposits rose by $2.4 billion in December, after gains of $3.2 billion in November and $6.2 billion in October, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board said.


WURLITZER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WURLITZER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,622,000
2,123,000
Net loss
2,093,000
639,000
9mo sales
6,218,000
5,617,000
Net loss
3,242,000
3,130,000
Wurlitzer said its previously announced agreement to sell its keyboard operations is proceeding, and if completed, the company anticipates the transaction will close in late February.


Music: Vox Nova Woodwind Quintet
LEAD: EXCEPT for a concert opener by Franz Danzi, the Vox Nova woodwind quintet concerned itself exclusively with the 20th century - and primarily with the last decade - at Weill Recital Hall on Sunday afternoon.
One work, Judith Lang Zaimont's ''When Angels Speak,'' was heard for the first time; another, ''Isonova'' by Louis Calabro, had its first New


ROCHESTER TELEPHONE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCHESTER TELEPHONE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
113,499,000
108,965,000
Net inc
b5,548,000
10,447,000
Share earns
.49
.93
Yr rev
439,239,000
411,748,000
Net inc
b41,887,000
39,758,000
Share earns
3.73
3.55


French in Societe Generale Accord
LEAD: The group of Belgian stockholders headed by Andre Leysen of Geveart N.V. and a French group headed by Compagnie Financiere de Suez signed an agreement tonight to collaborate in shaping the future of Societe Generale de Belgique, Belgium's largest concern.


Parent &amp; child
LEAD: ALL parents will, at some point, object to something that is happening to their children at school.
If the problem is clear-cut, as when a teacher hits a child or writes scathing personal comments on his papers, we act without hesitation to insure his safety and correct the problem.
The response is automatic.


Prosperity (for Better and Worse) Spreads in New Hampshire
LEAD: The New Hampshire that the Presidential candidates are barnstorming in 1988 is visibly different from the state their predecessors campaigned in four years ago.


RUTGERS HAS PRIZE IN ITS RECRUITING
LEAD: Shawn Williams signed the one-page document in the athletic director's office and then posed for pictures with his mother, Ann, and his high school football coach, Tim Hadden.


GAF CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GAF CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
209,098,000
182,242,000
Net inc
b21,374,000
c49,545,000
Share earns
.71
1.36
Shares outst
30,116,000
36,429,000
Yr rev
836,928,000
753,774,000
Net inc
b237,557,000
c293,161,000
Share earns
6.96
8.07


GINSBURG INQUIRY FINDS NO VIOLATION
LEAD: The Justice Department has decided not to seek a special prosecutor to review conflict-of-interest allegations against Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, a department official said today.


FOOD LION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOOD LION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
968,822,370
811,451,280
Net inc
28,174,740
19,466,833
Share earns
.09
.06
Yr sales
2,953,807,275
2,406,582,014
Net inc
85,802,202
61,822,590
Share earns
.27
.19


U.S. Will Investigate Black Man's Killing By 2 White Officers
LEAD: The United States Justice Department said yesterday it would investigate a Queens case to see if two white police officers violated the civil rights of a black man they fatally shot when, according to the police, he lunged at one of the officers with a knife.


Rating Game: Parents Try To Fill Gap In Guidelines
LEAD: WHEN people who now have children were children, there was no Terminator and no Dead Kennedys, no mention of condoms on sitcoms and no video cassettes.
On ''The Ed Sullivan Show,'' the Rolling Stones had to change the words of ''Let's Spend the Night Together.'' Roman Catholics over 30 can remember when the Legion of


Kurt Adler, Conductor Who Led San Francisco Opera, Dies at 82
LEAD: Kurt Herbert Adler, a Viennese-born conductor who led the San Francisco Opera for 28 years until his retirement in 1981, died of a heart attack Tuesday evening at his home in Ross, Calif., a suburb north of San Francisco.
He was 82 years old.


Heritage of Lincoln, the Lawyer
LEAD: Using 20th-century tools - computers, data bases and statistical analysis - the entire legal career of A. Lincoln Esq., scratched down with quill pens in the 19th century, is for the first time being tracked all over the country.


Oh, to Be a Child Again
LEAD: WHEN it comes to being fashionable, children are at a definite advantage.


Murdoch Defends Selection Of Kalikow to Buy The Post
LEAD: Defending his selection of Peter S. Kalikow to buy The New York Post, Rupert Murdoch said yesterday that the proposals offered by at least five other bidders would have demanded even greater concessions than the one from Mr.
Kalikow.


Former University President Is Acquitted in Federal Court
LEAD: The former president of the University of the District of Columbia has been cleared of Federal charges arising from an investigation into alleged misuse of special discretionary funds within the office of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.
A jury in Federal District Court deliberated about two hours Tuesday before acquitting Robert L.


MARIETTA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARIETTA CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,861,063
3,317,010
Net inc
396,755
275,582
Share earns
.17
.12


New Zealand to Cut Taxes
LEAD: New Zealand said today that it would start cutting company and personal taxes in a few weeks but deferred action on imposing a planned single rate of income tax for further consideration.


Mother Criticizes Judge In Howard BeachCase
LEAD: The mother of a white teen-ager sentenced to 10 to 30 years for manslaughter and assault in the Howard Beach case charged yesterday that the judge had ''basically acted as a prosecutor'' and had ''set out'' to have her son and two other teen-agers convicted in the racially volatile case.


EL POLLO ASADO CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EL POLLO ASADO CO
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Revenue
2,670,499
2,734,000
Net loss
1,202,819
b43,202
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
10,213,194
7,461,030
Net loss
2,400,093
b337,712
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income


80 Reported Slain as Bangladesh Votes
LEAD: Supporters of rival candidates in local elections battled each other with rocks, guns and homemade bombs today, and 80 people were reported killed and hundreds wounded across the country.


Bid for Control Looms At American Standard
LEAD: The Black &amp; Decker Corporation, rebuffed on its $2.1 billion bid for American Standard Inc., said yesterday that it would turn to stockholders to gain control of the big plumbing supplier.


Farley Industries Offering $500 Million in Debentures
LEAD: Farley Industries is offering $500 million in speculative-grade debentures, accompanied by warrants entitling holders to buy another $250 million in debentures, through underwriters led by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.


More Arena Football
LEAD: After averaging 11,400 fans for 13 games during 1987, the Arena Football League will resume competition on April 29.


AQUANAUTICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AQUANAUTICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
450,000
241,000
Net inc
b48,000
c190,000
6mo rev
932,000
438,000
Net loss
35,000
501,000
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $75,000.


TELEFLEX INCORPORATED reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELEFLEX INCORPORATED (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
75,755,600
61,137,900
Net inc
5,579,100
4,643,100
Share earns
.51
.42
Yr rev
271,765,600
218,146,900
Net inc
19,671,100
16,430,100
Share earns
1.79
1.51


CENTURY MEDICORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTURY MEDICORP
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,457,647
4,569,679
Net loss
b920,457
c161,404
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
11,492,193
13,155,147
Net loss
b1,858,660
c436,050
Share earns
-
.03
b-Includes an extraordinary loss of $244,440 for both the quarter and 9 months.


INTERSPEC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERSPEC INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
9,026,000
4,739,000
Net inc
b891,000
c463,000
Share earns
.19
.14
Yr sales
32,009,000
13,660,000
Net inc
b3,315,000
c714,000
Share earns
.85
.20
b-After tax credits of $235,000 for the quarter and $1,111,000 for the year.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the theft of art from a Manhattan gallery gave an incorrect first name for the commander of a police squad investigating the theft.
He is Capt.
Joseph M. Greeley.


CAROLINA FREIGHT CARRIERS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAROLINA FREIGHT CARRIERS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
191,942,290
191,224,150
Net inc
1,105,632
4,252,389
Share earns
.17
.64
Yr rev
594,910,770
591,324,453
Net inc
8,620,659
16,643,841
Share earns
1.30
2.53


INTER-REGIONAL FINANCIAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTER-REGIONAL FINANCIAL GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,277,000
c4,370,000
Share earns
.16
.56
Yr net inc
b11,272,000
c16,043,000
Share earns
1.45
2.08
b-After extraordinary gains of $306,000 for the quarter and $3.2 million for the year.


RAMADA INNS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAMADA INNS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
182,112,000
176,593,000
Net loss
2,038,000
c1,653,000
Share earns
-
.04
Yr rev
747,327,000
686,966,000
Net inc
b4,912,000
10,275,000
Share earns
.12
.27


Fund Raising is Halted By Conservative Group
LEAD: A political action committee headed by Representative Newt Gingrich has stopped raising money for conservative candidates because it is mired in debt.


YIELDS ARE DOWN
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were all down modestly for the week ended yesterday.
A reduction in the prime lending rate on Feb. 2 and recent price rises in Government securities continued to affect the money markets.


LIBERTY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIBERTY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
99,050,000
83,677,000
Net inc
b5,390,000
c7,202,000
Share earns
.59
.73
Shares outst
9,178,000
9,821,000
Yr rev
378,044,000
318,443,000
Net inc
b28,120,000
c34,730,000
Share earns
2.95
3.50
Shares outst
9,524,000
9,919,000


Deducting Job Expenses Harder but Still Possible
LEAD: Writing off the cost of a leisurely lunch at the Four Seasons in Manhattan or a night on the town as a business expense is still possible under the new tax law.
So is the cost of hunting for a new job, going to night school or traveling to a midwinter convention in balmy Palm Beach, Fla. - provided a good business connection can be shown.


Runaways Of the 80's: Victims Of Abuse
LEAD: Runaways in the 1980's bear little resemblance to 1960's youths who trekked cross-country with a sense of adventure, according to a survey by a youth-services organization.


UNION ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 310
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 310
1987
1986
Revenue
413,799,000
396,054,000
Net inc
36,458,000
58,257,000
Share earns
.27
.45
Yr rev
1,946,411,000
1,807,182,000
Net inc
333,878,000
351,821,000
Share earns
2.91
1.96


VIKONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIKONICS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,251,292
983,771
Net inc
17,799
b4,447
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
3,433,041
3,365,391
Net loss
222,822
b262,877
Share earns
-
.24
b-Net income and includes a tax credit of $2,000 and $123,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


AMERICAN TECHNICAL CERAMCS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN TECHNICAL CERAMCS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,847,000
5,249,000
Net inc
115,000
b83,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
10,941,000
9,680,000
Net inc
224,000
b192,000
Share earns
.06
-


Who Won, if at All?
LEAD: As returns flowed in from the Iowa caucuses, I was privileged to sit before a television set with Dr.
I.
F.
Attall, the incumbent holder of the Literary Digest Chair of Current and Near-Term Anthropology at Nostradamus University.
Dr.
Attall had agreed to share his interpretation of the returns exclusively with readers of this column, after first measuring them at 1.201 percent of registered Republicans who say they will take part in the South Carolina caucuses on


William E. Woodman, Insurance Executive, 68
LEAD: William E. Woodman, a retired insurance executive, died of heart failure Saturday at his home in Fort Myers, Fla.
He was 68 years old and also lived in Short Hills, N.J.


Palestinians Are Using the News Organizations; A Naive Ideal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Auto Pricing And Politics
LEAD: One of the hottest political questions in Washington is how much a $10,000 Chrysler car exported from the United States sells for in South Korea.
The answer, according to


Books of The Times
LEAD: WIND STAR. The Building of a Sailship.


At The Post, An Obituary Is Drafted
LEAD: Jerry Tallmer was searching, just as he does when he writes, for the right words.
He was silent a moment, tried to recall the precise quote, went to look it up and then wrote it out on a slip of paper, complete with punctuation and citation:


KRUG INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KRUG INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
34,441,000
29,635,000
Net inc
39,000
155,000
Share earns
.01
.04
9mo rev
102,829,000
87,689,000
Net inc
85,000
1,564,000
Share earns
.02
.37


Repeal the P.L.O. Shutdown Law
LEAD: The law ordering the closing of the Palestine Liberation Organization's observer mission at the United Nations affronts American traditions and violates U.S. obligations as host to the U.N.
Unless Congress reverses itself, this law, already a profound embarrassment, could produce an adverse judgment in the World


G.A.O. Urges Caution on a Glass-Steagall Repeal
LEAD: The General Accounting Office has recommended that Congress take a go-slow approach should it decide to repeal the Glass-Steagall Act, which separates banking from securities underwriting.


The Doughnut On Rose's Bat
LEAD: ''A new fielder's glove has arrived from Sears and with it the early morning sound of a ball rolling off the barn roof and landing back up there again with a sharp plunk. . . .
It has been an early spring. . . .''


GRAINGER, W W INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAINGER, W W INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
337,657,000
295,395,000
Net inc
24,022,000
21,261,000
Share earns
.85
.73
Yr sales
1,320,797,000
1,159,595,000
Net inc
90,506,000
b86,112,000
Share earns
3.14
2.96


Houston to Offer Bonds for Airport
LEAD: Houston is offering $85 million in airport senior lien revenue bonds through underwriters led by Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., with a maximum yield of 8.20 percent for an issue due in 2017.


COMMONWEALTH SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN OF FLORIDA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMONWEALTH SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN OF FLORIDA
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,281,000
1,751,000
Share earns
.71
.93
9mo net loss
1,612,000
b5,488,000
Share earns
-
2.94
b-Net income and after an extraordinary charge of $235,000.


Metromedia Chief Raises Orion Stake
LEAD: John W. Kluge, chairman and president of the Metromedia Company, has once again raised his stake in the Orion Pictures Corporation.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Kluge said that he had increased his Orion stake to 25.6 percent, from 24 percent, through open market purchases of 283,000 Orion shares between Jan.


Graphic Design Out of a Utopian Past
LEAD: THESE are some of the things Tibor Kalman, a founder of the New York graphic design firm M &amp; Co., finds ''endlessly inspiring'':


Palestinians Are Using the News Organizations; Not Animals
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Purged Chinese Intellectual Derides Talk of Liberalization
LEAD: China's most prominent dissident intellectual, breaking an imposed silence, today assailed harsh political controls on university students and teachers.


Terra Cotta On Exhibit And as Part Of the City
LEAD: TERRA cotta, the fireproof and durable baked clay material that has ornamented many of New York's most famous facades, is making a comeback.
No longer restricted to gargoyles and Art Deco swirls, it has captured the interest of contemporary urban artists and architects, who see it as a pliable, practical building material that can still respond to an artist's imagination.


HEALTH IMAGES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTH IMAGES INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,440,509
2,044,882
Net loss
298,689
b108,410
Yr rev
14,499,197
5,008,065
Net loss
1,886,290
430,027
b-Net income  The latest year loss included a non- recurring expense of $1,827,325 for exchange of Junior common stock.


Expansion Backed At Freddie Mac
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation's board yesterday authorized the quasi-governmental agency, known as Freddie Mac, to broaden the variety of securities it may issue to include up to $15 billion in real estate mortgage investment conduits and an unidentified amount of interest-only, principal-only securities.


COMMUNITY PSYCHIATRIC CENERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMUNITY PSYCHIATRIC CENERS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
74,144,000
62,638,000
Net inc
13,277,000
11,306,000
Share earns
.29
.25
Yr rev
295,579,000
246,771,000
Net inc
60,024,000
51,339,000
Share earns
1.32
1.14


Olympic Notebook; Good Start for Zurbriggen
LEAD: Pirmin Zurbriggen of Switzerland, the favorite, recorded the fastest time today in the first men's downhill training run for the XV Olympic Winter Games.
Competition in Alpine skiing will start Sunday with the men's downhill.


Museum Show Honors 25 Years of Channel 13
LEAD: The Museum of Broadcasting at 1 East 53d Street will mark the 25th anniversary of WNET starting tomorrow, with a three-month survey of distinguished programs that have been seen on the public television station since its inception.


TV Changes Character of the Iowa Caucuses
LEAD: The Iowa caucuses aren't what they once were, and they probably never will be again.


CUSTOMEDIX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CUSTOMEDIX CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,839,052
1,314,598
Net inc
b334,674
cd1,691,202
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
20,937,707
2,339,276
Net inc
b880,652
d2,809,704
Share earns
.03
.23
Shares outst
31,230,492
12,172,856





Against the Clock
LEAD: Marcus O'Sullivan of Ireland, the miler who has won all three of his indoor starts this season, is prepared to take a gamble in his specialty Saturday night at the Vitalis/U.S.
Olympic Invitational meet at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in East Rutherford, N.J.


Old Images Of Colonial Life in U.S. Revised
LEAD: COLONIAL WILLIAMSBURG is changing. The paint is peeling off the picket fences.


ROSS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROSS INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,390,968
972,705
Net inc
49,906
b96,720
6mo sales
2,608,319
2,295,145
Net loss
63,243
70,506
b-Net loss


DURIRON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DURIRON CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
49,128,921
34,311,104
Net inc
2,549,657
b495,574
Share earns
.37
-
Yr sales
182,092,656
144,290,484
Net inc
6,167,773
3,463,339
Share earns
.88
.50
Shares outst
7,029,718
6,719,514


EVANS'S 20 ASSISTS LEAD TEMPLE, 98-86
LEAD: Mark Macon, a freshman guard, scored a season-high 31 points and Howard Evans, the senior playmaker, had 15 points and a school-record 20 assists tonight to lead No. 1 Temple to a 98-86 rout of Villanova.


Holiday Weekend
LEAD: Tomorrow is Lincoln's Birthday; Washington's Birthday is observed Monday.
Following are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Parade: Monday, begins 9:15 A.M. at 35th St. and heads north on 5th Ave. to St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Parking: Alternate-side rules are suspended tomorrow and Monday.


Jazz: Shearing Trio
LEAD: SINCE George Shearing gave up playing with a quintet 10 years ago, he has been performing in a duo with a bassist.
However, as part of his annual three-month stand in the Cafe Carlyle, Madison Avenue at 76th Street, he has enlarged his group to a trio for the month of February.


U.S. Says Schiff Was Mastermind of $40 Million in Fraud Schemes
LEAD: A Federal prosecutor said yesterday that Irwin Schiff, a wealthy businessman who was slain in a Manhattan restaurant last summer, was the mastermind of a series of fraudulent financial transactions believed to total about $40 million.


ECHO BAY MINES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ECHO BAY MINES LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
59,300,000
46,400,000
Net inc
14,900,000
9,000,000
Share earns
.16
.10
Yr rev
215,200,000
126,100,000
Net inc
48,500,000
25,900,000
Share earns
.52
.30


U.S. FINDS 6 STATES FAIL TO MEET GOALS IN DESEGREGATION
LEAD: The Education Department said today that six Southern and border states were still in partial violation of a 17-year-old court order to rid their public colleges of the effects of segregation.


Stage: 'Mythos Oedipus' at La Mama
LEAD: ELLEN STEWART goes behind and beyond Sophocles in ''Mythos Oedipus.'' Gods, monsters, seers and appalling freaks of nature only mentioned in choruses by Sophocles inhabit the world of what Miss Stewart calls her ''dance-opera,'' being given its American premiere by the Great Jones Repertory Company at the La Mama Annex (it was first presented in Delphi and two other Greek locations in 1985).


Parole Scheduled for Convict In Tylenol Extortion Scheme
LEAD: An imprisoned tax accountant who plotted to extort $1 million from the manufacturer of Tylenol after seven people were killed here by cyanide-filled Tylenol capsules will be paroled in August 1989 if he stays out of trouble, a Federal official says.


Subject: Panama
LEAD: A witness identified as Floyd Carlton, a Panamanian pilot, entering Senate hearing room yesterday.
Earlier, Jose I. Blandon ended his testimony about Gen.


SPIEGEL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPIEGEL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
361,044,000
335,254,000
Net inc
21,288,000
c21,597,000
Share earns
.48
.55
Yr sales
1,065,250,000
1,002,230,000
Net inc
b49,111,000
36,209,000
Share earns
1.22
.92


Kuwait B.P. Stake
LEAD: The Kuwait Investment Office announced it had further increased its stake in the British Petroleum Company to 19.27 percent from 19.24 percent.
The London-based investment arm of the Kuwaiti Government said it had bought another two million partly paid shares on Tuesday.
It did not disclose the purchase price.


Gore Asks U.S. for Ruling On Foes' Spending for TV
LEAD: Questioning the practices of two rivals, Senator Albert Gore Jr.'s Presidential campaign today asked the Federal Election Commission to rule on the legitimacy of skirting state spending limits by counting television advertisements as fund-raising expenses.


Today's Bathrooms With Yesterday's Elegance
LEAD: OUT of America's fascination with all things antique has grown a market for bygone bathroom styles that is bringing back the pedestal sink, the ornate ceramic toilet and the claw-foot tub.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Washington Talk page Tuesday, about Senator Bill Bradley and his vote against aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, misidentified the only non-Southern state with a Democratic Senator who voted for the aid.
The state was Nebraska, not Kansas.
Because of an editing error, the article also misstated the year in which Senator Bradley began his support of the aid.


Beyond Needles: the AIDS War
LEAD: Imagine Sam, a heroin addict: His habit is up to $100 a day - he's dropped out of community college and started stealing cars full time.
But that's the least of it.
Now his girlfriend has begun to hassle him about AIDS.
She's plainly terrified that he might get the disease from one of the junkies with whom he shoots up, passing needles around.


TEMPEST TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEMPEST TECHNOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,393,000
7,144,000
Net inc
1,283,000
974,000
Share earns
.16
.14
9mo rev
20,438,000
13,442,000
Net inc
3,421,000
1,707,000
Share earns
.47
.24


HOLIDAY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOLIDAY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Revenue
380,128,000
391,766,000
Net loss
b18,648,000
c10,072,000
Share earns
-
.42
Yr rev
1,662,742,000
1,647,788,000
Net inc
b108,145,000
103,370,000
Share earns
4.42
4.15


CORKEN INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORKEN INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,387,000
2,263,000
Net inc
284,000
192,000
Share earns
.09
.07
6mo sales
4,975,000
4,646,000
Net inc
494,000
382,000
Share earns
.16
.14


Topics of The Times; Housing Bonus for Harlem
LEAD: A proposal by the New York City Planning Commission would rezone Fifth Avenue north of 96th Street to encourage construction of badly needed new housing between 96th and 110th Streets.
The plan deserves the Board of Estimate's support.


JOSLYN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOSLYN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
38,106,000
34,872,000
Net inc
3,079,000
1,882,000
Share earns
.64
.40
Yr sales
156,480,000
149,501,000
Net loss
5,087,000
b10,758,000
Share earns
-
2.25


South Africa Quells Coup Attempt in a Homeland
LEAD: The South African Government sent troops into a nominally independent black homeland today and reinstated its leader 15 hours after he was ousted in a military coup.


New Opera Seasons Announced
LEAD: New York's two major opera companies announced their new seasons yesterday.
The Metropolitan Opera will present five new productions in an extended 32-week 1988-89 season, one of them a double bill, as well as three complete cycles of its new production of Wagner's ''Ring des Nibelungen.''


American Cellular Deal
LEAD: The Comcast Corporation, a fast-growing operator of cable television systems, said yesterday that it would break into the cellular telephone business with the acquisition of the American Cellular Network Corporation for $230 million.


HERSHEY FOODS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HERSHEY FOODS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
665,719,000
614,971,000
Net inc
40,518,000
37,637,000
Share earns
.45
.41
Shares outst
90,186,336
92,058,144
Yr sales
2,433,793,000
2,169,614,000
Net inc
148,171,000
132,764,000
Share earns
1.64
1.42
Shares outst
90,186,336
93,508,322


CONVEX COMPUTER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONVEX COMPUTER (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
20,172,000
12,921,000
Net inc
b2,326,000
c1,407,000
Share earns
.13
.08
Yr rev
69,647,000
40,182,000
Net inc
b8,845,000
c3,994,000
Share earns
.49
.27


WPP in Deal For Anspach
LEAD: WPP Group P.L.C., a London-based marketing firm that owns J. Walter Thompson, said it had acquired Anspach Grossman Portugal, a corporate-identity consultant with offices in New York and San Francisco.
The British firm has agreed to pay up to $36 million in cash for the firm, whose major clients include American Express, Citicorp, Hewlett-Packard, Quaker Oats, Sara Lee, Texaco and


GNI GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GNI GROUP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,707,679
1,018,112
Net inc
b223,735
c329,604
Share earns
.07
-
6mo rev
4,898,992
2,144,421
Net inc
b407,535
c498,961
Share earns
.13
-
b-Included tax credits of $76,070 for the quarter and $138,562 for the 6 months.


CHYRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHYRON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
11,178,000
9,336,000
Net inc
b1,022,000
670,000
Share earns
.10
.07
6mo sales
21,925,000
18,414,000
Net inc
b1,842,000
1,276,000
Share earns
.18
.13


TELEPROBE SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELEPROBE SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Revenue
652,000
1,314,000
Net inc
b53,000
c204,000
Share earns
.01
.04
6mo rev
4,141,000
2,457,000
Net inc
b3,071,000
c290,000
Share earns
.74
.04
b-Includes a tax benefit of $21,000 and $1,221,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Itinerant Painter Only Does Ceilings
LEAD: THE itinerant ceiling painter Larry Boyce has arrived in New York City after clocking 8,600 miles across the Canadian Rockies on his bicycle.
Mr.
Boyce may be identified by his zebra-striped tights and his tendency to color-coordinate his clothes with his ceilings.


BOBSLEDDER REGAINS BACKUP POSITION
LEAD: He received encouraging news from his attorney in Boston this morning and immediately began packing for his trip to the Winter Olympics.
Although the issue has not been officially resolved, Donald LaVigne will be rejoining his teammates on the United States bobsled team, fulfilling a goal he set a year ago when he decided to take a year off from Harvard to pursue his


A Furnished Apartment Is a Start for a Homeless Family
LEAD: ''IT looks like we went out and bought the furniture,'' said Edwin DeLeon, still in shock six weeks after opening the door to his new apartment and finding it furnished like a Seaman's showroom. ''It was exactly what we had in mind.''


Art Gallery Raid Involved Daring Acrobatics
LEAD: The thieves who took $6 million in paintings and drawings from a New York City art gallery this week carried out ''a very daring raid,'' lowering themselves from a skylight in an acrobatic rope manuever in which one slip could have sent them plunging down a four-story stairwell, a top police investigator said yesterday.


Weakened Pistons Turn Back Knicks
LEAD: Joe Dumars, the subject of trade rumors, scored 12 of his 18 points in the third quarter tonight, leading the Detroit Pistons to a 98-87 victory over the Knicks.
The loss was the Knicks' 16th straight on the road.


DURHAM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DURHAM CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,625,000
c4,865,000
Share earns
.55
.57
Yr net inc
b18,287,000
c22,740,000
Share earns
2.16
2.66
b-Includes gains on investments of $1,769,000 and $8,354,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


OTRA SECURITIES GROUP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OTRA SECURITIES GROUP
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,675,000
1,279,000
Net inc
132,000
b91,000
b-Net loss


First Executive
LEAD: The First Executive Corporation said that a Delaware state court had refused to halt a tender offer for First Executive shares from the ICH Corporation, an action sought by two shareholders as part of a lawsuit.
The suit seeks to overturn a standstill agreement between the Los Angeles-based insurer and ICH, of Louisville, Ky.


Temple Vandal Sentenced
LEAD: The son of a Russian Orthodox priest was sentenced today to five years probation for spray-painting swastikas and anti-Semitic slogans on a synagogue, Temple Beth Shalom, in Mahopac last November.
The youth, Andrei Federoff, 17 years old, of Mahopac, was also ordered to pay damages, get counseling and do community service.


Man Gets Prison Term in Bid To Send Metals to Pakistan
LEAD: A man convicted of trying to export to Pakistan special metals used in making nuclear bombs was sentenced today to five years in prison.


Bill Controlling Campaign Gifts Could Affect 3
LEAD: A substantial majority of the campaign money raised by Mayor Koch and two other officials in 1985 would have been barred under a bill passed by the City Council Tuesday, according to Board of Elections records and politicians familiar with the campaigns.


Mark D. Soroko, Corporate Executive, 87
LEAD: Mark D. Soroko, a retired senior vice president and board member of Revlon Inc., died of heart failure Saturday at St.
Francis Hospital in Miami.
He was 87 years old and lived in Bal Harbor, Fla.


Syracuse Wins The Showdown
LEAD: A crowd of 16,798 packed the Civic Arena tonight to watch the Big East's two best teams duel in a conference showdown.
Pro basketball scouts came in droves to see four of the nation's best big men: Charles Smith and Jerome Lane for Pitt, Rony Seikaly and Derrick Coleman for Syracuse.


DATAREX SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATAREX SYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,790,000
8,153,000
Net inc
513,000
208,000
Share earns
.29
.19
Shares outst
1,770,831
1,108,678
Yr sales
43,935,000
24,839,000
Net inc
1,076,000
459,000
Share earns
.61
.41


PACIFICORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFICORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
570,100,000
579,600,000
Net inc
76,600,000
81,500,000
Share earns
1.04
1.13
Shares outst
69,681,000
67,702,000
Yr rev
2,162,500,000
2,066,900,000
Net inc
266,300,000
250,900,000
Share earns
3.60
3.45
Shares outst
69,045,000
66,825,000


U.A.W. Action Set On Chrysler Unit
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers union said it would oppose the sale of the Chrysler Corporation's Accustar subsidiary and would take action to try to prevent any sale, including seeking a meeting with Chrysler executives and demonstrating in front of Chrysler headquarters.


Italy's Government Falls After Budget Defeats
LEAD: Prime Minister Giovanni Goria resigned today after six months as head of Italy's 47th postwar Government, a coalition battered by political infighting and a hostile Parliament.


Commuter Plane Crashes
LEAD: A commuter plane on a training flight crashed near Springfield Municipal Airport on Tuesday, killing three people, the State Highway Patrol said.
Officials said the Piedmont Airlines plane was practicing takeoffs and landings at the airport when it crashed about 3 P.M.


Washington Talk: Congress; Budget Cuts? 'Not in My District!'
LEAD: It was bound to happen.


A Shift in Third World Funds' Flow
LEAD: The world's poorest and most indebted countries are beginning to get less in combined aid each year from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund than they are paying in interest and principal on outstanding debt to the two organizations, an analysis has disclosed.


ENGRAPH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENGRAPH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
32,399,000
26,412,000
Net inc
960,000
458,000
Share earns
.15
.09
Shares outst
6,330,000
5,467,000
Yr sales
122,828,000
108,843,000
Net inc
3,876,000
2,988,000
Share earns
.68
.55
Shares outst
5,719,000
5,459,000


NASA May Replace 72 Bolts in Nozzles Of Shuttle Boosters
LEAD: The space agency and Morton Thiokol Inc., the rocket manufacturer, are debating whether they must replace 72 bolts inside the nozzle of each space shuttle booster rocket as a safety measure.


Remains of 6 Vietnam War Fliers Identified
LEAD: Six sets of remains, including one returned two and a half years ago, have been positively identified as Navy and Air Force fliers missing from the Vietnam War, the Pentagon said Tuesday.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.We put down new carpet in our entrance hall with a thick pad beneath it.
The bottom of the front door had to be trimmed slightly to clear the carpet, and now on windy days we get cold drafts under the door.
I can't put regular weatherstripping along the bottom of the door because it won't clear the carpet.


Inquiries Confirm That Goldin Is Off All Hooks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ex-F.B.I. Translator Indicted
LEAD: A former translator of Chinese for the Federal Bureau of Investigation has been arrested and indicted on a charge of providing classified information to the Government of Taiwan, the bureau announced today.


Options Customers Will Get $1 Million In an Amex Refund
LEAD: In an unusual effort to calm investors' fears about the options market, the American Stock Exchange said yesterday that as much as $1 million would be refunded to some customers who traded stock index options on Oct. 20.


Bridge: Lucky Guesses by Experts May Well Be Results of Skill
LEAD: Many years ago an inexperienced player was heard to complain: ''Those experts are so lucky.
They always guess right.''


2 Indicted in North Carolina In Newspaper Hostage Case
LEAD: Two men who held 19 people hostage at a newspaper office last week to dramatize complaints of discrimination and public corruption have been indicted on weapons and hostage-taking charges.


U.S. Detects Radioactive Leaks at 3 More Plants
LEAD: Federal officials said today that they had found three more plants where a widely used industrial device leaked tiny particles of radioactive polonium, but added, ''So far we've seen nothing that would pose a threat to public health.''


RECAP ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RECAP ENTERPRISES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
238,700,000
208,200,000
Net inc
18,900,000
10,300,000
Share earns
.37
.26
Yr rev
927,000,000
635,500,000
Net inc
b62,500,000
13,000,000
Share earns
1.28
.38


CONVERGENT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONVERGENT INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
100,420,000
77,398,000
Net loss
b23,913,000
4,476,000
Yr rev
384,817,000
305,825,000
Net loss
b32,608,000
32,835,000
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $1,755,000 and $2,203,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and a loss of $3,861,000 on disposal of discontinued operations for both the quarter and year.


Palestinians Are Using the News Organizatins; Piling On
LEAD: To the Editor:


SMITH INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SMITH INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
77,968,000
63,208,000
Net inc
b70,749,000
c44,384,000
Share earns
3.04
-
Yr rev
264,373,000
323,982,000
Net inc
b29,669,000
c149,032,000
Share earns
1.29
-


A Dazzling Light Show Animates a Bridge
LEAD: THE most visible decorations along the approach to the Benjamin Franklin Bridge used to be gaudy casino billboards.
But since last fall, Philadelphians and New Jerseyans have been treated to an animated light show on the bridge, which runs nearly three-quarters of a mile over the Delaware River and is the link between Philadelphia and Camden, N


Talks on Dana Unit
LEAD: Robert Bosch G.m.b.H., a privately held manufacturer of electrical appliances and auto parts, said that it was negotiating the acquisition of the Racine Hydraulics division from the Dana Corporation, based in Toledo, Ohio.
The German company said in a statement that its Robert Bosch Corporation unit in Broadview, Ill., was holding talks with Dana representatives.


Michael Jackson and U2 Share British Awards
LEAD: Michael Jackson, Britain's George Michael and the Irish group U2 have won the British record industry's top 1988 awards.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''Laws that limit the acceptable focus of one's sexual desires to members of the opposite sex, like laws that limit one's choice of spouse (or sexual partner) to members of the same race, cannot withstand constitutional scrutiny absent a compelling governmental justification.'' - Federal Judge William Norris, in a decision overturning the Army's ban on homosexuals.


Critic's Notebook; Decrescendo in the Concert Business
LEAD: THE troubles suffered recently by the Nashville Symphony, which was forced by financial problems to stop performing, come as the latest in an ominous series of setbacks for orchestras around the country.
In the past several months, ensembles in New Orleans, San Diego, Vancouver, Denver, Detroit, Oakland, Calif., and elsewhere have been disbanded, gone on strike over wage cuts or accepted reduced salaries or shortened schedules.


Manhattan Board Rejects Salant Bid
LEAD: Manhattan Industries said that its board had rejected an unsolicited takeover offer from the Salant Corporation.
The apparel maker characterized the $16-a-share offer as inadequate and not in the best interests of its shareholders.
Officials at Salant, also an apparel company, said they had no official comment on the rejection.


Talking Deals; The Hostile Bid Reaches Europe
LEAD: IT can now be said that the hostile bid has arrived in Europe - and in a big way.
Hostile has certainly become the right word since Carlo de Benedetti stirred so much antagonism with his bid to take control of Societe Generale de Belgique.
He has encountered a hostile management, hostile Government, hostile press and hostile citizenry.


Comments From Findings on Bias in Colleges
LEAD: The Education Department's finding that six Southern and border states had failed to desegregate their higher education systems included a number of steps that the department said were required to bring the systems into compliance.
Following are some of the steps ordered and comments about those state's systems.


Can the Good Petain Be Rescued From the Bad?
LEAD: In the gloomy chamber where the town council convenes, Mayor Jacques Barat-Dupont pointed a stubby finger at the slab bearing the names of Verdun's citizens of honor.
In freshly carved wooden letters stood a surname that stirs pride and shame in France: ''General Petain, victor of Verdun.''


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
CFM International, a company jointly owned by General Electric Co. and Snecma of France, said Lufthansa German Airlines had placed a firm $150 million order for 15 CFM aircraft engines.


CADMUS COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CADMUS COMMUNICATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
36,711,000
28,127,000
Net inc
742,000
1,058,000
Share earns
.12
.18
6mo sales
71,857,000
55,726,000
Net inc
2,065,000
1,881,000
Share earns
.34
.32


CHIEFTAIN DEVELOPMENT CO reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHIEFTAIN DEVELOPMENT CO (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
76,620,000
73,986,000
Net inc
9,619,000
b16,600,000
Share earns
.17
-
b-Net loss and after a writedown of $23.7 million U.S. oil and gas properties.


Michael Feinstein's Blue Heaven
LEAD: THE very first night Michael Feinstein spent in the first home he has ever owned - the time was early January; the place, Hollywood -the 31-year-old singer-pianist went to bed thinking: ''I'm a grown-up now!
Oh, my God, isn't this wonderful?''


Washington Talk: Briefing; Lone Sailor Is Not Alone
LEAD: The United States Navy memorial on Pennsylvania Avenue was inaugurated last October in a ceremony that evoked the nation's maritime heroics with its statue of the Lone Sailor on the edge of an outdoor amphitheater.
But there was also a relatively unsung international aspect to the project.


First Issue of Sassy Due Out Next Week
LEAD: The premier issue of Sassy, a magazine for teen-age girls, is scheduled to hit newsstands on Tuesday.
An issue will cost $2, with a yearly subscription $13.98.


Home Improvement
LEAD: ALTHOUGH resilient floors -asphalt, linoleum, vinyl, rubber, cork - require little maintenance, they are not impervious to damage.
Flooring that is stained, scratched, blistered or torn can be repaired.


Topics of The Times; Good Deal for a School
LEAD: It's not often that the chance to help a New York City school combines with a commercial real estate development at no cost to taxpayers.


Work-Spend Ethic
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Slave's Daughter, 104
LEAD: Daisy Turner, the daughter of a slave who ran away from a plantation and moved to Vermont after the Civil War, died Monday.
She was 104 years old.


Waldheim Telegram Called Fake
LEAD: The Yugoslav press agency reported today that a document said to link President Kurt Waldheim of Austria to Nazi war crimes was a fake and that a forgery investigation was under way.


HOMOSEXUAL BAN IN ARMY REJECTED BY APPEALS COURT
LEAD: A Federal appeals court in San Francisco struck down the Army's ban on homosexuals yesterday, ruling that homosexuals are entitled to as much protection against discrimination as members of racial minority groups.


John B. Madden, 69; Led Brown Bros. Firm
LEAD: John Beckwith Madden, a general partner in the private banking firm of Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, died of a heart attack Tuesday at his home in Brooklyn Heights.
He was 69 years old and also lived in Christmas Cove, Me.


Pagliarulo Loses Arbitration
LEAD: Mike Pagliarulo, who in the previous two winters encountered bitter contract negotiations with the Yankees, lost his salary arbitration case yesterday after having rejected a compromise settlement.


Question Raised As to the Father Of an Asian Girl
LEAD: The touching story of a veteran who saw the photograph of a young Vietnamese girl in a magazine and thereby found the long-lost daughter he fathered in the war has taken an unexpected turn: The girl he brought back to California may not be his child.


DECLINE PREDICTED FOR MAIL SERVICE IN NEW YORK CITY
LEAD: Mail service in New York City is likely to deteriorate because of a ''crazy'' Government mandate to reduce spending on operations and mail-processing plants, John M. Nolan, postmaster of the New York division of the Postal Service, said yesterday.


Metro Matters; When a Student Is Counted As 94% of One
LEAD: Two centuries ago, framers of the United States Constitution devised an ingenious formula to skirt the slavery issue.
They cryptically declared that representation and direct taxation shall be apportioned among the states by adding to the total number of free persons ''three fifths of all other persons.


ENVIROSAFE SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENVIROSAFE SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,014,000
10,029,000
Net inc
1,040,000
c2,698,000
Share earns
.27
.90
Shares outst
3,841,000
3,000,000
Yr rev
40,421,000
31,568,000
Net inc
b4,078,000
c4,724,000
Share earns
1.15
1.58
Shares outst
3,548,000
3,000,000


The Modern Picks Scholar as Pivotal Curator
LEAD: In a long-expected move but one attended by staff controversy, the Museum of Modern Art has named Kirk Varnedoe, a professor at New York University's Institute of Fine Art, to the powerful post of director of painting and sculpture.


Piano: Emanuel Krasovsky
LEAD: EMANUEL KRASOVSKY drew a select and musical audience to his performance at Weill Recital Hall on Tuesday evening, and it was immediately easy to hear why; the Lithuanian-born Israeli pianist has a command of the keyboard and a substance to his musical thinking that compel attention.
He began with Beethoven (Op.


GIRLS, AT 7, THINK THIN, STUDY FINDS
LEAD: Girls come to believe that thin is beautiful as early as age 7 or even younger, according to a new report linking that attitude to a rising incidence of eating disorders in young girls.


Word on Products Expected at I.B.M.
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation will introduce mainframe computer products next week in a step to rejuvenate its aging mainframe line, industry sources said.
The sources said, however, that an announcement on Monday probably would not include a new series of I.B.M.'s 3090 mainframes that the company's largest customers, already straining the limits of their machines, are eagerly awaiting.


ADDISON-WESLEY PUBLISHING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADDISON-WESLEY PUBLISHING CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
36,059,000
29,855,000
Net inc
444,000
b352,000
Share earns
.17
-
Yr sales
167,358,000
150,118,000
Net inc
9,504,000
7,998,000
Share earns
3.68
3.12


RETAILING CORP OF AMEICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RETAILING CORP OF AMEICA (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
39,317,000
35,507,000
Net inc
1,273,000
1,040,000
Share earns
.41
.33
9mo rev
97,816,000
76,523,000
Net inc
2,124,000
1,531,000
Share earns
.68
.49


Complaint Filed
LEAD: Mike Cingiser, the Brown University basketball coach, faces arraignment in California on Feb. 23 on charges of disorderly conduct and of assaulting a fan who heckled his team in December.


Trump Revises Project for West Side
LEAD: In an effort to reduce opposition to his proposed Television City project, Donald J. Trump disclosed a new plan yesterday that would include 760 low-cost apartments for the elderly and increased park space.


Collapsible Bicycle In Progress
LEAD: THE Italian designer Richard Sapper, creator of the Tizio lamp, is now at work on a bicycle.
Although the project is still in the planning stage, Mr.
Sapper did say that his new bicycle would be a lightweight fold-up variety, ''long and narrow like a stick so you can take it into a bus.''


On Exhibit: A Lamp Called Sardine
LEAD: ''IT is meant to look like a cat ate it,'' said Tucker Viemeister, the designer, along with Lisa Krohn, of a lamp called Sardine that is being shown at the ''Furniture and Counter-Parts'' exhibit at Gallery 91 in Manhattan.


Palestinians Are Using the News Organizations
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nofziger Jury Starts Debate on Whether He Broke Ethics Law
LEAD: A jury began deliberations today in the Federal ethics trial of Lyn Nofziger, the former White House political director who is accused of unlawfully lobbying on behalf of the Wedtech Corporation and other private clients in 1982.


Democrat Leaving Congress
LEAD: Representative Ed Jones, Democrat of Tennessee, said today that he would retire from Congress at the end of his term, leaving the seat he has held since 1969.
Mr.
Jones, who is 75 years old and a ranking member of the Committee on Agriculture, was first elected to fill the unexpired term of Representative Robert A.


INGLES MARKETS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INGLES MARKETS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
183,342,539
158,851,385
Net inc
3,481,911
3,070,003
Share earns
.20
.21
Shares outst
17,548,200
14,583,015


Gephardt Grasped The No. 1 Issue
LEAD: The last two Presidential elections have been fought over the issue of which party was better equipped to arrest the decline of America.
In 1980, Ronald Reagan promised voters to restore America's ''place in the sun.'' In 1984, he claimed that ''America is back.'' In 1988, the worry about decline continues to plague voters; however, it is no longer focused on military comparisons with the Soviet Union or the memory of American humiliation in


MACMILLAN BLOEDEL LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACMILLAN BLOEDEL LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
791,200,000
542,200,000
Net inc
62,900,000
23,300,000
Share earns
.57
.16
Yr sales
3,130,000,000
2,510,000,000
Net inc
280,600,000
b178,300,000
Share earns
2.56
1.55


Political Marketing; Simon Gears A TV Attack On Gephardt
LEAD: The Presidential campaign of Paul Simon, the homespun Illinois Senator who had rejected negative television advertising in Iowa, said today that it had borrowed $110,000 to begin a television offensive on Thursday against a Democratic rival, Richard A. Gephardt.


Hers
LEAD: ''KILL her!'' the audience howls as Anne Archer pulls the trigger on Glenn Close in the movie ''Fatal Attraction.'' I would like to unclench my fist and join the ecstatic applause.
If only life were so clear cut.


Fight Canceled
LEAD: The International Boxing Federation light-heavyweight title fight between Charles Williams of Grand Rapids, Mich., the champion, and Tom Collins of Britain, scheduled for Feb. 20 in Windsor, England, was canceled yesterday.


Malaysia Stops Traders
LEAD: Malaysia closed 16 commodity firms today and said it was investigating them for suspected illegal trading on overseas exchanges, a senior official said.
Malaysia's Commodities Trading Commission said the 16 had been trading on a number of overseas exchanges but had not been registered.
The firms' premises were raided by the authorities early this morning.


London Board Backs Index Arbitrage as a Market Stabilizer
LEAD: The London stock exchange urged its members today to increase the use of a form of computerized stock trading that has been blamed in the United States for accelerating October's stock market collapse.


NETWORK SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NETWORK SYSTEMS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
35,870,000
31,562,000
Net inc
5,554,000
6,527,000
Share earns
.19
.22
Yr rev
120,506,000
108,792,000
Net inc
17,452,000
18,007,000
Share earns
.60
.62


NORTHWEST ENGINEERING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHWEST ENGINEERING CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
56,241,000
6,040,000
Net inc
1,914,000
765,000
Share earns
.28
.14
Yr sales
200,326,000
32,692,000
Net inc
10,762,000
3,389,000
Share earns
1.75
.61


VALMONT INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VALMONT INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
136,000,000
77,506,000
Net inc
2,250,000
1,128,000
Share earns
.83
.43
Yr sales
445,000,000
313,392,000
Net inc
b8,250,000
2,208,000
Share earns
3.06
.83


Citing Recent Violence by Gangs, Los Angeles to Add 150 Officers
LEAD: With officials saying gang violence is on the rise here, the City Council has voted to hire 150 new police officers.


PROFIT SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
CBS Inc.
$251,600,000
+12.8
Eaton Corp.
25,800,000
-44.9
GAF Corp.
21,400,000
-56.8
Hershey Foods Corp.
40,500,000
+7.7
Holiday Corp.
(18,600,000)
-
Smith International
70,700,000
*-
Spiegel Inc.
21,300,000
-1.4
Tenneco Inc.


SUAVE SHOE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUAVE SHOE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,297,000
15,647,000
Net loss
435,000
b661,000
Share earns
-
.25
b-Net income


Alien Footprints on Sydney's Sands
LEAD: Joan McDonald, who has been renting out deck chairs at Bondi beach for more than 50 years, recently added a sun blocking agent to the popular tanning oil she sprays from a hose.


Piano Recitalist Replaced
LEAD: Roy Kogan, who won an international piano competition sponsored by the American Music Scholarship Association, will not appear at Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday evening because of an injury to his hand.
Mr.
Kogan won the gold medal at the 1986 piano competition and was to have made his Lincoln Center debut as part of his award.


CHRISTIANA COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHRISTIANA COMPANIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,189,000
13,357,000
Net loss
311,000
1,119,000
6mo rev
2,285,000
22,521,000
Net loss
168,000
1,235,000
The company said the substantial decline in revenue resulted from the previously reported sellout of its condominium projects.


Merrill Lynch Official Joins Savings Institution
LEAD: Gary Lieberman, executive vice president of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets Inc., has left the firm to become chairman and chief executive of a new merchant banking unit of Franklin Savings Association of Ottawa, Kan.


Enter the Villain: Museum Marks Soviet Shift
LEAD: Fifty years after the opening of the Central Lenin Museum, the sanctum sanctorum of this city's Communist memorials, the arch heretic of the Bolshevik Revolution has been admitted.


Tolentine Runs Record to 20-1
LEAD: St.
Nicholas of Tolentine won its 20th game this season, defeating Springfield Gardens, 64-60, last night at the Gauchos' gym in the Bronx.


DUKAKIS MOUNTS 2-FRONT OFFENSIVE
LEAD: The campaign of Michael S. Dukakis is achingly aware of the stakes in New Hampshire.
Asked today whether his Presidential bid could survive a loss in next Tuesday's primary here, Mr.
Dukakis's reply was a single word: ''No.''


Cello: Christopher Costanza
LEAD: CHRISTOPHER COSTANZA is an excellent young cellist with fleet fingers and an unflinching, deep-in-the-strings way of producing sound.
The 23-year-old musician, a student at the New England Conservatory in Boston, made his New York debut at the 92d Street Y on Tuesday evening as part of the Young Concert Artists Series.


Hospitals Expanding Procedures to Assist Patients for Discharge
LEAD: Where do patients go after being discharged from hospitals and what services will they need while they recuperate?


CERNER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CERNER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,303,000
7,178,000
Net inc
1,594,000
b1,441,000
Share earns
.43
.47
Shares outst
3,732,000
3,076,000
Yr rev
33,595,000
17,356,000
Net inc
4,025,000
b2,291,000
Share earns
1.08
.80
Shares outst
3,729,000
2,881,000


ALLOY COMPUTER PRODUCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLOY COMPUTER PRODUCTS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,696,000
11,544,000
Net loss
689,000
b707,000
Share earns
-
.16
Yr sales
44,604,000
40,856,000
Net inc
1,403,000
2,013,000
Share earns
.30
.48


INTREX FINANCIAL SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTREX FINANCIAL SERVICES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b11,294,000
c1,888,000
Share earns
-
.44
Yr net loss
b10,402,000
c5,603,000
Share earns
-
-
b-After net losses from discontinued operations of $3,312,000 for the quarter and $7,574,000 for the year, and a loss on disposal of discontinued operations of $7,099,000 for the both periods.


UNITED SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (SOUTH CAROLINA) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (SOUTH CAROLINA)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
917,000
878,000
Per share
.45
-
9mo net inc
2,710,000
2,256,000
Per share
1.33
-
The company converted to stock ownership in the fourth quarter of 1987.


Key Rates
LEAD:  In percent Previous Year Yesterday Day Ago PRIME RATE 8.50 8.50 7.50 DISCOUNT RATE 6.00 6.00 5.50 FEDERAL FUNDS 5.65 6.04 6.17 3-MO.
TREAS.
BILLS 5.60 5.62 5.83 6-MO.
TREAS.
BILLS 5.83 5.83 5.80 7-YR.
TREAS.
NOTES 7.89 7.95 7.16 30-YR.
TREAS.
BONDS 8.29 8.34 7.61 TELEPHONE BONDS 9.25 9.26 8.83 MUNICIPAL BONDS* 7.88 7.91 7.11


Irving Bank Sued by Bidder
LEAD: The Bank of New York Company, which has been pursuing the Irving Bank Corporation since September, said yesterday that it had filed suit against Irving to prevent it from issuing convertible preferred stock as a takeover deterrent.


DIAGNOSTIC MEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAGNOSTIC MEDICAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,851,513
2,203,986
Net loss
142,482
b73,595
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income and includes an extraordinary credit of $31,000.


GENISCO TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENISCO TECHNOLOGY CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,811,165
8,486,861
Net loss
473,408
273,636


CLAIRSON INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLAIRSON INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
23,721,049
16,324,425
Net inc
411,582
236,636
Share earns
.08
.05
Shares outst
5,089,270
4,330,039
Year-ago net income and share earnings are pro forma, presented as if the company had accrued an income tax liability prior to its initial public offering in November 1986 and the termination of its S-Corporation status.


Ferrer Emerges as Strong Voice for Bronx
LEAD: Shortly after he became Borough President of the Bronx last spring, Fernando Ferrer made room in a corner of his office for a large, hand-lettered placard that somebody had displayed at a rally. ''Recall Koch -Ferrer for Mayor,'' it read.


HEXCEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEXCEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
96,567,000
79,609,000
Net inc
4,079,000
2,424,000
Share earns
.90
.56
Yr sales
349,184,000
290,383,000
Net inc
12,869,000
9,664,000
Share earns
2.87
2.28


CORDIS CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORDIS CORPORATION (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
31,228,000
24,633,000
Net inc
b1,760,000
c1,383,000
Share earns
.13
-
6mo sales
60,945,000
47,226,000
Net inc
b2,939,000
c1,085,000
Share earns
.22
-


Dollar Is Mixed as Traders Await Report on Trade Gap
LEAD: The dollar was mixed against major foreign currencies yesterday as traders weighed prospects for lower United States interest rates while awaiting tomorrow's report on the American trade deficit for December.


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (TENN) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (TENN)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
72,429
115,899
Per share
.12
-
6mo net inc
183,198
238,913
Per share
.31
-
The per share earnings are not available for the year-ago periods; the company went public in April 1987.


Description By Chambers Is Disputed
LEAD: Jennifer Levin's neck was compressed by a ''considerable force'' lasting at least 20 to 30 seconds and perhaps a minute or more, a pathologist testified yesterday.


U.S. Lifts a Ban on Florida Citrus Shipments
LEAD: The United States Department of Agriculture on Tuesday lifted a three-year embargo on shipments of fresh citrus fruit from Florida to other critus-growing states.
The embargo was imposed as a protection against canker.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


A Confidant Turns Against Noriega, but Why?
LEAD: For two days, Jose I. Blandon has transfixed Capitol Hill with vivid accounts of wrongdoing by his former boss, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, Panama's military leader.
But it is still unclear why a man many Panamanian exile leaders in Miami and Costa Rica denounce as General Noriega's confidant in unsavory operations over the years would suddenly switch sides.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-15


INSIDE
LEAD:  Ginsburg-TV Probe Dropped


Ford Shift on Plant
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would not buy the auto assembly plant in Westmoreland County, Pa., that Volkswagen of America plans to close later this year.
Ford, which had given notice in November that it might bid for the plant, said it had decided that it had enough production capacity to meet demand for the next few years.


LAUREL ENTERTAINMENT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAUREL ENTERTAINMENT INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,580,340
1,668,872
Net inc
147,936
200,580
Share earns
.06
.08
9mo rev
2,201,792
6,904,559
Net loss
670,534
b1,789,506
Share earns
-
.73


Philharmonic Planning Its First 'Voix Humaine'
LEAD: Francis Poulenc's ''Voix Humaine,'' an opera for solo soprano, will be presented by the New York Philharmonic for the first time at 8 P.M. next Thursday at Avery Fisher Hall.


REGULATORS SHIFT FINANCIAL CORP. STRATEGY
LEAD: Federal regulators, indicating a significant shift in their strategy for solving the problems of the ailing Financial Corporation of America, have decided to begin selling the savings and loan company's $17 billion portfolio of mortgage-backed securities.


U.S. Declares Japan in Violation On Whaling and May Curb Trade
LEAD: Commerce Secretary C. William Verity Jr. today declared Japan in violation of a moratorium on commercial whaling.
A spokesman for Mr.
Verity said the Secretary might recommend an embargo on imports of fish from Japan.


British Court Refuses 'Spycatcher' Press Ban
LEAD: The British Government lost another round today in its 20-month effort to ban publication of ''Spycatcher,'' the memoirs of a former British counter-intelligence officer, which the Government calls a threat to national security.


Take a Yes for Afghanistan
LEAD: The United States has been trying for eight years to drive Soviet troops from Afghanistan.
On Monday, Mikhail Gorbachev announced that the troops would all be gone by March 1989 if the U.S. keeps its pledge to stop aiding the Afghan rebels.
It was an extraordinary statement, hailed by the Reagan Administration as ''a positive step.


CUBAN DISCUSSES DECISION ON SEOUL
LEAD: Cuba decided two years ago not to attend the Seoul Olympics if some events were not staged in North Korea, the president of the Cuban Olympic committee said today.


Long Live the King
LEAD: ''Judicial activism'' is a term of special abuse in modern conservative rhetoric.
Judges who protect individual liberty in constitutional cases are accused of distorting history, disrespecting elected legislators and ignoring the practical needs of government.


The Stage: 'Loose Ends'
LEAD: MORE than most of his theatrical peers, Michael Weller writes plays that could serve as time capsules of their period.
His first full-length work, ''Moonchildren,'' summarizes the 1960's through the perspective of a crucial academic year. ''Loose Ends,'' a play with broader scope, focuses on the 1970's - post-hippie, pre-yuppie, a time of searching and changing identities.


Labor Dept. Child-Care Study Misleads Public
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chaya Schneerson, Wife of the Leader Of the Lubavitchers
LEAD: Chaya Moussia Schneerson, the wife of Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, the Lubavitcher Rebbe, died early yesterday at New York Hospital.
She was taken to the hospital Tuesday night complaining about feeling ill.
She was 86 years old and lived in the Crown Heights neighborhood of Brooklyn.


On to Royalty Filly Winner
LEAD: On to Royalty stamped herself as Florida's leading 3-year-old filly with a 1 1/2-length victory over Social Pro in the $61,700 Forward Gal Stakes today at Gulfstream Park.


CBS Net Up 12.8% In Quarter
LEAD: CBS Inc. reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings rose 12.8 percent, buoyed by cost-cutting efforts and by strong results at its television and radio stations.


ENERGAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENERGAS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
76,000,000
66,162,000
Net inc
4,306,000
1,372,000
Share earns
1.05
.34
The company said the latest quarter includes the results of Western Kentucky Gas Co., which the company acquired in December.


Walsh Hires Counsel In Iran Case Challenges
LEAD: The special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair, in another sign that he would seek criminal charges in the case, said today that he had hired a former Federal judge to oversee legal challenges to the investigation.


WILLIAMS COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILLIAMS COMPANIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
580,800,000
521,100,000
Net inc
b19,000,000
c232,300,000
Share earns
.48
-
Yr rev
1,779,800,000
1,858,600,000
Net inc
b91,800,000
c239,700,000
Share earns
2.58
-


COMPANY NEWS;
LEAD: The Edward J. DeBartolo Corporation and Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., two major real estate developers, yesterday joined the Campeau Corporation's bid for Federated Department Stores Inc., agreeing to provide a total of $660 million for the deal.


ABUSES OF RIGHTS DECLINE IN SOVIET
LEAD: The State Department said today that human rights abuses had eased somewhat in the Soviet Union in the last year despite continued violations that remained a central concern to the United States.


Israelis Furious Over an Arab Plan to Sail 'Home'
LEAD: Furious Israeli officials vowed today that they would not allow a ship carrying Palestinian deportees to dock in Israel.


Closing Arguments Made In Murder Trial of Sculptor
LEAD: Carl Andre at court.
His trial on charges of killing his wife, Ana Mendieta, is nearing completion.
Page B5. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


Robert L. Turner, Concert Hall Manager, 50
LEAD: Robert L. Turner, general manager of Avery Fisher Hall and Alice Tully Hall, died on Monday.
He was 50 years old.


DIXIE YARNS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIXIE YARNS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
161,405,000
82,524,000
Net inc
6,956,000
3,639,000
Share earns
.58
.57
Shares outst
11,826,689
6,067,678
Yr sales
580,504,000
300,770,000
Net inc
26,284,000
13,378,000
Share earns
2.42
2.24
Shares outst
10,584,628
5,659,422


Reagan Didn't Know of Afghan Deal
LEAD: An American commitment in 1985 to end military aid to the Afghan guerrillas at the beginning of a Soviet troop withdrawal was made without the knowledge or approval of President Reagan, according to White House and State Department officials.


New Look For Urban Newsstands
LEAD: HELP may be on the way for the New York City newsstand, which has come to resemble ''a gigantic coat hanger for every conceivable object,'' in the words of Bartholomew Voorsanger, a vice president of the New York City chapter of the American Institute of Architects.


City Ballet: Balanchine's 'Jewels'
LEAD: ''JEWELS'' is a crowd-pleaser that is also, in subtle ways, one of George Balanchine's most problematic ballets.
Presented by the New York City Ballet on Tuesday at the New York State Theater, ''Jewels'' was danced by a cast that included a number of dancers in new and recently acquired roles.
It was a performance that pointed up the ballet's difficulties.


Group Living
LEAD: To The Home Section:


AMERICAN CAPACITY GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CAPACITY GROUP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
949,230
348,056
Share earns
.46
.14
Yr net inc
b2,275,212
591,247
Share earns
.96
.38
b-Includes a gain of $93,383.


CHEMICAL LEAMAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHEMICAL LEAMAN CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
55,812,850
53,812,006
Net loss
262,914
b1,313,309
Share earns
-
1.07
Yr rev
226,617,647
202,883,886
Net inc
1,196,990
2,650,965
Share earns
1.04
2.16


BAKER FENTRESS &amp; CO reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAKER FENTRESS &amp; CO
As of Dec 31
1987
1986
Assets
378,300,000
396,700,000
Share earns
46.57
50.39
Assets represent net assets.


Broadway Takes to Broadway for AIDS Rally
LEAD: Performing artists, stage workers and others who work in New York City theaters marching to Duffy Square yesterday as part of the Broadway Cares Week, which was proclaimed by Governor Cuomo and Mayor Koch.
Broadway Cares, an umbrella organization for the various theater groups, was set up to channel the theater industry's resources and fund-raising efforts in the fight against AIDS.


Accountant Says Noriega Helped Launder Billions
LEAD: An accountant testified under oath to Congress today that he laundered billions of dollars in illegal drug profits through Panama's banking system with the help of Gen.
Antonio Manuel Noriega, commander of the country's army and police and de facto leader.


Bear Stearns Unit To Seek Jewelcor
LEAD: The brokerage Bear Stearns Companies said a company it had formed with Jewelcor Inc.'s chairman and a director had offered to buy the jewelry concern in a transaction valuing it between $48.9 million and $52.2 million.
The Bear Stearns Holding Corporation, which includes Jewelcor's chairman, Frank P.


Youth Gets 5 to 15 Years For Howard Beach Attack
LEAD: After publicly expressing sorrow, a white teen-ager was sentenced yesterday to 5 to 15 years in prison for his part in the attack that led to the death of a black man in Howard Beach, Queens.


Israel Says It Seized 3 Guerrillas From Egypt
LEAD: Israeli troops captured three armed guerrillas who infiltrated into the country across the southern border with Egypt last week, apparently to carry out an attack on civilians, the army said today.


Advertising; Pontiac's Gift to Soviet
LEAD: David Deutsch Associates announced that Pontiac dealers in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut were planning to ship a red Pontiac Grand Prix to the Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Timed to coincide with the gesture, a 30-second spot will appear on television in the New York metropolitan area over the next six weeks, with hopes of national syndication.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A brief article about a piano recital to be given tomorrow by Bruce Brubaker misstated the site.
It will be at Alice Tully Hall.


ENVIROPACT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENVIROPACT INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,906,990
3,499,323
Net inc
374,017
c230,324
Share earns
.12
.08
Shares outst
3,200,935
2,733,357
6mo rev
17,203,266
5,939,124
Net inc
b844,490
c280,073
Share earns
.27
.12
Shares outst
3,184,092
2,413,713


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about reactions to a commission's findings on the war record of President Kurt Waldheim of Austria characterized Simon Wiesenthal's background incorrectly.
Mr.
Wiesenthal, head of the Jewish Documentation Center in Vienna, had been acquainted with Mr.
Waldheim and had spoken in support of restraint on the Waldheim issue until the evidence was complete.


Lewis Wolberg, 82, Clinic Psychoanalyst In New York, Is Dead
LEAD: Dr.
Lewis R. Wolberg, a psychoanalyst and founder and former chairman of the Postgraduate Center for Mental Health, died of a heart attack Feb. 3 at his winter home in La Penita, Jalisco, Mexico, near Puerto Vallarta.
He was 82 years old and also lived in Putnam Valley, N.Y.


Fumes Sicken Hospital Staff
LEAD: Surgery at the Westchester County Medical Center here was canceled today when 15 staff members were overcome by fumes as they prepared the operating floor in the morning.
A spokeswoman for the hospital, Nancy McPartlin, said all elective surgery was postponed and emergencies were referred to other hospitals.


POST-REAGAN ERA PAINTED IN BUDGET
LEAD: President Reagan's new budget lays down a comprehensive blueprint for Federal policies in the post-Reagan era, including increased spending on education and science and a dramatic expansion of his campaign for the private sector to take over Government functions.


YORK INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*YORK INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
265,342,000
187,085,000
Net inc
6,278,000
2,244,000
Share earns
.64
.24
Yr sales
963,108,000
689,979,000
Net inc
27,630,000
8,217,000
Share earns
2.82
.88


'Deep Scars' for a Jerusalem Where Riots Define Borders
LEAD: Even after Arab youths smashed the picture window in her living room for the second time, Laureen Rabbe was surprised by the violence that encroached on her suburban home.


Merrill Research Chief To Head Equity Unit
LEAD: In the latest example of how securities firms are responding to the tougher environment on Wall Street, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company yesterday announced a reorganization of its huge capital-markets operation.


Polysar Spurns Bid
LEAD: The Polysar Energy and Chemical Corporation said it had rejected as inadequate an increased offer of $16 a share (Canadian), or about $12.60 (American), for its 13 million shares by the Nova Corporation of Calgary, Alberta.
The new bid, raised from a previous offer of $14 a share, raises to about $163 million the total offer for the common shares, which would increase Nova's stake in Polysar to 31 percent from 10 percent.


WASTE MANAGEMENT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASTE MANAGEMENT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
758,967,000
565,382,000
Net inc
88,332,000
b210,731,000
Share earns
.39
1.00
Yr rev
2,757,630,000
2,017,775,000
Net inc
327,078,000
b370,930,000
Share earns
1.46
1.76


F.A.A. Is Urging Use of Crash Recorders by Commuter Lines
LEAD: New rules that would greatly expand the use of crash recorders, particularly on smaller commuter airliners, are to be proposed today by the Federal Aviation Administration.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Federal National Mortgage Association is offering $450 million of mortgage securities through a real estate mortgage investment conduit, or Remic.
Divided into five tranches, the rates range from 7.30 percent to 9.25 percent.
The issue is backed by conventional fixed-rate mortgages in the form of Fannie Mae mortgage-backed securities and will be offered through Bear, Stearns.


STANDARD REGISTER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD REGISTER CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
176,812,000
168,127,000
Net inc
14,352,000
10,538,000
Share earns
.48
.37
Yr rev
666,661,000
561,858,000
Net inc
40,537,000
32,666,000
Share earns
1.36
1.21


CREDIT MARKETS
LEAD: Government bond prices moved slightly lower yesterday, following the release of retail sales figures for January that were stronger than had been anticipated.


Art: By Charles Sheeler, Paintings and Drawings
LEAD: THE restrospective of Charles Sheeler's work at the Whitney Museum of American Art has a dry, cautious feeling to it, as if there's not quite enough art on the walls or enough personality in the art.
As seen here, Sheeler's career spans five decades, from 1910 to the late 1950's, in the media of painting, drawing and photography.


Chambers's Lawyer Challenges Pathologist About Pressure on Neck
LEAD: The defense attorney for Robert E. Chambers Jr. suggested yesterday that pressure applied to Jennifer Levin's neck could have resulted in her death much more quickly than the 20 seconds to 30 seconds estimated by a pathologist.


LONDON HOUSE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LONDON HOUSE INC
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,818,371
1,486,643
Net inc
83,027
13,667
Share earns
.06
.01
9mo rev
6,147,939
5,060,513
Net inc
674,871
349,508
Share earns
.51
.22


Violeta and Corazon
LEAD: The people here who would have the most to gain by fulfillment of the Central American plan for peace and democracy are not very optimistic.
Of course, it is the long-suffering Nicaraguan population in general who would gain.
But it is the opposition leaders and human rights advocates who are going to be the key players.


INTERNATIONAL THOROUGHRED BREEDERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL THOROUGHRED BREEDERS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
29,384,139
25,378,458
Net loss
4,532,848
6,998,369
6mo rev
49,743,585
49,268,375
Net loss
8,641,447
11,792,497


Film: 'A Tiger's Tale,' Starring Ann-Margret
LEAD: ORDINARILY you can tell a lot about a film from the names of its characters, and the principals in ''A Tiger's Tale'' include Rose Butts (Ann-Margret), Shirley Butts (Kelly Preston), Bubber Drumm (C. Thomas Howell), La Vonne (Angel Tompkins) and Claudine (Ann Wedgeworth).
To be fair, this film, written, produced and directed by Peter Douglas (from a novel by Allen Hannay 3d), is a little better than that, but it does place excessive stock in rustic quirks and cracker-barrel humor.


SMELTER IS FINED FOR LEAD HAZARD
LEAD: The Occupational Safety and Health Administration today levied its third largest fine ever, $2.78 million, against a Missouri smelting plant accused of exposing workers to high levels of lead and then dismissing them to sidestep Government medical leave requirements.


Children's Benefit
LEAD: Youngsters with professional theatrical ensembles around the city will take part in a special performance on Monday at 7:30 P.M. at the John Houseman Theater, 450 West 42d Street.
Proceeds from the evening will benefit the Tibetan Children's Villages in Dharmsala and Bylakuppe, India, where more than 1,000 orphaned children are cared for.


Sparse Turnout at Koch Meeting on Pensions
LEAD: Notably less confrontational, Mayor Koch met with a small group of New York City legislators yesterday to try to persuade them not to support a measure to increase pensions for former city and state workers.


JAN BELL MARKETING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JAN BELL MARKETING (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
35,400,000
20,500,000
Net inc
2,300,000
960,000
Share earns
.37
.19
Yr rev
72,500,000
46,700,000
Net inc
4,400,000
2,300,000
Share earns
.75
.44
Shares outst
6,580,000
5,000,000


Anger in Miami Over a Resignation
LEAD: Cuban-Americans responded with anger and sorrow today to the resignation of Sergio Pereira, the chief administrative officer of Dade County, who is under fire for personal indiscretions.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Counting Microchips
LEAD: Late last year Congress banned Pentagon purchases of products of the Toshiba Corporation of Japan and Kongsberg Vaapensfabrikk of Norway as punishment for their sale of important military technology to the Soviet Union.


Michel Camilo Trio
LEAD: Michel Camilo, a pianist, will lead a trio and Dave Valentin, a flutist, will lead a quintet in a Latin-jazz double bill tonight through Sunday at the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street (475-8592).
Sets begin at 9 and 11:30 P.M. through Sunday, plus a 1:30 A.M. show tonight and tomorrow; there is a $15 cover and a $5 minimum at tables, or a $7.50 charge at the bar.


ALLSTAR INNS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLSTAR INNS LP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,044,000
10,761,000
Net loss
943,000
3,569,000
9mo rev
33,254,000
35,318,000
Net inc
1,175,000
b8,562,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss  The company went public in April 1987.


Greenwich Village Sculptor Acquitted of Pushing Wife to Her Death
LEAD: Carl Andre, the sculptor, was found not guilty yesterday of charges that he murdered his wife by pushing her from the window of their 34th-floor Greenwich Village apartment.


3 Shot in School Cafeteria
LEAD: A teen-age boy drew a gun in a fight in a high school cafeteria today and shot two teachers and a student before fleeing, officials said.
One of the teachers, Richard Allen, was shot in the head.
He was reported in serious condition in the hospital.
The other teacher, who was shot in the abdomen and thigh, and the student, who suffered leg wounds, were reported in stable condition at another hospital.


Mexico Delays Bond Auction
LEAD: Mexico said yesterday that it had postponed for a week, to Feb. 26, an auction of up to $10 billion in bonds in exchange for loans held by banks around the world.
The banks are being asked to exchange their loans to Mexico at a discount for the bonds, which would be backed by United States Government securities.


Canadian Bank Examines Loss
LEAD: The National Bank of Canada, the nation's sixth-largest bank, said today that it was investigating unauthorized trades by a bond dealer in its New York office.
The trades cost the bank $25 million in Canadian funds, it said, and the amount will be taken as a loss against its first-quarter earnings.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Five-Stroke Lead in Seniors: Bob Charles of New Zealand flirted with a PGA Seniors Championship record yesterday, shooting an eight-under-par 64 that led him to a five-stroke lead after 18 holes of the $350,000 golf tournament.
Charles, coming off a Seniors victory in South Africa, was nearly flawless in posting an opening round of eight birdies and no bogeys on the par 72, 6,530-yard Champion course at PGA National.


Love Songs
LEAD: Al Carmines, a composer and pastor of the Rauschenbusch Memorial Church, and Speckled Bird, a folk-gospel trio, will present a sampler of love songs, with champagne and hors d'oeuvres, on Sunday at 5 P.M. on the second floor of the Trinity Presbyterian Church, 422 West 57th Street.
Tickets, which benefit the Rauschenbusch church, are $25.


INTERNATIONAL ALUMINUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL ALUMINUM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
47,236,000
44,440,000
Net inc
2,795,000
2,235,000
Share earns
.62
.49
6mo sales
95,795,000
88,390,000
Net inc
6,097,000
4,227,000
Share earns
1.34
.93


Ailing Mexico Economy Will Be a Focus of Talks
LEAD: As President Miguel de la Madrid and President Reagan prepare for their last scheduled official meeting, Mexico is struggling to emerge from its worst economic crisis in half a century and hoping the United States will play a key role in helping it recover.


Julie Christie in 'Gold Diggers,' From Britain
THERE are critics in Britain who have praised Sally Potter's ''Gold Diggers'' as ''witty,'' ''visually entrancing'' and ''an absorbing pleasure,'' and there may also be like-minded individuals on the planet Jupiter.
But by any reasonable earthly standard, this thing - a 1983 oddity, sort of a feminist, deconstructionist, riddle-filled anti-musical, much of it set on the Icelandic tundra - is pure torture.
Its only noteworthy attribute is the presence of Julie Christie, who embodies some sardonic notion of the archetypical unenlightened movie heroine through the ages.
Like it or not, Miss Christie is infinitely better off playing such creatures straight than she is satirizing them here.
''The Gold Diggers,'' which opens today at the Thalia SoHo, begins with a black woman (Colette Laffont) and a white one (Miss Christie) outlining a vexing riddle (''Only in the darkness am I visible. You can see me but never touch me. I can speak to you but never hear you . . . who am I?'').
One of them then maintains that since there are only 90 minutes to find an answer, ''Time is short.'' This is laughable, under the circumstances.
The camera goes on to explore a plotless configuration of bare Arctic landscapes, mock silent-movie scenes and caricatures of masculine behavior, and never has the clock moved more slowly.
There is also about a 15-minute encounter between Miss Christie and a tap-dancing mime.


'Chronosymphonies'
LEAD: The American Composers Orchestra and the Kronos Quartet will perform the premiere of Matthias Kriesberg's ''Chronosymphonies'' on Sunday at 3 P.M. in Carnegie Hall.
The orchestra, conducted by Dennis Russell Davies, will also present works by Gordon Getty, John Alden Carpenter and Roy Harris.
Tickets are $11 to $17.50.


Simon and Gephardt Seek Funds
LEAD: Two nights after his victory in the Iowa caucuses, Representative Richard A. Gephardt was a long way from New Hampshire, where other Presidential contenders were seeking support for Tuesday's primary.


Colgate Net Up in Quarter
LEAD: The Colgate-Palmolive Company yesterday reported sharply higher fourth-quarter earnings although its profit for all of 1987 tumbled because of restructuring expenses.


Second Stage Benefit
LEAD: A $200 celebrity bowling benefit for the Second Stage Theater, sponsored by Seagram's, will be held on Monday at 6 P.M. at the Madison Square Garden Bowling Center, at 32d and Seventh Avenue.
Couples may choose their bowling partners from a roster that includes Treat Williams, Marsha Mason, Betty Buckley, Kevin Bacon, Carrie Fisher and about 20 others, and prizes will be awarded.


FOOTE, CONE &amp; BELDING COMUNICATIONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FOOTE, CONE &amp; BELDING COMUNICATIONS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
104,101,000
86,855,000
Net inc
b5,602,000
c4,082,000
Share earns
1.30
.98
Shares outst
4,293,000
4,162,000
Yr rev
343,714,000
326,397,000
Net inc
b17,076,000
c13,726,000
Share earns
4.03
3.30
Shares outst
4,234,000
4,162,000


Dreaming of a Medal?
LEAD: Don LaVigne waiting for a flight to Calgary at the Albany County Airport Wednesday night.
After being reinstated as a member of the U.S. bobsled team, LaVigne received approval yesterday from the International Olympic Committee to compete in the Games. (AP)


Retail Sales Rose 0.5% In January
LEAD: In a report that many economists found reassuring, the Government said today that retail sales throughout the country climbed five-tenths of 1 percent in January and that December's sales, upon revision, were considerably higher than first estimated.


Film: 'School Daze'
LEAD: FROM the intimate, funny sexual battleground on which Spike Lee's ''She's Gotta Have It'' unfolded, Mr.
Lee has moved on to bigger, bolder and messier ambitions.
The new occasion is ''School Daze,'' his scathing look at a fictitious white-financed, all-black college whose motto is ''Uplift the Race.


Susan Osborn
LEAD: Susan Osborn, the former lead singer of the Paul Winter Consort, will be singing a mixture of gospel, folk and other popular romantic ballads, tonight at 8 o'clock at the Church of the Holy Apostle, 296 Ninth Avenue (at 28th Street).
Tickets are $12.
Information: 219-2527.


WHITE HOUSE BANS OFFICIALS HELPING CONTRA DONATIONS
LEAD: The White House announced today that it had forbidden Reagan Administration officials to ''provide assistance or encouragement of any kind to private individuals or third parties raising funds'' for the Nicaraguan rebels.


Bourne Retrospective
LEAD: A retrospective of films by the American independent film maker St.
Clair Bourne begins tomorrow at noon at the Whitney Museum of American Art, Madison Avenue at 75th Street.
Mr.
Bourne is known for his documentaries and feature films about the lives of blacks living in the United States and abroad; among them are profiles of the writers Amiri Baraka and Langston Hughes.


NORTON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
343,400,000
258,900,000
Net inc
b17,200,000
c73,600,000
Share earns
.83
-
Yr sales
1,260,900,000
1,107,100,000
Net inc
b66,500,000
c33,100,000
Share earns
3.20
-


Not All Tenants Praise Cuomo Proposals on Rent Regulation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Conferees Seek 'Founding Mothers'
LEAD: Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor told nearly 1,500 women here today that the Supreme Court would ''linger for a good many more years'' on women's rights cases in order to eliminate some of the effects of a Constitution that makes ''no specific mention of women.''


OPTO MECHANIK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OPTO MECHANIK INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,820,951
4,956,708
Net inc
152,588
114,892
Share earns
.07
.05
6mo rev
12,236,014
10,438,868
Net inc
342,057
256,454
Share earns
.16
.12


Battle Begins For Control Of Gillette
LEAD: A complex battle for control of the Gillette Company broke out yesterday with the disclosure by Coniston Partners of New York that it owned about 6 percent of the big Boston-based producer of razor blades, cosmetics and other consumer goods.


Restaurants; French bistro on the East Side.
LEAD: WHEN the wind chill hammers the thermometer into single digits, one of the most effective human antifreezes is a bracing stew along with a slab of rough country bread and a glass of husky red wine.
To the French, that translates as pot-au-feu, and one of the best around is ladled out at Voulez-Vous.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Justice's Decision
LEAD: Justice Harry A. Blackmun of the Supreme Court has resigned from the Cosmos Club, the prestigious club whose all-male membership policy has come under increasing attack from the District of Columbia Government and from disaffected members as well as from feminists.


City Ballet: 2 Bolshoi Stars Visit
LEAD: IF any idea once seemed highly unlikely it was that the New York City Ballet would be the first American company to play host to Soviet dancers for an extended time.
Until his death in 1983, George Balanchine, the company's artistic director, did not hide his criticism of the Soviet Union, including its ballet.


Our Towns; Casinos' Allure: Weaning a Girl From the Tables
LEAD: The 12 casinos in Atlantic City say they turned away minors at the door 200,000 times last year and kicked them off casino floors more than 30,000 other times.
The casinos say they do their best to keep out those under 21.
If so, what is striking about the case of Kim Cohen, an Atlantic City teen-ager who started playing blackjack at 15, is the encouragement the casinos gave her to keep gambling.


RENAISSANCE GRX reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RENAISSANCE GRX
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
981,000
2,000
Net loss
1,852,000
918,000
6mo sales
2,252,000
2,000
Net loss
3,472,000
1,360,000


Kluge Lifts Stake In Orion Pictures
LEAD: John W. Kluge, the chairman of the Metromedia Company, has increased his stake in the Orion Pictures Company for the second consecutive day.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Mr.
Kluge said he had raised his holdings to 26.7 percent from 25.6 percent, through purchases of an additional 221,400 Orion shares on Tuesday at an average price of $17.02 each.


Leonard Martelli, 50, Writer and Executive
LEAD: Leonard J. Martelli, a former publishing executive and co-author of ''When Someone You Know Has AIDS: A Practical Guide,'' died of complications resulting from AIDS on Sunday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 50 years old.


Olympia Increases Stake in Santa Fe
LEAD: Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., controlled by the Reichmann family of Canada, has increased its stake in the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation to 10.54 percent, from 10.3 percent.
Olympia said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it expected to buy more Santa Fe shares.


Ford-Mazda Car Is Shown
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company today introduced a Japanese-American sports car, the Probe, which it hopes will recapture sales from Japanese companies like the Toyota Motor Corporation and the Honda Motor Company.


SOMERSET GROUP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOMERSET GROUP
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
21,875,000
-
Net inc
b3,819,000
-
Share earns
2.09
-
b-After income from discontinued operations of $1,607,000.
The company was formed in April 1986.


Horse Racing Notebook; 71 Stakes Races Granted Higher Status
LEAD: Is American racing getting better all the time?
Apparently so, in the opinion of the committee that classifies the nation's most important stakes races.
The North American Graded Stakes Committee recently published its listing of this year's top races, and changed the status of 76 of them: 71 were upgraded and 5 were downgraded.


Suggestion, on Intruder: Off With Its Head
LEAD: There is no telling how many neighborly quarrels have flared, flamed and faded into the mists of the past on Elfreth's Alley, the oldest continuously inhabited residential street in the United States.


On Eve of Tet, Vietnam Tries to Ease Friction
LEAD: As Vietnam prepares to celebrate Tet, the Lunar New Year - and the 20th anniversary of a series of wartime attacks known as the Tet Offensive - the Vietnamese people and army are being urged to get along better with each other.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Jose Santos rode five winners for the second straight day yesterday at Aqueduct, giving him 10 winners in 13 races.
The only other jockey in New York history to ride 10 winners in two days was Steve Cauthen, who did it twice in 1977. . . .
Pat Riggin, the Pittsburgh Penguins' starting goaltender at the beginning of the season, was assigned to the Penguins' Muskegon farm club in the International Hockey League.


SPEX GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPEX GROUP INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,774,412
2,771,432
Net loss
236,774
81,425


Chinook: Gold-Medal Warmth
LEAD: WE have seen the chinook wind and it works, melting the snow in its path like a giant microwave oven demolishing an ice-cream cone.


Gay Ex-Soldier Wants to Return to the Army
LEAD: Thoughout his 16-year stint in the Army, Perry J. Watkins said today, he made no secret of his homosexuality, even performing as a female impersonator.
Early in his Army career he asked for a discharge, naming his lovers so that the Army could substantiate his claim.


Women in the Law Aren't Yet Equal Partners
LEAD: Like most major law firms in the early 1970's, Rogers &amp; Wells resembled an elegant men's club, and the Manhattan firm had only one female associate among its 95 lawyers in 1971.
A recruiting manual listed attractions like a villa on a Florida golf course and a private barbershop providing free haircuts.


Economic Scene; Military Budget Under Pressure
LEAD: THE effort to bring down the United States' budget deficit, which has swollen the gross national debt from $1 trillion to more than $2.5 trillion in the last seven years, is increasing the pressure on the military budget.


CONSUMERS WATER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSUMERS WATER CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,303,000
22,579,000
Net inc
b2,101,000
c2,688,000
Share earns
.36
.46
Yr rev
80,467,000
84,316,000
Net inc
b8,870,000
c9,017,000
Share earns
1.51
1.55


Washington Talk: Briefing; G.A.O.'s Best Sellers
LEAD: The General Accounting Office, a perennial scourge of waste and fraud in Government programs, investigates almost every Federal activity, from ''Star Wars'' to Congressional cafeterias.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  COMMITTEE DRAFTING CONVENTION AGAINST MERCENARIES - 11 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Rap Group in a Salute To Paterson Principal
LEAD: Run-DMC, the rap group, treated about 3,000 students at Eastside High School today to a high-decibel salute to the school's principal, Joe Clark.


Valley National Finds Chief at Smaller Rival
LEAD: Banking ''is an all-out war now, while 15 years ago it was a fairly simple business,'' said James P. Simmons, who was elected chairman and chief executive of the Valley National Corporation earlier this week.
Valley is the parent of Arizona's largest bank.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  The Jazz Age at J's


Allah and Gorbachev Mixing in Central Asia
LEAD: Worshipers who come to the mosque of Imam Ibudulayev Nasrulo may sometimes find it difficult to tell where Mohammed leaves off and Mikhail S. Gorbachev begins.


Stage: John Gielgud Stars in London Play
LEAD: As the curtain rose Wednesday night on John Gielgud's first stage performance in a decade, the audience's trepidation was palpable.
Mr.
Gielgud is 83 years old and the sole active member of the acting trinity whose other legendary figures, Laurence Olivier and Ralph Richardson, are retired or dead.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-15


INDEPENDENT INSURANCE GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDEPENDENT INSURANCE GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b4,750,000
c3,466,000
Share earns
.69
.48
Shares outst
7,157,993
7,338,819
Yr net inc
b29,311,000
c31,086,000
Share earns
4.09
4.24
Shares outst
6,860,963
7,310,045


Advertising; Jordache to Broadcast Its New Commercials
LEAD: Jordache, a maker of jeans and casual clothes, will begin airing its latest 10- and 30-second television spots on Monday.
The half-dozen spots, created in-house, will continue to aim at the teen-age audience with the tagline ''Jordache Basics - Because Life . . .
Is Not.''


The Police Brass Make a Night of It
LEAD: From 6:30 on last night, the top officials of the New York City Police Department were out on the town, dancing, drinking and dining at the annual winter benefit dance of the New York City Police Foundation at Police Headquarters.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Roger Feuerman, Robert Tabor, Doreen Fox, Stephanie Pierson and Tino Pelino have been named senior vice presidents at Backer Spielvogel Bates, part of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide Inc.


GROLIER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROLIER INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
130,996,000
102,164,000
Net inc
b7,636,000
c7,193,000
Share earns
.39
.46
Shares outst
19,428,075
15,581,867
Yr rev
424,154,000
350,587,000
Net inc
b22,092,000
c12,515,000
Share earns
1.29
.87
Shares outst
17,107,253
14,323,670


Infant Ejected in Car Crash
LEAD: The police filed drunken driving and other charges today against the mother of a 13-month-old boy who hurtled out a car window in an accident early Wednesday and spent 15 minutes in an icy stream.
The boy, Eric McCourt, was in critical condition at Children's Hospital in Pittsburgh suffering head injuries and exposure, a hospital official said.


Albert Fink Milton, Executive, 90
LEAD: Albert Fink Milton, a former financial executive in New York City, died last Friday at his home in Washington, Conn.
He was 90 years old.


The Stage: 'Cave Life'
LEAD: EARLY in ''Cave Life'' (at the Circle Repertory Company), Robin Bartlett leads a tour through the prehistoric wing of the Museum of Natural History.
As she stops at an exhibit of Neanderthal man, one of the loin-clothed sculptural figures suddenly leaps to life and grabs the guide in a passionate embrace.


Another Quake in California
LEAD: A strong earthquake rocked a wide area of Southern California today, injuring at least 25 people and bringing on a fatal heart attack but apparently causing little damage.


Advertising; WPP Refinancing
LEAD: WPP Group, London, reported that it had signed its previously announced refinancing agreement for its acquisition of the JWT Group, which occurred last July.
WPP said the new package includes a seven-year, $160 million loan set up by S. G. Warburg &amp; Company, with the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York acting as agent and lead manager.


Islanders Beaten Late
LEAD: Vincent Damphousse scored his second goal of the game tonight with 22 seconds left in regulation time as the Toronto Maple Leafs broke a six-game losing streak with a 4-3 victory over the Islanders.


KDI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KDI CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
77,479,000
72,874,000
Net inc
b2,647,000
c70,000
Share earns
.27
.01
Yr sales
314,368,000
283,086,000
Net inc
b18,778,000
c6,487,000
Share earns
1.93
.68


Group Says It Controls Belgian Societe Generale&lt;
LEAD: A consortium of Belgian and French investors said today that it had obtained majority control of Societe Generale de Belgique, apparently thwarting a bid by the Italian entrepreneur Carlo de Benedetti.


LINCOLN NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINCOLN NATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,021,937,000
1,858,459,000
Net inc
b33,509,000
c82,285,000
Share earns
.71
1.79
Shares outst
42,898,287
44,875,579
Yr rev
6,960,056,000
5,998,413,000
Net inc
b236,904,000
c284,392,000
Share earns
5.19
6.12
Shares outst
43,738,079
44,857,409


BRANDON SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRANDON SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,143,000
4,855,000
Net inc
561,000
301,000
Share earns
.24
.17
Shares outst
2,297,603
1,746,930


INTERNATIONAL CONTAINER SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL CONTAINER SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,899,067
1,753,440
Net inc
143,488
165,359
Share earns
.05
.06
9mo sales
4,531,317
4,340,004
Net inc
178,378
405,258
Share earns
.06
.14


Film: 'Traveling North'
LEAD: ''TRAVELING NORTH,'' opening today at the Plaza Theater, is a modest, essentially dreary Australian movie made bearable by the robust performance by Leo McKern in the star part.


TAMBRANDS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TAMBRANDS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
133,417,000
115,666,000
Net inc
15,282,000
14,053,000
Share earns
.69
.63
Yr sales
538,861,000
486,564,000
Net inc
76,601,000
69,130,000
Share earns
3.45
3.12


Market Place; Behind Advance In G.M.'s H Stock
LEAD: TAKEOVER situations dominate the handful of issues recently hitting new highs on the New York Stock Exchange.
But the class H stock of General Motors - certainly no acquisition candidate - finds itself in this select group.


Iranians Celebrate Revolution's Anniversary
LEAD: Part of the crowd that gathered in Azadi Square in Teheran yesterday to mark the ninth anniversary of the Islamic Revolution and the end of the Persian monarchy.
Meanwhile, an Iranian gunboat attacked a large Norwegian tanker in the Persian Gulf, the sixth such attack since the 10-day celebration started Feb.


Dawson Shoots for Arbitration Record
LEAD: While Andre Dawson was preparing to shoot for a record arbitration salary today, two other outfielders who had sought salaries of more than $1 million negotiated new contracts yesterday.
Kirby Puckett of Minnesota accepted a $1,090,000 salary and Eric Davis of Cincinnati agreed to $899,000.


2 Are Seized in Beirut, Then Freed
LEAD: Gunmen kidnapped two Swedish journalists in Beirut's southern suburbs today but released them after realizing that they were not West Germans, the police said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Carriers Inc., Overland Park, Kan., has rejected Baytree Investors Inc.'s $15-a-share tender offer for a 51 percent stake.


VERTICOM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VERTICOM INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,979,000
2,657,000
Net loss
506,000
b205,000
Share earns
-
.07
Yr sales
12,490,000
8,305,000
Net inc
25,000
443,000
Share earns
.01
.18
b-Net income


U.S. Skater Tries Again
LEAD: As the sun set below the Canadian Rockies far to the west, Team Swider-Peltz was finishing up another grueling workout inside the Olympic Oval.
It's arguable which of the team members finds the workout most taxing.


Advertising; Hartz Names Keyes
LEAD: Hartz Mountain Industries, Secaucus, N.J., the real estate subsidiary of the Hartz Mountain Corporation, has tapped Keyes Martin Gaby Linett Advertising, Springfield, N.J., as the agency for its waterfront project in Edgewater, N.J.
The $1 million budget will be used for print, outdoor and direct marketing campaigns.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''I'm disappointed.
It seems I have been found guilty of trying to get the White House to do what it promised to do.''  - Lyn Nofziger.  [ A28:3. ]


In Philadelphia, a New Prelate, But Strict Views Are Familiar
LEAD: In an atmosphere of majesty that radiated the accumulated moral authority of two millenniums of church history, John Cardinal Krol today turned over the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia to Archbishop Anthony J. Bevilacqua.


Bishop Frederick Donaghy, Missionary, 85
LEAD: Bishop Frederick Donaghy, a Roman Catholic missionary in China and Taiwan, died of cancer Friday at Maryknoll, the Catholic Foreign Mission Society of America's center in Ossining, N.Y.
He was 85 years old.


COMMERCE CLEARING HOUSE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCE CLEARING HOUSE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
133,059,000
127,162,000
Net inc
6,640,000
6,145,000
Share earns
.37
.34
Yr rev
564,611,000
519,394,000
Net inc
52,791,000
47,551,000
Share earns
2.93
2.64


WINDMERE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WINDMERE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
51,031,200
24,753,600
Net inc
4,341,500
1,099,900
Share earns
.47
.12
Yr sales
145,225,200
95,282,700
Net inc
11,921,700
b5,245,500
Share earns
1.28
.56


U.S. File on Waldheim: Why Panel Didn't See It
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d ordered aides not to provide an Austrian investigative panel with the Justice Department's evidence on the wartime activities of President Kurt Waldheim of Austria, according to department officials.


Art: Chinese Paintings, 1800 to 1950, at the Met
LEAD: TWO years ago, the Metropolitan Museum of Art was given 471 Chinese paintings dated from 1800 to 1950.
The donor was Robert H. Ellsworth, a resident of New York City who is known worldwide as a dealer in Oriental art.
The gift fills a big hole in the museum's holdings, and by implication it makes a pitch for the continuing interest and significance of


COLGATE-PALMOLIVE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLGATE-PALMOLIVE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,465,101,000
1,249,468,000
Net inc
38,387,000
29,983,000
Share earns
.56
.43
Yr sales
5,647,160,000
4,984,576,000
Net inc
b54,022,000
177,465,000
Share earns
.78
2.52


NOFZIGER IS CONVICTED ON 3 COUNTS OF VIOLATING FEDERAL ETHICS LAW
LEAD: Lyn Nofziger, who served as one of Ronald Reagan's close advisers in the California Governor's office and in the White House, was found guilty today of illegal lobbying under the Federal ethics law.


Advertising; Foote, Cone Gets Client And Reports Profit Rise
LEAD: Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc., Chicago, has won the account for the Chicago-based United States League of Savings Institutions over four local agencies and the incumbent, Metacom, New York.
A national campaign is scheduled to begin this spring.
The budget is $5 million.
Foote, Cone yesterday reported a 37 percent rise in fourth-quarter earnings.


A WEEKEND FOR LOVERS, PRESIDENTS AND DRAGONS
LEAD: THE first great multi-holiday weekend has arrived.
Thanks to a highly improbable convergence of several usually scattered midwinter holidays, Valentine's Day, the birthdays of America's first and 16th Presidents (now telescoped into a single, generic President's Day), and the warm-up to both Chinese New Year's and Mardi Gras (or


Advertising; Leo Burnett: Steady as It Grows
LEAD: The worst snowstorm of the season struck today in a city not known for its gentle weather.
But while many Chicagoans refused to go outside, the Leo Burnett Company's most famous advertising creations -Tony the Tiger, the Pillsbury Doughboy and Charlie the Tuna - as well as its top executives stood in the 11-below-zero cold to celebrate the near completion of the agency's 50-story headquarters building.


Art People
LEAD:  Invasion of Price Lists


Gephardt Eyes Dukakis's Backyard
LEAD: On the face of it, the Democratic primary in New Hampshire next Tuesday is a straightforward affair: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts should win on the strength of his New England-ness, with Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri and Senator Paul Simon of Illinois fighting for second place.


AMERICAN MUSEUM OF HISTORIAL DOCUMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MUSEUM OF HISTORIAL DOCUMENTS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
633,372
550,319
Net inc
b22,390
b42,369
Share earns
.05
.09
b-Includes tax benefits of $3,859 for the latest quarter and $12,711 for the year-earlier period.


Metro-North Delays at High
LEAD: More than 16 percent of the trains on the Metro-North Commuter Railroad ran late in January, the poorest month in four years, the railroad said yesterday.
The New Haven line had the worst time with 21 percent of its trains late and an average delay for those trains of 17 minutes.
Metro-North calls a train late if it is more than five minutes behind schedule at its destination.


G.M. Rebate Plan Special to The New York Times
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it was offer-ing a $1,000 cash rebate to buyers of eligible 1988 Pontiac Firebirds, in a program that expires on April 30.
First-time buyers will qualify for an additional $600 payment in a pro-gram that ends Sept. 30.


CROWN CORK &amp; SEAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROWN CORK &amp; SEAL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
393,780,000
358,679,000
Net inc
16,561,000
15,579,000
Share earns
1.69
1.50
Yr sales
1,717,899,000
1,618,932,000
Net inc
88,339,000
79,441,000
Share earns
8.59
7.46


Gymnast Will Pass
LEAD: Kristie Phillips, the national women's champion and a good bet for a gold medal at the Summer Olympics, will not defend her championship in the American Cup championships next month, the United States Gymnastics Federation announced yesterday.


STANDARD COMMERCIAL TOBACCO CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANDARD COMMERCIAL TOBACCO CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
226,303,000
191,780,000
Net inc
4,982,000
4,068,000
Share earns
.91
.74
9mo sales
537,994,000
445,280,000
Net inc
11,288,000
9,246,000
Share earns
2.06
1.90


Threat Investigated
LEAD: The F.B.I. said yesterday it has entered the investigation of a death threat that prompted Tony Yates, the University of Cincinnati basketball coach, to stay away from Wednesday night's game in St.
Louis, the first game he has missed in five seasons.


Eastern Pilots Win Ruling
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday ordered Eastern Air Lines to produce internal documents about plans to transfer any of its major assets, including its shuttle operation on the East Coast.


Murdoch to Buy 2 More Magazines
LEAD: The publisher Rupert Murdoch will buy a consumer fashion magazine and an apparel trade publication, Murdoch Magazines said.
Sportswear International, a trade publication, and In Fashion, a bimonthly consumer magazine, will be purchased for an undisclosed sum.


Times Co. Net Up 22.1%
LEAD: The New York Times Company said yesterday that net income rose 22.1 percent, to nearly $42.5 million, or 52 cents a share, in the last three months of 1987, from $34.8 million, or 43 cents a share, in the comparable 1986 quarter.
Revenues rose 7.2 percent, to $447.8 million, from $417.9 million in the 1986 period.


Holiday Weekend
LEAD: Today is Lincoln's Birthday; Washington's Birthday is observed Monday.
Following are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Parking: Alternate-side rules are suspended today and Monday.
Sanitation: No collection or street sweeping either day.
Government offices: Federal and state offices are open and city offices are closed today; all are closed Monday.


SPARTON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPARTON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
54,755,476
59,572,195
Net inc
2,463,860
2,228,173
Share earns
.31
.28
6mo sales
104,124,973
111,756,562
Net inc
4,292,005
5,085,608
Share earns
.54
.64


COORS, ADOLPH CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COORS, ADOLPH CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
293,152,000
275,926,000
Net inc
3,655,000
4,041,000
Share earns
.10
.11
Yr sales
1,350,739,000
1,314,930,000
Net inc
48,148,000
59,393,000
Share earns
1.32
1.65


CFS FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CFS FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
170,000
1,900,000
Per share
.06
.62
Yr net inc
186,000
3,100,000
Per share
.06
1.04
The company said both fiscal 1987 periods include a loss provision on real estate of $815,000 and a $464,000 decrease in income from mortgage banking operations.


Interest Deductions Limited By Maze of New Regulations
LEAD: Until this tax-filing season, deducting interest on home mortgages, car loans, margin accounts and business loans used to be a straightforward affair with hardly any limitations.
To most taxpayers, interest was interest, and they were usually able to deduct any kind of interest expense in full with few complications.


QUALITY SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUALITY SYSTEMS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,332,800
2,135,300
Net loss
b400,300
c143,400
Share earns
-
.03
9mo rev
7,516,500
7,154,200
Net loss
b78,200
c490,600
Share earns
-
.11
b-After a loss on marketable securities of $505,500.


THE LAW: AT THE BAR
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani's flirtation with politics is over, at least for the moment.
But the debate over Mr.
Giuliani himself - what he was up to, what the future holds for him, and, ultimately, just what kind of man he is - rages more fiercely than ever.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  Advertising Arguments


OWENS &amp; MINOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OWENS &amp; MINOR INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
156,518,000
128,848,000
Net inc
2,099,000
1,509,000
Share earns
.38
.38
Shares outst
5,578,000
3,975,000
Yr sales
576,805,000
467,582,000
Net inc
6,486,000
4,902,000
Share earns
1.42
1.24
Shares outst
4,570,000
3,955,000


The New Protestant Ethic Is the Asian Ethic
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stop and Shop Rejects Offer
LEAD: As expected, the board of the Stop and Shop Companies rejected a buyout offer of $1.03 billion, or $37 a share, from the Dart Group Corporation.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Fellow Travelers
LEAD: Donna F. Tuttle, an Under Secretary of Commerce who heads the United States Travel and Tourism Administration, has a problem with one part of the private travel industry: the National Geographic Society's Traveler magazine.


BARNWELL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARNWELL INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,110,000
2,470,000
Net inc
570,000
240,000
Share earns
.41
.17


Advertising; Grey Is Winner For U S West
LEAD: Grey Advertising, Los Angeles, has come out the winner in the three-month competition for the U S West Inc. corporate advertising business, with a budget of $10 million.
U S West, one of the regional Bell operating companies, serves 14 Western and Midwestern states.
Its former agency, Fallon


RANGERS SINK; DEVILS 4, CANADIENS, 2
LEAD: For Coach Jim Schoenfeld of the Devils, the words of praise did not appear to be enough to describe Bob Sauve's remarkable goaltending against Montreal tonight.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 418 money market mutual funds increased $2.76 billion, to $278.03 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 113 institutional funds increased $1.65 billion, to $82.33 billion.
Assets of the 208 general purpose funds were up $305.7 million, to $81.4 billion.


NORTH EUROPEAN OIL ROYALTY TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTH EUROPEAN OIL ROYALTY TRUST
Qtr to Jan 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,781,751
4,745,457
Net inc
3,658,367
4,630,267
Share earns
.44
.56
The share earnings are in units.


Campeau Renews Bid for Retailer
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation, strengthened by an alliance with two powerful real estate developers, yesterday renewed its $61-a-share cash offer for Federated Department Stores Inc.
Separately, the Securities and Exchange Commission supported Campeau's right to challenge Delaware's new anti-takeover law.


Whatever You Do, Don't Call Burns Bobby
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Audible Rituals


'Trickster of Seville'
LEAD: Ever since Tirso de Molina first recorded the story of the legendary libertine Don Juan in 1630, this drama of passion, seduction and revenge has been retold many times.
A new version of the 17th-century Spanish writer's ''Trickster of Seville'' will be presented in a free staged reading Monday at 7 P.M.


Lukewarm Welcome for Professionals
LEAD: In the past, the Olympics were closed to professional athletes, or at least those defined as professionals by the International Olympic Committee.
In fact, a double standard existed, most clearly exemplified by athletes from the Eastern European countries, who are subsidized by their governments, but who usually listed their occupation as student or soldier.


Michigan Sets Bonuses For Pension Managers
LEAD: To compete with the high salaries of the securities industry, the Michigan Civil Service Commission yesterday approved a plan to pay bonuses to the state employees who manage Michigan's $15 billion pension fund, based on the fund's performance.


Film: 'Au Revoir les Enfants,' From Louis Malle
LEAD: LOUIS MALLE'S ''Au Revoir les Enfants'' (''Goodbye, Children'') is based on an event that took place during January 1944, when the French writer and director, then 12 years old, was attending a Jesuit boarding school near Fontainebleau.
At the end of the Christmas holidays, in the middle of the scholastic year, there appeared at the school three new boys, one of whom became the young


Shultz Likely to Undertake Mideast Peace Mission
LEAD: Administration officials said today that Secretary of State George P. Shultz would probably travel to the Middle East at the end of this month to explore the prospects for movement toward Arab-Israeli peace negotiations.


Jersey State Opera
LEAD: The New Jersey State Opera will present Pietro Mascagni's ''Iris'' on Sunday at 6 P.M. in Newark's Symphony Hall.
Adriana Maliponte, a soprano, will sing the title role.
It is the first production of the opera in this area since its performance at the Metropolitan Opera in 1931.
Tickets are $6 to $42.


GLATFELTER, P H CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GLATFELTER, P H CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
127,442,000
72,537,000
Net inc
15,120,000
11,371,000
Share earns
.63
.46
Yr sales
423,680,000
284,832,000
Net inc
55,027,000
41,474,000
Share earns
2.25
1.66


Winner of Nobel Prize Assails Candidates on Issue of AIDS
LEAD: Opening the annual meeting of the nation's leading scientific organization, Dr.
David Baltimore, a Nobel prize-winning molecular biologist, today criticized the Presidential candidates of both major political parties.


The Great Game Goes On
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev faces a challenge entirely worthy of his abilities as a master politician.


Estimate Board Reacts To Threats With a Vote
LEAD: The Board of Estimate, its existence threatened by the prospect of changes in the New York City Charter, rose up in oratorical ire yesterday to assert its powers and challenge Mayor Koch's right to order quietly the closing of a Brooklyn firehouse.


Illinois on Probation
LEAD: The University of Illinois, which admitted to football recruiting violations during the tenure of Mike White, a former coach, was placed on probation yesterday by the National Collegiate Athletic Association but received no major penalty.
The N.C.A.A.
Committee on Infractions said Illinois would be on probation until July 1, 1989, and must submit two internal audits of the football program.


WHITE HOUSE SETS NEW SPACE POLICY
LEAD: After a bitter internal struggle, the White House yesterday made public a new policy meant to rejuvenate the Government's ailing space program and speed the growth of the nation's emerging commercial space industry.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing on page B1 yesterday about holiday weekend closings referred incorrectly to a parade.
The Washington's Birthday parade, originally scheduled for Monday, has been canceled.
An article on the subject appears today on page B2.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  TWO POETS AT THE GAS STATION


P.L.O. Dispute: U.S. and U.N. on Collision Course
LEAD: After years of growing tension in their relations, the United Nations and the United States are on the brink of their most damaging confrontation as a result of Congressional moves to close the Palestine Liberation Organization mission here, diplomats and senior officials of the world organization say.


TREASURES AND TRIFLES: BROWSING IN ART BOOKSTORES
LEAD: IN matters of art, New York has everything in depth -museums, dealers, magazines, practicing artists.
So it should come as no surprise that this is also a city where art bookstores are in good supply, a city, in fact, where books about art are as easy to buy as - and certainly more nourishing than - a takeout dinner.


Auctions
LEAD: Britain is currently in the midst of an unofficial Noel Coward festival.
Revivals of his early plays, including ''Easy Virtue'' and ''The Vortex,'' are running in London and Glasgow, and last week the New Sadler's Wells Opera launched its nationwide tour of ''Bitter Sweet,'' Coward's 1929 operetta, in


IU Urges Caution On Neoax Offer
LEAD: The board of the IU International Corporation urged stockholders to refrain from tendering their shares to Neoax Inc. because of uncertainties about its tender offer.
IU said it was exploring alternatives to the hostile $20-a-share offer, including a recapitalization or a leveraged buyout.


Revamping of Air Traffic System Urged, Including Private Control
LEAD: The new Secretary of Transportation called today for a restructuring of Federal aviation regulations and said that turning the air traffic control system over to private industry should be among the options.


ESPEY MANUFACTURING &amp; ELECTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESPEY MANUFACTURING &amp; ELECTRONICS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,519,779
3,908,890
Net inc
548,086
586,772
Share earns
.46
.49
6mo sales
6,785,143
7,269,681
Net inc
1,072,931
1,092,686
Share earns
.89
.90


Kickoff Gets Nebraska
LEAD: Nebraska, which defeated Penn State in the first game five years ago, and Texas A&amp;M, winner of three straight Southwest Conference championships, will meet in the sixth Kickoff Classic this summer.


ROYAL TRUST CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROYAL TRUST CO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
618,000,000
526,000,000
Net inc
45,000,000
37,000,000
Share earns
.28
.25
Yr rev
2,269,000,000
1,856,000,000
Net inc
188,000,000
154,000,000
Share earns
1.28
1.10


Negligent Landlord Is Ordered Confined To Ill-Kept Tenement
LEAD: A Brooklyn landlord has been sentenced to spend 15 days under house arrest in an apartment building that he owns and where he failed to correct nearly 400 building code violations.


James McGlincy, 70; Was a CBS Journalist
LEAD: James McGlincy, a journalist who worked for several newspapers and for CBS News, died of cancer of the lymph glands on Tuesday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 70 years old.


FINANCIAL CORP OF SANTA BARARA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FINANCIAL CORP OF SANTA BARARA (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
414,000
5,641,000
Share earns
.05
.86
Yr net inc
2,770,000
b19,088,000
Share earns
.39
3.16
b-After an extraordinary credit of $900,000.


CERAMICS PROCESS SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CERAMICS PROCESS SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,100,000
900,000
Net loss
1,600,000
1,000,000
Yr rev
3,600,000
2,600,000
Net loss
5,900,000
4,100,000


GREGG GOES TO WORK REBUILDING S.M.U.
LEAD: Forrest Gregg said he knew it would be a daunting job to rebuild Southern Methodist University's penalized and disgraced football program when he left professional coaching last month.


SEAGULL ENERGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEAGULL ENERGY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
40,334,000
49,169,000
Net inc
2,944,000
4,799,000
Share earns
.32
.57
Yr rev
152,923,000
185,680,000
Net inc
8,180,000
135,000
Share earns
.80
-


Film: 'Action Jackson'
LEAD: ''ACTION JACKSON'' is named for a Detroit cop who is slow to take offense but when he does, get out of the way.
Played by Carl Weathers, a member of the highly-developed-upper-torso school of movie hero, he is after a power-mad automobile executive skilled in karate whose henchmen are killing off the leadership of the auto union.


THE NEW YORK TIMES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THE NEW YORK TIMES CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
447,845,000
417,853,000
Net inc
b42,492,000
c34,758,000
Share earns
.52
.43
Shares outst
81,496,000
81,087,000
12mo rev
1,689,598,000
1,564,663,000
Net inc
b160,333,000
c132,227,000
Share earns
1.96
1.63
Shares outst
81,853,000
80,985,000


A New Global Status for Cognac
LEAD: For centuries, cognac makers have boasted that nothing has changed in the way they make their world-famous brandy -neither the copper-distilling equipment, nor the oak barrels in which the cognac ages.


Rebuilding Techniques for Jaws Not Yet Proven
LEAD: To the Editor:


A&amp;W BRANDS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*A&amp;W BRANDS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,166,000
8,087,000
Net inc
638,000
135,000
Share earns
.06
.02
Shares outst
8,849,000
3,604,000
Yr sales
74,862,000
40,131,000
Net inc
1,536,000
b515,000
Share earns
.20
-


PARADYNE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARADYNE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
60,431,000
63,750,000
Net inc
b565,000
cd26,265,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr rev
232,568,000
261,109,000
Net loss
b2,608,000
d38,461,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $276,000 and $445,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  MUCH DEPENDS ON DINNER.
The Extraordinary History and Mythology, Allure and Obsessions, Perils and Taboos of an Ordinary Meal.
By Margaret Visser. 351 pages.
Illustrated.


COPPERWELD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COPPERWELD CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
59,396,000
47,450,000
Net inc
2,699,000
b3,357,000
Share earns
.24
-
Shares outst
8,731,411
8,618,392
Yr sales
224,115,000
199,246,000
Net inc
10,037,000
b6,258,000
Share earns
.87
-
Shares outst
8,667,761
8,618,392


Showing by Robertson in Iowa Race Buoys Conservatives
LEAD: Conservative political operatives, many of them privately expressing doubts that the Presidential candidacy of their standard bearer, Representative Jack F. Kemp, will survive, saw hope for their cause today in Pat Robertson's surprising second-place finish in the Iowa caucuses.


Del Norte Funding Begins Offering
LEAD: The Del Norte Funding Corporation is offering $200 million of secured lease obligation bonds in three tranches through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; company.
All the bonds are priced at par and are guaranteed by leases from the El Paso Funding Corporation, a unit of the El Paso Electric


PROPERTY CAPITAL TRUST (BOSTON)(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROPERTY CAPITAL TRUST (BOSTON)(A)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,108,000
3,838,000
Share earns
.42
.42
Shares outst
9,781,000
9,102,000
6mo net inc
b11,957,000
7,673,000
Share earns
1.24
.84
Shares outst
9,702,000
9,066,000


Many Donors Increase Gifts To Neediest
LEAD: As the city's poor grow poorer and more numerous, many people have increased their usual contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Young People's Concert
LEAD: The New York Philharmonic will present a Young People's Concert featuring Stravinsky's ''Rite of Spring'' tomorrow at 2 P.M. in Avery Fisher Hall.
Zubin Mehta will conduct.
Tickets are $4 to $15.
Information: 874-6770.


Townsend Harris Coup
LEAD: To the Editor:


Parents Not the Answer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Girl's Lawyers Agree to Assist Attack Inquiry
LEAD: The lawyers for a Dutchess County teen-ager who said she was the victim of a racial and sexual attack agreed today to cooperate with a state investigation, promising that she would be a witness ''at the appropriate time.''


IMO DELAVAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMO DELAVAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
104,755,000
91,974,000
Net inc
4,610,000
c2,133,000
Share earns
.67
-
Yr sales
368,463,000
358,414,000
Net inc
b20,120,000
c10,986,000
Share earns
2.83
-


MILGRAY ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MILGRAY ELECTRONICS INC
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
73,797,920
62,004,437
Net inc
b851,628
175,738
Share earns
1.09
.23
b-Includes a $351,200 gain from an accounting change.
The company said that in 1987 it changed its method of inventory costing to include in inventory certain labor and overhead costs, which decreased its operating income for the year by 6 cents a share.


Film: 'Shoot to Kill'
LEAD: IN the cool green mountains of the Pacific Northwest, a red-hot thriller unfolds.
It's ''Shoot to Kill,'' a film that marks the return of Sidney Poitier after a long absence from the screen, and a reappearance of good old-fashioned storytelling technique as well.
This is essentially a formula film, and as such it's nothing fancy.


JACKPOT ENTERPRISES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACKPOT ENTERPRISES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,878,000
6,621,000
Net inc
1,363,000
949,000
Share earns
.29
.20
6mo rev
13,496,000
12,836,000
Net inc
2,209,000
1,552,000
Share earns
.47
.33


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Buddy Tate
LEAD: Buddy Tate, a saxophonist who played with Count Basie, will lead a quartet with the guest vocalist Carrie Smith tonight through Sunday at Carlos 1, 432 Avenue of the Americas, near Ninth Street (982-3260).
Sets begin at 9 and 11 P.M., plus a 12:30 A.M. set tonight and tomorrow; there is a $10 cover with a $7 minimum at tables and a one-drink minimum at the bar.


Military Officers in Honduras Are Linked to the Drug Trade
LEAD: Senior Honduran Army officers and a powerful drug dealer with past ties to Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the Panamanian military leader, are setting up major drug operations in Honduras, according to American officials and worried Honduran political leaders.


PULLMAN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PULLMAN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
213,187,000
127,716,000
Net inc
3,433,000
b4,051,000
Share earns
.08
.10
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $173,000.
Year-ago figures have been restated to reflect the sale of a temperature monitoring device business and the anticipated disposition of an electrical components business.


The Trade Gap: Myths and Crocodile Tears
LEAD: The trade figures scheduled for release today will no doubt show that Asian nations continue to sell us much more than we sell them, the declining dollar notwithstanding.
In fact, America's trade deficit with the ''four tigers'' of Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore and Taiwan is now greater than our trade deficit with all of Western Europe.


Rabbi Israel Raphael Margolies Dies at 72
LEAD: Rabbi Israel Raphael Margolies, who spoke out on a variety of social issues and was a longtime civil rights advocate, died of complications from hypoglycemia yesterday at his home in Teaneck, N.J.
He was 72 years old.


U.S. Must Keep Access To North Korea Open
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dining Out Guide: Pasta
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants reviewed in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
CHELSEA TRATTORIA ITALIANA, 108 Eighth Avenue, near 16th Street (924-7786) - **(Aug.


Reagans to Help Raise Funds
LEAD: President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, will appear at a $10,000 a couple fund-raising event Friday for the California Republican Party, state party officials said.
The event will be held at the Bel-Air home of David Murdock, a real estate developer.
The event is expected to draw 100 to 125 people.
The Reagans are making a brief stopover before traveling to Mexico over the weekend to visit President Miguel de la Madrid.


N. Carolina Wins in Overtime
LEAD: J. R. Reid and Scott Williams scored 4 points each in overtime to lead sixth-ranked North Carolina to a 75-73 victory over No. 16 North Carolina State in an Atlantic Coast Conference game tonight.


Violence Erupts Again in Bangladesh Vote
LEAD: Election-related violence broke out in three cities near the capital today, a day after similar violence left at least 80 people dead, officials said.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.40
5.72
6.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.60
5.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.88
5.83
5.66
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.94
7.89
7.09
30-YR.


Gay Rights and the Court; Justices Likely to Confront Anew the Issue Of Government Bias Against Homosexuals
LEAD: A Federal appellate ruling Wednesday that the Army's ban on homosexuals was unconstitutional casts doubt on all governmental discrimination against homosexuals, whether in the military or in civilian employment.


Conference Focuses on Racial Strife
LEAD: For almost two hours, the cacophony of lilting Caribbean accents, Brooklynese and the audible influences of Spanish and Asian languages filled the auditorium at the Pratt Institute as 70 Brooklyn community leaders sought ways to reduce racial and ethnic tensions.


Taking No Chances
LEAD: A worker making snow for the weekend Winter Festival in Central Park as there is little hope for much, if any, of the real thing. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


On Stage
LEAD:  The Smell of Success for Mamet


HEEKIN CAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEEKIN CAN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
78,626,000
67,456,000
Net inc
2,945,000
1,735,000
Share earns
.90
.53
Yr sales
230,353,000
207,592,000
Net inc
8,757,000
6,985,000
Share earns
2.69
2.15


BUSH SHARPENING ATTACKS ON DOLE
LEAD: Vice President Bush, searching for ways to stave off a challenge from Senator Bob Dole, campaigned without many of the trappings of office today and with a sharpened, more critical attack on his leading rival.


Bush Leads in New York Filings, But Opponents Protest His Tactics
LEAD: Vice President Bush had some good news in the Republican Presidential race yesterday when his New York supporters filed the most slates, the most candidates for delegate and the most signatures on petitions for the April 19 Presidential primary.


The Philadelphia
LEAD: The Philadelphia Orchestra, conducted by Riccardo Muti, will present vocal works by Bruckner, Mozart and Verdi on Monday at 8 P.M. in Carnegie Hall.
Tickets are $16 to $30.
Information: 247-7800.


Meadowlands Meet A Yardstick for Coe
LEAD: At 31 years of age, with a decade of world-class competition behind him, Sebastian Coe is turning to something new.
Coe will run in his first American indoor track meet, the Vitalis Olympic Invitational in Byrne Meadowlands Arena, tomorrow night.


Plea Ends Copter Export Case
LEAD: Two brothers being tried on charges of illegally exporting 87 high-performance Hughes helicopters to North Korea have pleaded guilty to reduced charges, a prosecutor said.


High Voltage Bid
LEAD: The High Voltage Engineering Corporation of Burlington, Mass., has agreed to accept a sweetened offer of $18 a share, or about $91.8 million, from Hyde Park Partners L.P., a New York investment firm.
Hyde Park had made unsolicited offers of $15.25 a share and then $17 a share for High Voltage, a which makes electrical and communications instruments.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
New Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Colgate-Palmolive Co.
$38,400,000
+28.0
Fruit of the Loom Inc.
12,600,000
+34.0
Melville Corp.
161,900,000
+21.1
Norton Co.
17,200,000
*-
Standard Register Co.


DEROSE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEROSE INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Sales
5,656,000
5,521,000
Net loss
297,000
807,000


TV Weekend; Ramey In 'Don Giovanni'
LEAD: ''DON GIOVANNI'' may be the world's best opera; we remember the music even when we've forgotten which grieved woman was Donna Anna and which one was Donna Elvira. ''Great Performances,'' on Channel 13 at 9 tonight, presents the Salzburg Festival production of Mozart's great work.
It is not a feast for the eyes; on the other hand, it is ''Don Giovanni.


Early Music Players
LEAD: The Early Music Players will present a program entitled ''Musick With Her Silver Sound'' on Sunday at 3 P.M. that includes pieces from the English courts of Henry VIII, Elizabeth I and James I, played on original instruments, at St.
Bartholomew's Church (109 East 50th Street).
A $5 contribution is requested.


THERMO ELECTRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THERMO ELECTRON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
98,582,000
88,467,000
Net inc
5,026,000
4,441,000
Share earns
.28
.25
Yr sales
383,383,000
331,600,000
Net inc
18,110,000
14,320,000
Share earns
1.00
.83


BUSINESSMEN'S ASSURANCE CO OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUSINESSMEN'S ASSURANCE CO OF AMERICA (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,744,000
d6,867,000
Share earns
.24
.65
Yr net inc
b66,122,000
cd16,445,000
Share earns
6.38
-
b-After investment losses of $2,058,000 for the quarter and an investment gain of $58,346,000 for the year, and the year also includes a tax credit of $3,978,000.


AMERICAN HERITAGE LIFE INESTMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN HERITAGE LIFE INESTMENT (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,188,314
c3,300,482
Share earns
.26
.71
Yr net inc
b10,632,848
c15,776,307
Share earns
2.30
3.36
b-After capital losses of $1,336,644 for the quarter and a capital gain of $764,579 for the year.


AIRLEASE LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIRLEASE LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,988,000
2,791,000
Net inc
2,136,000
1,934,000
Share earns
.46
.41
Yr rev
15,177,000
5,520,000
Net inc
8,506,000
1,934,000
Share earns
1.84
.41


NRBQ to Perform
LEAD: NRBQ, a rock band, will perform tonight and tomorrow at the Bottom Line, 14 West Fourth Street (228-6300), with True Image opening.
Double bills begin at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; tickets are $12.50.


AIDS Experiment Based on Salk's Theories
LEAD: Some patients infected with the AIDS virus are being injected with an inactive form of the virus in a program in which Dr.
Jonas Salk is using the same theories that led to his vaccine for polio.


Study Urges Tougher Checks To Meet Clean Air Act Goals
LEAD: More stringent controls to reduce smog and carbon monoxide pollution from motor vehicles are required if the nation is to reach the goals of the Clean Air Act, according to a study released today by the American Lung Association.


Largest L.I. Hospital Curbs Elective Care In Nursing Shortage
LEAD: The Nassau County Medical Center, the largest hospital on Long Island, began turning away all non-emergency cases today because of a severe shortage of nurses.


Asante Dancers
LEAD: Drummers and dancers from the Asante tribe in Ghana will give a free demonstration on Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Hillside School, 54 Orange Avenue, Montclair, N.J.
The performance is sponsored by the Montclair Art Museum as part of a celebration of Black History month.
A reception will follow at the museum, South Mountain and Bloomfield Avenues.


The Larger Peril in Panama
LEAD: It's not necessary to believe all the charges against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to know he's an abomination and that his continued rule is disastrous for Panama and dangerous to the United States.
Even the Reagan Administration says so.
The problem is that no one seems to have a good plan for ousting Panama's strongman.


Washington Talk: The Commerce Department; In 'Lockup,' Itchy Reporters Count the Secnds
LEAD: None have been handcuffed, none subjected to strip searches, none fingerprinted.
But for reporters covering the United States Government's periodic releases of critical economic statistics, their compulsory incarceration for a half-hour or so before the magic moment of data release produces a sensation not all that different from being under arrest.


Old Tollbooths on Merritt: Trying to Save 30's Artifacts
LEAD: After a long campaign, the tolls on the Merritt Parkway will be abolished next July 1.
Now, a new campaign is starting to save the tollbooths as a historical reminder of the 1930's, when people went motoring instead of commuting.


FIRST EXECUTIVE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST EXECUTIVE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b40,969,000
c41,120,000
Share earns
.41
.43
Shares outst
83,570,000
79,953,000
Yr net inc
b177,837,000
c157,022,000
Share earns
1.79
1.76
Shares outst
83,836,000
72,609,000


Newmont's Gold Loan
LEAD: The Newmont Mining Corporation confirmed yesterday that it had recently obtained a loan of one million ounces of gold from a group of lenders led by the Bank of Nova Scotia.
At current bullion prices, the loan is valued at roughly $445 million and is believed to be the largest of its kind by a mining company.


SEALED POWER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEALED POWER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
202,780,000
162,137,000
Net loss
b2,900,000
c5,900,000
Share earns
-
.48
Yr sales
774,175,000
665,807,000
Net inc
26,100,000
28,500,000
Share earns
2.12
2.32


CADE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CADE INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
13,580,000
12,826,000
Net inc
409,000
b122,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr sales
55,091,000
58,274,000
Net inc
1,415,000
c3,690,000
Share earns
.08
.21
b-Net loss


INSIDE
LEAD:  Shultz May Visit Mideast


AON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b27,486,000
c45,695,000
Share earns
.42
.68
Yr net inc
b156,184,000
c237,249,000
Share earns
2.36
3.70
b-After realized investment losses of $17,381,000 and $28,870,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


2 More Quit In Turmoil At Salomon
LEAD: Two more senior executives resigned from Salomon Brothers yesterday, joining the growing list of defectors from the large investment banking house, people close to the firm said.


Pop/Jazz; Resurgence Of Big Bands In New York
LEAD: THE 1980's have seen an explosion of jazz activity, in just about every form imaginable.
One of the most fertile movements of the decade, for instance, has been built around the re-emergence of the big band as a composer's forum.
Artistically challenging orchestras have been like taxes: they seem to be everywhere.


JACO ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACO ELECTRONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,281,686
9,125,941
Net inc
264,882
51,856
Share earns
.22
.04
6mo sales
23,961,404
17,017,617
Net inc
559,756
224,585
Share earns
.47
.19


Scientists Urge Huge Project To Chart All Human Genes
LEAD: An expert committee of the National Research Council said yesterday that the United States should immediately begin a 15-year effort to diagram and describe in detail the chemical language of all the possibly 100,000 human genes.


MOLECULON INC reports earnings for Year to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOLECULON INC (OTC)
Year to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
880,037
1,099,763
Net loss
2,592,426
2,078,238


COSTAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COSTAR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Sales
5,915,000
5,200,000
Net inc
b501,000
c1,084,000
Share earns
.29
-
Yr sales
22,633,000
18,559,000
Net inc
b1,603,000
c438,000
Share earns
.92
-
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $43,000 for the quarter and $462,000 for the year; gains on the disposal of discontinued operations of $22,000 and $627,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and the year also includes a tax credit of $307,000.


Percy Jones
LEAD: Percy Jones, an electric bassist, will perform tonight at 9 and 11 at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street (219-3055).
Tickets are $7.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Aon Corp., Chicago, Ill., an insurance holding company, appointed John J. O'Connell executive vice president of its Aon Information Services division.


Harpsichord Concertos
LEAD: John Gibbons, a harpsichordist, will perform harpsichord concertos by Bach tonight at 8 o'clock in Weill Recital Hall.
He will be joined by a quintet of string players.
Tickets are $12.
Information: 247-7800.


John Reich Dies at 81; Led Goodman Theater
LEAD: Dr.
John Reich, who guided the Goodman Theater from an academic adjunct of the Art Institute of Chicago to one of the nation's best resident professional ensembles, died of congestive heart failure Tuesday at Sarasota Memorial Hospital in Florida.
He was 81 years old.


EDAC TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EDAC TECHNOLOGIES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,544,000
9,989,000
Net inc
11,000
b624,000
Yr sales
41,140,000
45,903,000
Net inc
233,000
c2,590,000
Share earns
.07
.80
b-Net loss  c-Includes an extraordinary gain of $2.5 million from life insurance proceeds.


HAIG SAID TO BE SET TO DROP FROM RACE
LEAD: Alexander M. Haig Jr. plans to quit the Republican Presidential race on Friday and endorse the candidacy of Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, Republican campaign officials said tonight.


Few in Survey See Recession
LEAD: United States manufacturers are largely unconcerned about their inventory levels and only one in four sees a recession this year, according to a survey of manufacturing executives made public this week.
The National Association of


PORTLAND GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PORTLAND GENERAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
202,469,000
198,794,000
Net inc
b12,853,000
cd56,088,000
Share earns
.28
-
Yr rev
763,763,000
759,843,000
Net inc
b113,031,000
d15,830,000
Share earns
2.45
.34


Diner's Journal
LEAD: RESTAURANT LAFAYETTE, the three-star French restaurant in the Drake Hotel on Park Avenue at 56th Street, has added some engrossing traditional winter dishes to its menu.
Called ''menu d'autrefois,'' or menu of another time, the four-course meal, served at dinner, is prix fixe at $65 (intended for two or more diners, although any items can be ordered a la carte).


Bridge: Pat Cotter's Skills Range Across Games and Sports
LEAD: Versatility in active games and sports is not uncommon, nor in intellectual pursuits.


MORINO ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORINO ASSOCIATES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,526,000
9,286,000
Net inc
2,971,000
1,988,000
Share earns
.29
.19
6mo rev
21,764,000
16,207,000
Net inc
4,556,000
3,086,000
Share earns
.44
.31


After Delay, P.L.O. Ship Is Set to Sail to Israel
LEAD: After days of delay, the Palestine Liberation Organization announced today that a ship carrying Palestinian deportees would leave for Israel in 36 hours.


ROBOTIC VISION SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROBOTIC VISION SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,928,000
3,805,000
Net inc
26,000
-
Share earns
.01
-
The company reported a net loss for the year-ago quarter.


Dollar and Gold End Mixed; U.S. Trade Figures Awaited
LEAD: The dollar ended mixed on worldwide foreign exchanges yesterday as dealers awaited the December merchandise trade report from the Commerce Department.


RANGERS SINK; CAPITALS 5, RANGERS 3
LEAD: It was as if the prospect of climbing closer to a playoff spot induced vertigo.
The Rangers stumbled miserably at the start and collapsed typically at the finish in a 5-3 loss to the Capitals last night.


THERMODYNETICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THERMODYNETICS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,616,522
1,484,510
Net inc
28,753
5,849
9mo sales
5,012,493
4,299,959
Net inc
138,523
b225,420
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Exiled Afghan Dean Is Killed At Press Service in Pakistan
LEAD: A prominent exiled professor from Afghanistan, Prof.
Sayd Bahouddin Majrooh, was killed today by an unknown gunman in Peshawar, his son said.


Murdoch's Lawyers Argue for Cross-Ownership
LEAD: Lawyers for Rupert Murdoch argued before a Federal appeals court here today that Congress acted unconstitutionally when it passed a law before Christmas whose sole object, they said, was to damage Mr.
Murdoch.


HUDSON GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUDSON GENERAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
29,375,000
22,830,000
Net inc
309,000
218,000
Share earns
.25
.18
6mo rev
56,323,000
44,255,000
Net loss
42,000
b316,000
Share earns
-
.26


District Judge Frees Suspect In Hostage-Taking at School
LEAD: A man initially believed to have been an accomplice in a hostage-taking here last week was released from jail after a prosecutor said it appeared he had been forced to participate at gunpoint.


Apathy Cancels a Parade
LEAD: It was never on the scale of the Thanksgiving or Veterans Day parades.
Still, over the last 90 years, the parade in honor of Washington's Birthday - led by the Knights of Columbus Color Corps with its capes draped over tuxedos, swords and plumed hats -had become a tradition.


COEUR D'ALENE MINES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COEUR D'ALENE MINES CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,400,000
6,778,000
Net inc
3,500,000
b1,343,000
Share earns
.43
-
Yr rev
60,176,000
13,950,000
Net inc
11,202,000
b4,693,000
Share earns
1.26
-


MONARCH CAPITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONARCH CAPITAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b7,203,000
c20,324,000
Per share
.89
2.50
Shares outst
7,352,000
8,130,000
Yr net inc
b44,099,000
c73,891,000
Per share
5.52
8.86
b-Includes a capital loss of $5,230,000 and $859,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and a net gain of $1,191,000 and $6,943,000 from restructuring of operations for the same periods, respectively.


Lutes of Many Lands
LEAD: Lutes of Arabia, China and Iran will be presented tomorrow at 8 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street (362-8719).
Simon Shaheen will play the Arab oud, Tang Liang-Xing will play the Chinese pipa and Dariush Dolat-Shahi will play the Persian setar and tar, all lutes of various shapes and tunings, in a concert presented by the World Music Institute (206-1050).


Wallace R. Cotton, 64, Supreme Court Justice
LEAD: Justice Wallace R. Cotton of State Supreme Court died of melanoma, or skin cancer, Wednesday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


CHAUS, BERNARD reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAUS, BERNARD (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
69,287,000
73,135,000
Net loss
1,792,000
b3,008,000
Share earns
-
.16
6mo sales
162,171,000
150,103,000
Net inc
988,000
8,781,000
Share earns
.05
.48


Tenants Strike Beneath Their Rooftop Pool
LEAD: A cylinder of black-tinted glass that rises 46 stories above Second Avenue, the apartment building is the epitome of Upper East Side elegance.
The view from a rooftop pool looks south over the midtown skyline.
In the basement, two theaters show first-run films.


GENUINE PARTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENUINE PARTS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
644,887,000
582,013,000
Net inc
40,636,000
31,724,000
Share earns
.52
.40
Yr sales
2,606,246,000
2,394,072,000
Net inc
148,292,000
121,552,000
Share earns
1.88
1.52


Mozambique: Few Escape Fury of War
LEAD: Hundreds of people sought refuge from war at a relief camp outside this decaying town.
But Mozambique's cruel reality crept up on them there.


Pork Posts Steep Decline; Midwest Storm a Factor
LEAD: Prices of pork futures fell steeply yesterday as concerns about the weather combined with other market forces to foreshadow a possibly sharp increase in hog slaughters.


Advertising; Mingo Reorganizes
LEAD: Frank L. Mingo, who runs Mingo-Jones Advertising, has reorganized the firm's executive ranks so he can devote more time to clients of the mi-nority -owned shop.
Mr.
Mingo turned over the posts of president and chief operating officer to Samuel J. Chis-holm, who will look after day-to-day operations.


Troops Kill Palestinian Youth
LEAD: Israeli troops shot and killed a Palestinian youth at the Tulkarm refugee center in the West Bank today, an army spokesman said.
The shooting brought the unofficial death toll to at least 54 in more than two months of violence in the Israeli-occupied territories.


10 Elected to Academy
LEAD: John McPhee, Cynthia Ozick and Reynolds Price are among 10 leading cultural figures who have been elected to the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters.
The other new members, whose names were announced yesterday, are Alex Katz, the painter and printmaker; Elmer Bischoff and Giorgio Cavallon, painters; Francis Thorne, the composer, and Raymond Carver, Leslie Fiedler and Evan S.


Mr. Waldheim and Mr. von Weizsacker
LEAD: Nothing better illustrates Kurt Waldheim's unfitness for leadership than his response to the new report on his World War II record.
The report confirms his knowledge of Nazi atrocities by his army units and his subsequent concealment of this record.
Yet what Austria's President pulls from the report, sadly for


Recital: Dawn Upshaw
LEAD: A TALENTED singer, like a great impostor, learns how to switch personalities, not merely clothes or facial expressions, to suit the occasion.
The remarkable soprano Dawn Upshaw demonstrated such ability at Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday evening in two successive, drastically different vocal dramas.


About Real Estate; Converting All-Suite Hotels in Stamford
LEAD: As all-suite hotels continue to proliferate around the nation, some owners are taking advantage of their broader potential: transformation into residential condominiums should an oversupply develop or demand for transient accommodations slacken.


Timeless All-Stars
LEAD: The Timeless All-Stars - Harold Land on tenor saxophone, Bobby Hutcherson on vibraphone, Curtis Fuller on trombone, Cedar Walton on piano, Buster Williams on bass and Billy Higgins on drums - are performing tonight through Sunday at Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South above Bleecker Street (242-1785).


Samaranch Calls for 'Vigilance'
LEAD: With the opening ceremonies of the XV Olympic Winter Games two days away, less attractive Olympic issues continued to share the forefront with final preparations.


Texaco Investors Win Plea
LEAD: Shareholders challenging Texaco Inc.'s proposal to grant sweeping releases and indemnities to officers and advisers involved in its acquisition of Getty Oil will have the right to gather documents and testimony from them before the March 22 hearing on Texaco's bankruptcy reorganization plan, Bankruptcy Judge Howard


Workers' Total For New York Soaring in 80's
LEAD: Employment in New York City in the 1980's has risen to its highest level since the years just after World War II, with women experiencing the largest gains, according to a Federal report issued yesterday.


Convicted Killer Is Captured After Photo Is Shown on TV
LEAD: A convicted murderer who escaped from an Indiana prison in 1986 was captured by the F.B.I. on Staten Island yesterday, four days after his picture was shown on a television program about the F.B.I.'s most-wanted list, the authorities said.


UNUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNUM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b18,200,000
c24,500,000
Share earns
.39
-
Yr net inc
b94,800,000
c115,100,000
Share earns
1.94
-
b-Includes realized capital gains of $300,000 and $9.9 million for the quarter and year, respectively.


Justice Dept. Finds No Violation Of Ethics Law in Ginsburg Case
LEAD: The Justice Department has decided not to seek a special prosecutor to review conflict-of-interest allegations against Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, a department official said Wednesday.


FRUIT OF THE LOOM reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRUIT OF THE LOOM (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
224,200,000
179,900,000
Net inc
12,600,000
c9,400,000
Share earns
.21
-
Yr sales
870,300,000
692,900,000
Net loss
b13,400,000
cd12,100,000
b-After income of $5 million from discontinued operations and an extraordinary charge of $56.2 million from debt refinancing.


State Dept. Is Faulted on Embassy Guard Incidents
LEAD: A preliminary investigation by the General Accounting Office, the Congressional monitoring agency, has found that the State Department failed to inform military investigators of more than 500 instances of possible wrongdoing by Marine guards at American embassies worldwide, a Congressman said today.


It's Not Luge Weather
LEAD: Warm weather and sudden gusts of wind hampered practice runs today for the Olympic luge competition and were blamed for two crashes on the Calgary Olympic Park course.


Ethiopian Troops Said to Kill 20 at Aid Center
LEAD: Ethiopian troops killed 20 people on Monday when thousands of drought victims at a food relief center in a northern region refused to leave for resettlement, Western relief officials and an Ethiopian rebel said today.


Painless Tax for New York Commuters
LEAD: In search of ways to close New York City's projected budget gap, Mayor Koch asks the State Legislature to double the tax surcharge on commuters who work in the city.


UNHAPPY DUNKER
LEAD: Still miffed over the judging in last weekend's National Basketball Association slam-dunk competition in Chicago, Dominique Wilkins of the Atlanta Hawks says he will not participate in the future - unless he gets the homecourt advantage.


Brandenburg Ensemble
LEAD: The Brandenburg Ensemble, conducted by Alexander Schneider, will perform works by Bach, Vivaldi and Handel on Sunday at 3 P.M. in Avery Fisher Hall.
The pianist Peter Serkin will be the soloist.
Tickets are $10 to $20.
Information: 874-6770.


Racer Is Restored To Bobsled Team
LEAD: The International Olympic Committee and all other concerned governing bodies agreed today that Don LaVigne could be added to the United States Olympic bobsled team as the 13th member.


MELVILLE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MELVILLE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,014,494,887
1,729,912,659
Net inc
161,909,612
133,701,271
Share earns
2.98
2.47
Yr sales
5,930,283,296
5,262,364,161
Net inc
285,383,290
238,332,165
Share earns
5.25
4.40


IMMUNEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMMUNEX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,288,000
3,133,000
Net loss
524,000
266,000
Yr rev
15,704,000
9,482,000
Net loss
175,000
1,415,000


Staten Island Coach Likes a Challenge
LEAD: Because he badly wanted to get back into coaching, Howie Ruppert left his job as an assistant to P. J. Carlesimo at Seton Hall in the big-time Big East Conference to take on the head coaching job at the College of Staten Island in the low-profile City University of New York Athletic Conference.


One Winning Appeal From Death Row
LEAD: Since last April, when the Supreme Court rejected Warren McCleskey's argument that the administration of the death penalty was unconstitutional because of its racially disparate effects, the nation's 2,000 death row inmates have had to draw their hopes and their appeals more narrowly.
One who has won a measure of success, although not on any ground related to race, is Warren M


ADVANTA CORP reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANTA CORP
(
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
58,909,000
57,786,000
Net loss
6,069,000
b2,596,000
Share earns
-
.29
Yr rev
268,379,000
146,304,000
Net inc
3,819,000
8,601,000
Share earns
.42
1.00


Art: Jennifer Bartlett
LEAD: JENNIFER BARTLETT'S latest works, now at the Paula Cooper Gallery, are smart and suave and highly polished, and they cast a seductive, unsettling spell.
For her latest exhibition, the well-known former Minimalist has returned to familiar ground, depicting boats, houses and fences on four huge canvases (9 by 14 feet), in front of which have been placed sculptural re-creations of the painted images.


Rebels Hint New Actions In Argentina
LEAD: Some of the soldiers involved in a rebellion last month have indicated in recent days that they intend to continue agitating against the military leadership and the civilian Government.


Vital Repair for Civil Rights Law
LEAD: When Federal money flows to one department of a school or hospital, Federal law should prohibit discrimination in all parts of the institution.
For years that was accepted as the clear intent of several Federal civil rights laws.
Then in 1984, the Supreme Court narrowed their scope.
The Senate now has restored the laws' broader reach and the House is about to follow.


TEXTRON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXTRON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
1,864,200,000
1,938,900,000
Net inc
b50,000,000
c61,000,000
Share earns
.55
.74
Shares outst
91,625,000
82,841,000
Yr rev
7,248,100,000
6,615,700,000
Net inc
b256,300,000
c239,200,000
Share earns
2.92
2.90
Shares outst
87,733,000
82,564,000


Badolato Journal; He Tried to Sell the Town In More Ways Than One
LEAD: Domenico Lanciano is the town philosopher in this very small town, which is dying because no one much likes to live here anymore.


Film: From Bunuel, 'Los Ambiciosos,' at the Public
LEAD: LUIS BUNUEL said that ''Los Ambiciosos'' (''The Ambitious Ones''), also known as ''La Fievre Monte a el Pao,'' was not a good film, and he was right.


EHRLICH BOBER FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EHRLICH BOBER FINANCIAL (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,097,000
6,639,000
Net loss
52,000
b813,000
Share earns
-
.28
6mo rev
8,661,000
14,421,000
Net loss
571,000
b2,159,000
Share earns
-
.83


Redesigned Rocket For Shuttle Is Tested For Margin of Safety
LEAD: The space agency today tested a section of the space shuttle's redesigned booster rocket with intentionally flawed joints to determine whether the new design had a dependable safety margin.


Regulators File Charges Of Juice-Price Scheme
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission yesterday accused a Florida investor of trying to manipulate prices of orange juice futures in September 1984.


U.S. Is Considering Disciplinary Action In Alzheimer's Study
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration has notified a California psychiatrist that it is considering disqualifying him from testing new drugs because of doubts about a report he wrote asserting that a drug helped combat Alzheimer's disease.


The Silos
LEAD: The Silos, a rock band, will perform Sunday at 9:30 and 11 P.M. at Under Acme, 9 Great Jones Street (420-1934).
Tickets are $5.


Appeals Court Rejects Testing Of Rail Workers
LEAD: The Government's policy of requiring railroad workers to submit to drug or alcohol tests after accidents or rule violations was struck down as unconstitutional today by a Federal appeals court.


FINE HOMES INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FINE HOMES INTERNATIONAL (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
140,396,000
-
Net loss
23,806,000
-
Yr rev
324,393,000
-
Net loss
16,245,000
-
The company said comparable figures for the year-earlier periods are not available because Fine Homes went public on June 25, 1987.


Better Ties Brighten U.S.-Mexican Summit Today
LEAD: President Reagan and President Miguel de la Madrid are to meet here Saturday with relations between the United States and Mexico smoother than at any time since they took office at the start of the decade.


INFORMATION RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INFORMATION RESOURCES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
25,139,000
26,718,000
Net loss
3,263,000
b2,665,000
Share earns
-
.16
Yr rev
105,451,000
93,634,000
Net loss
3,038,000
b10,002,000
Share earns
-
.60


PUGET SOUND POWER &amp; LIGHT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUGET SOUND POWER &amp; LIGHT (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
203,665,000
189,031,000
Net inc
32,634,000
30,610,000
Share earns
.58
.51
Shares outst
53,115,326
51,270,343
Yr rev
729,360,000
714,763,000
Net inc
120,424,000
110,248,000
Share earns
2.13
1.74
Shares outst
52,425,585
50,726,160


LIFECORE BIOMEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIFECORE BIOMEDICAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
683,000
935,000
Net inc
23,000
b90,000
6mo rev
1,458,000
1,694,000
Net inc
7,000
b326,000
b-Net loss


ANDOVER CONTROLS reports earnings for 16wks to Jan 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANDOVER CONTROLS (OTC)
16wks to Jan 10
1988
1987
Sales
7,106,231
6,994,567
Net inc
916,460
802,455
Share earns
.25
.22
6mo sales
12,113,929
12,077,684
Net inc
1,535,742
1,348,759
Share earns
.42
.37


LORIMAR TELEPICTURES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LORIMAR TELEPICTURES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
255,079,000
196,811,000
Net loss
b19,211,000
21,740,000
9mo rev
616,790,000
525,747,000
Net loss
b82,634,000
c4,059,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Includes about $22 million for the quarter and 9 months of reserves for the company's home video division; specifically the reserves relating to home video are due to a reserve for potentially uncollectible accounts receivable, and a writedown for inventory relating to both overstock of catalog tit


Arbitragers Return to the Game
LEAD: Although individual and institutional investors are still nursing their wounds from the October stock market collapse, Wall Street's risk arbitragers are back at the tables.
The resurgence of giant takeover deals is making it possible once again for them to rake in big profits in a matter of days or weeks.


Stage: 'Faithful Servant,' A Mild Joe Orton Work
LEAD: The bite and twist of Joe Orton are present in ''The Good and Faithful Servant,'' which he wrote for British television shortly before his murder in 1967, but the plot is not twisty enough to surprise and the bite is not all that biting.
The title character is one-armed Buchanan, whom we meet as he is about to be retired after 50 years ''in charge of the main entrance.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


ORIOLE HOMES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31PEGASUS GOLD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ORIOLE HOMES CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
36,993,473
32,266,669
Net inc
b3,489,982
1,258,569
Share earns
.89
.32
Yr rev
116,895,860
91,407,423
Net inc
b7,417,443
2,643,552
Share earns
1.89
.67


EMERY AIR FREIGHT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMERY AIR FREIGHT (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
358,000,000
236,900,000
Net loss
18,400,000
b2,000,000
Share earns
-
.10
Yr rev
1,200,000,000
887,500,000
Net loss
47,700,000
5,400,000
b-Net income


Business Inventories Rose A Sharp 0.8% in December
LEAD: Business inventories jumped eight-tenths of 1 percent in December, reflecting a backlog of unsold products, the Commerce Department reported today.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD:  Questions appear on page 15.


VALLEY FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VALLEY FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
2,502,000
4,901,000
Per share
.38
.80
Yr net inc
16,544,000
17,033,000
Per share
2.66
2.75
The latest earnings reflect a fourth- quarter $6.3 million after-tax writeoff of finance income receivables by All Valley Acceptance Co., a subsidiary.


Trump Holds Stake in MCA
LEAD: MCA Inc., the giant entertainment company, said yesterday that Donald J. Trump, the New York developer, had notified the company that he owns 375,000 MCA shares, or about $16.9 million worth, and that he may acquire up to 24.9 percent of MCA shares.


PRESTON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRESTON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
134,534,000
105,220,000
Net inc
b4,753,000
604,000
Share earns
.83
.10
Yr rev
505,419,000
418,943,000
Net inc
6,088,000
7,263,000
Share earns
1.06
1.26


OFFSHORE LOGISTICS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OFFSHORE LOGISTICS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,799,000
12,923,000
Net inc
1,614,000
c15,202,000
Share earns
.09
3.30
6mo rev
34,089,000
28,743,000
Net inc
b4,471,000
c14,274,000
Share earns
.26
3.14
Shares outst
17,007,861
4,546,272


CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday from Athens on Palestinian plans to organize a sea voyage to Israel misstated the circumstances of the 1947 voyage of the Exodus.
The passengers were put on a British vessel and taken to France, where they refused to disembark, and then to the British zone of


Spruced-Up Calgary Is Ready to Light the Torch
LEAD: Who could forget that first date: the tingling sensations of excitement, the nervous exhilaration, the anxiety of remembering the proper way to look, act, speak and oh-my-gosh, did I forget aOything?


Books of the Times; Epiphanic Moments
LEAD:  DUSK AND OTHER STORIES. By James Salter. 157 pages. North Point Press. $14.95.


Mexico, After Reagan and de la Madrid
LEAD: The mini-summit meeting today between Presidents Miguel de la Madrid and Ronald Reagan at Mazatlan is the last encounter of two men who have learned to get along but not to understand each other.
It also marks the end of the Reagan era in Mexican-American relations, a time of tensions and misunderstandings, resentment and deterioration on almost every item of the two nations' agenda.


Reagan Begins Trip to West and Mexico
LEAD: President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, boarding Air Force One at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., for a flight to California, where they attended a Republican Party fund-raising affair last night in Los Angeles.
Today, Mr.
Reagan is to fly to the Mexican Pacific resort of Mazatlan for talks with President Miguel de la Madrid.


BIDEN IS OPERATED ON FOR ANEURYSM IN BRAIN
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. underwent surgery yesterday at Walter Reed Army Medical Center to correct an aneurysm of an artery supplying blood to the brain, his spokesman said.


WORLCO DATA SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WORLCO DATA SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,838,900
2,716,577
Net loss
167,192
b152,475
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
8,283,543
7,701,050
Net loss
935,911
b312,303
Share earns
-
.11
b-Net income


Alfred S. Eichner Is Dead at 50; Major Post-Keynesian Economist
LEAD: Alfred S. Eichner, a leading member of the post-Keynesian school of economics and a professor at Rutgers University, died of a heart attack Wednesday in Closter, N.J., where he lived.
He was 50 years old.


Gerber to Shut Unit
LEAD: The Gerber Products Company of Fremont, Mich., said it would close its trucking subsidiary, CW Transport Inc. of Wisconsin Rapids, Wis., because its management had been unable to secure financing for a leveraged buyout and no other acceptable offer for the company had been received.
Closing of the company and its operating subsidiaries will put 1,500 people out of work.


Concert: Philharmonic In 'Sacre du Printemps'
LEAD: A concert entirely made up of Tchaikovsky's Piano Concerto No. 1 and Stravinsky's ''Sacre du Printemps'' may not be everyone's idea of judiciously balanced programming, but it is certain to give the eardrums a workout.
Zubin Mehta, who conducted the New York Philharmonic in just such a program of Russian blockbusters on Thursday evening, could not salvage much out of the Tchaikovsky, which Alexander Toradze alternately brutalized and sentimentalized as the soloist.


In a Weapons Race, Much Can Go Wrong
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jersey Housing Lottery Makes Hundreds Happy
LEAD: At 7 A.M. yesterday, an ecstatic John Galea was the first to arrive.
He was two hours early.


Suit Against Dart
LEAD: The Stop and Shop Companies filed suit against the Dart Group Corporation in connection with a tender offer made by Dart for the retail company's stock.
Stop and Shop earlier rejected Dart's offer of $37 a share.
The suit, which was filed in Federal District Court in Boston, charges that Dart violated Federal laws by not disclosing its purported intention to raise Stop and Shop's stock price so that Dart could sell its holdings at a higher price.


Guidepost
LEAD:  Yields on I.R.A.'s  Bank promotions for Individual Retirement Accounts are expected to be modest this year, compared with the marketing blitz when the I.R.A. was the most popular tax deduction for middle- and upper-income taxpayers.
But despite new restrictions on the deductibility of contributions, the I.R.A remains a viable savings instrument.


ZEUS COMPONENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZEUS COMPONENTS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
23,163,000
20,922,000
Net inc
55,000
b808,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss and included a tax credit of $586,000.


ROOSEVELT FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROOSEVELT FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
923,000
c4,143,000
Per share
.17
-
Yr net inc
b17,201,000
c16,578,000
Per share
3.11
-
b-Included a tax credit of $4,899,000.
c-Included tax credits of $1,488,000 for the quarter and $6,798,000 for the year.


Smithsonian Guidebook
LEAD: A free guide, published by the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, offers information that is of special interest to museum visitors with physical disabilities.
In addition to general information, ''A Guide for Disabled Visitors'' indicates the availability of wheelchairs, sign-language interpreters and sound amplification at the Smithsonian's 13 facilities.


Gephardt Received 2 Unsecured Loans
LEAD: Representative Richard A. Gephardt's Presidential campaign and political action committee received unusual, unsecured loans totaling $200,000 in 1986 and 1987 from two banks whose top officers now hold key positions on Mr.
Gephardt's campaign.


Insider Curb in British Bill
LEAD: Britain said this week that it intends to make insider trading on financial markets an extraditable offense.


Amoco Canada Firm on Dome Bid
LEAD: The Canadian unit of the Amoco Corporation said it does not plan to raise its takeover offer of $5.5 billion (about $4.3 billion United States) for Dome Petroleum Ltd., although preferred stockholders are threatening to go to court for more money. ''Adding more money is absolutely out of the question,'' Amoco Canada's president, T.


MASSACHUSETTS U. SCENE OF PROTEST
LEAD: An estimated 200 black students took over a building at the University of Massachusetts today to protest a racially motivated attack on two students.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Dave (Tiger) Williams, the National Hockey League's career penalty leader, has been placed on waivers by the Hartford Whalers.
Williams, 34 years old, has a career total to 3,966 minutes in penalties. . . .
Doctors in Erie, Pa., have advised John Bowen, the Gannon University forward who is one of the leading rebounders in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division II, not to play basketball again this season because of a mild stroke.


Can Carnival Without Koch Still Dazzle?
LEAD: On the eve of carnival, as preparations reached their peak to have Mayor Koch of New York as the guest of honor, the man who would have formally inaugurated the festivities, Mr.
Koch, suddenly backed out.


Jazz: Buddy Tate at 72
LEAD: Long ago, the tenor saxophonist Buddy Tate reached the point where every set of his deserved to be recorded.
He's made an art out of unpredictability: at age 72, his solos have a feeling of wildness to them; they career into raunchy lower-register honks, then climb woozily into silvery squeaks, pushing the upper limits of his horn.


Henry J. Kelley; Professor, 62
LEAD: Henry J. Kelley, the Christopher C. Kraft Professor of Aerospace and Ocean Engineering at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, died of a heart attack Tuesday at his home in Blacksburg, Va.
He was 62 years old.


Pentagon Revises Result of 'Star Wars' Experiment
LEAD: The previously reported failure of part of a ''Star Wars'' experiment this week was a partial success, but a previously reported success was flawed.


STAFF BUILDERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STAFF BUILDERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
37,851,516
8,878,263
Net inc
649,316
b335,085
Share earns
.09
.19
Yr rev
95,159,679
31,016,196
Net inc
1,700,555
b1,013,764
Share earns
.36
.57


Unlikely Ski Jumper Lands, Hard, in Calgary
LEAD: The red and white warm-ups identify Fast Eddie Edwards as a member of Her Majesty's Olympic team.
He's an unlikely-looking athlete, though, at 5 feet 8 inches, peering through glasses with milk bottle lenses.
Still, there are several countries that have an avid interest in the British ski jumper, a waif who has become


Toyota Considers Exporting Planes
LEAD: Toyota Motor Sales USA is working on a plan that could result in the export of small airplanes to East Asia.
Brian Barents, a Toyota vice president hired recently from the Cessna Aircraft Company of Wichita, Kan., said the potential deal would help reduce the United States' trade imbalance with East Asia.


Gossage Sent to Cubs
LEAD: The San Diego Padres traded Rich (Goose) Gossage to the Chicago Cubs last night as part of a four-player deal that brought Keith Moreland, a third baseman and outfielder, to San Diego.
Gossage, 36 years old, came to the Padres from the Yankees as a free agent in 1984.
He is second on the career save list with 289.


Don't Give Mice AIDS
LEAD: To the Editor:


PERFECTDATA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PERFECTDATA
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
949,000
1,126,000
Net loss
29,000
152,000
9mo sales
2,905,000
3,168,000
Net loss
222,000
615,000


Cordero Returns
LEAD: Jose Santos, left, with Angel Cordero Jr. after the seventh race yesterday at Aqueduct.
It was the first outing for Cordero following a five-week layoff from racing because of an injury.
Page 53. (The New York Times/Steve Ross)


RAYMOND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAYMOND CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
42,567,228
36,069,418
Net inc
395,670
2,174,080
Share earns
.07
.37
Yr sales
135,594,117
131,241,991
Net inc
1,648,053
7,014,403
Share earns
.28
1.18


ICEE-USA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ICEE-USA CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
3,395,000
3,229,000
Net loss
202,000
408,000


Gillette Stock Off; Profit Taking Seen
LEAD: Despite an announcement on Thursday that the investment group Coniston Partners holds a 6 percent stake in the Gillette Company, the stock yesterday fell $1.875 a share, to $39.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Many analysts attributed the drop to profit takers, who have watched their shares gain handsomely as it was rumored that someone was accumulating shares.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Auto Racing  Elliott Sets Mark: Bill Elliott never trailed in a record-setting victory yesterday in the opener of the Budweiser International Race of Champions series at Daytona International Speedway in Florida.
In the 40-lap, 100-mile race, Elliott averaged 186.239 miles per hour, the fastest winning speed in the series' history.


HON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HON INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
144,383,000
124,672,000
Net inc
7,020,000
7,973,000
Share earns
.36
.39
Yr sales
555,373,000
503,575,000
Net inc
24,766,000
29,254,000
Share earns
1.24
1.42


Many Sources Finance Gifts To Neediest
LEAD: Back in April 1986, the Rev.
Fleming P. Rutledge was hit by a taxicab while crossing the street near his office at Grace Church at 802 Broadway, near 11th Street, in Manhattan.


FROZEN FOOD EXPRESS INDUSRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FROZEN FOOD EXPRESS INDUSRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,488,888
22,627,372
Net inc
715,662
473,372
Share earns
.54
.36
Yr rev
84,584,685
91,195,286
&amp;
Net loss
248,000
b433,000
Share earns
-
.14


Soldier's Body Is Discovered After a Month
LEAD: The body of an Army private killed after an automobile accident was not discovered until a month after he was reported missing, and the Kentucky state police say confusion at the accident scene was the reason.


OGLEBAY NORTON reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OGLEBAY NORTON (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
40,480,000
30,574,000
Net inc
2,289,000
b1,235,000
Share earns
.69
-
Yr rev
137,349,000
130,777,000
Net inc
559,000
b1,608,000
Share earns
.17
-


Dollar Soars on Trade Data; Gold Prices Move Higher
LEAD: The dollar soared in value against most major currencies yesterday after the Government reported that the United States trade deficit shrank for the second consecutive month in December.


Dickens Indeed Dwelt On Little Nell's Death
LEAD: To the Editor:


Haig Drops Out of Campaign and Endorses Dole
LEAD: Alexander M. Haig, Jr., right, and Senator Bob Dole yesterday in Manchester, N.H.
Mr.
Haig, last among G.O.P. candidates in polls in the state, said Mr.
Dole ''is head and shoulders above George Bush.'' Page 9. (NYT/Sara Krulwich)


Salinas: 'Let's Be More Open'
LEAD: The paradox of Mexico is that it tries so hard and makes so much progress but always seems stuck on the treadmill of debt, unemployment and overpopulation.


SCIENTIFIC INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCIENTIFIC INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
522,600
486,000
Net inc
9,300
4,800
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo sales
1,116,100
872,800
Net inc
60,800
b16,700
Share earns
.09
-
b-Net loss


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.54
6.50
6.10
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.75
5.64
5.66
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.98
5.88
5.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.06
7.94
7.09
30-YR.


Daniels Suspended
LEAD: The Topeka Sizzlers of the Continental Basketball Association have suspended Lloyd Daniels, the former New York City high school star, for the rest of the season because he failed to get into playing condition and had not participated in a drug rehabilitation program.
Daniels, 20 years old, pleaded guilty last summer to a misdemeanor charge of attempting to possess cocaine.


SOO LINE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOO LINE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
151,105,000
150,141,000
Net inc
4,396,000
b38,150,000
Share earns
.46
-
Yr rev
613,124,000
631,823,000
Net loss
8,504,000
43,315,000
b-Net loss and included a $73 million charge from reductions in employment and freight equipment.


Coping: With Bargaining for a New Car
LEAD: This might have been the best place in the world to learn how to buy a car this week, when most of the country's automobile merchants flooded into the city for their annual convention.
That meant more than 25,000 people -members of the National Automobile Dealers' Association and their guests - all talking cars in general and auto sales in particular.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the investigation into an attack on a Dutchess County teen-ager incorrectly described the role of an assistant attorney general in a previous case.
The official, John M. Ryan, aided in the investigation of a 1975 bombing at LaGuardia Airport, but no one has been prosecuted.


Producer Prices Up In January
LEAD: Prices at the producer level rose a surprising four-tenths of 1 percent in January, as higher food costs more than offset declines in energy prices, the Labor Department said yesterday.


Concert: Tokyo Quartet Presents More Beethoven
LEAD: Not least among the 92d Street Y's recent complete traversals of this and that is its current Beethoven quartet cycle with the Tokyo String Quartet, the second concert of which took place Wednesday night.


A Wrinkle Treatment Has Its Risks
LEAD: Retin-A, prescribed to treat acne since 1971, is suddenly in the spotlight as an alluring lotion that makes wrinkles disappear, fades brown spots and gives skin a rosy glow.
Dermatologists say it does, to some degree.
But it is strong medicine, involves a long-term commitment and is not for everyone.


Nevada County Is Held Illegal
LEAD: The formation of Bullfrog County, an unpopulated expanse of scrubland created to help the state win Federal dollars, violates the State Constitution, a judge has ruled.


Lorimar Reports $19 Million Loss
LEAD: The Lorimar Telepictures Corporation said today that it had lost $19.2 million in the quarter ended Dec. 31, largely because of a $22 million reserve for possible losses in its scandal-ridden home video subsidiary.


Kaisertech Units
LEAD: Kaisertech Ltd., the holding company for the Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation, said that it had agreed to sell the rest of its chemicals assets to various purchasers as part of its strategy to concentrate on its aluminum business.
In December, Kaiser announced its intention to sell the Harshaw/Filtrol Partnership, a specialty chemicals business, to the Engelhard Corporation.


Robertson Comments on South Africa Unrest
LEAD: Pat Robertson says black Americans ''don't understand what they're dealing with'' in South Africa, and that he will not criticize that nation to gain votes for his Presidential bid.


Retail Sales Up In New York
LEAD: Several of New York's leading department stores had average sales gains in January of 11.4 percent in the city and 7.4 percent in the area over January 1987, a spot-check found yesterday.
In the full fiscal year, ended


EMC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
39,924,000
18,397,000
Net inc
7,830,000
4,627,000
Share earns
.32
.19
Yr rev
127,066,000
66,588,000
Net inc
28,241,000
18,630,000
Share earns
1.19
.81


A Long Marriage: 'There Is No Secret'
LEAD: The approach of St.
Valentine's Day finds Florence and Ed Corcoran holding hands on a love seat in Edgewater, N.J., after 10 children, 42 years of marriage and one near-breakup.


BANNER INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BANNER INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
200,531,000
36,672,000
Net loss
b14,134,000
c282,000
Share earns
-
.07
6mo sales
404,020,000
73,100,000
Net loss
b11,777,000
c5,111,000
Share earns
-
1.11


LOCAL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOCAL FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
1,578,000
b207,000
Share earns
-
.12
6mo net loss
1,803,000
b434,000
Share earns
-
.25
b-Net income and after a charge of $374,000 from the prepayment of debt for the quarter, and the 6 months is after a $467,000 extraordinary charge.


THOMAS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THOMAS INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
80,488,000
75,592,000
Net inc
4,817,000
3,124,000
Share earns
.46
.30
Yr sales
321,911,000
296,195,000
Net inc
17,136,000
12,756,000
Share earns
1.64
1.23


Bank Wary On Dollar
LEAD: The Bank of England said this week that the recent fall of the United States dollar was likely to prove more important to the world economy than the October stock market collapse.


Belgian Ends Societe Generale Role
LEAD: In a dramatic turnaround, the Belgian entrepreneur Andre Leysen today abruptly dropped out of the battle for control of Societe Generale de Belgique, Belgium's largest company, after 3 of his 18 partners refused to ratify his plan for expanded control.


LEISURE TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEISURE TECHNOLOGY (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
28,919,000
44,036,000
Net inc
b393,000
1,851,000
Share earns
-
.30
9mo rev
109,093,000
88,886,000
Net inc
b4,840,000
c335,000
Share earns
.72
-


FILENET CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FILENET CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
17,200,000
9,281,000
Net inc
b2,831,000
c719,000
Share earns
.28
.09
Shares outst
10,143,000
8,374,000
Yr rev
52,130,000
29,164,000
Net inc
b6,862,000
c1,359,000
Share earns
.75
.17
Shares outst
9,193,000
7,794,000


Cape Town Lifts Curb on Politics at Schools
LEAD: A South African court today struck down Government curbs on universities that linked the granting of state subsidies to strictures against political activities.


INFORMATION SOLUTIONS reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INFORMATION SOLUTIONS
Year to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,614,207
16,810,864
Net loss
816,017
b366,752
Share earns
-
.13
b-Net income  Year-ago results are restated.


FISCHBACH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FISCHBACH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
228,003,000
278,251,000
Net loss
2,700,000
7,103,000
Year-ago results for an accounting change.


More Children Must File And the Bill Will Be Higher
LEAD: For the nation's youth, this tax filing season is a turning point: Legions of children who never had to file a return before will be drafted into the ranks of the country's 105 million filers.
And children of all ages, from toddlers to college students, will be subjected to very different and harsher tax treatment.


ADVANCED GENETIC SCIENCES reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANCED GENETIC SCIENCES (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,999,000
3,237,000
Net loss
993,000
3,895,000


HOSPITAL CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOSPITAL CORP OF AMERICA (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
923,112,000
1,194,245,000
Net inc
32,950,000
b42,049,000
Share earns
.40
-
Yr rev
4,675,879,000
4,930,652,000
Net loss
58,394,000
c174,644,000
Share earns
-
2.08


PULASKI FURNITURE reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PULASKI FURNITURE (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 24
1988
1987
Sales
25,229,708
21,113,151
Net inc
770,853
851,684
Share earns
.27
.29


INDEPENDENT BANK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDEPENDENT BANK CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,703,000
2,308,000
Per share
.34
.46
Yr net inc
8,262,000
7,751,000
Per share
1.64
1.55
The company said share earnings reflect the 50 percent stock dividend paid


Holiday on Monday
LEAD:  Washington's Birthday will be observed on Monday.
Following are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.
Sanitation: No collection or street sweeping.
Government offices: Federal, state and city offices are closed.
Post offices: Closed, except for special delivery and Express Mail delivery.


An F.B.I. Inquiry Fed by Informer Emerges in Analysis of Documents
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation's sweeping inquiry into a group opposed to United States policy in Central America was largely fueled by an undercover informer who has said he invented much of his information.


About New York; Where Are You? A Nameless Man In a Grim World
LEAD: Where are you?
You weren't at the subway stop this morning.
Our mutual friend hasn't seen you either.
She's the one you touched by saying, ''You certainly look beautiful today -but then you always do.'' She would try to pass you by, and you would say something like that, and turn her on her heel.


Brooklyn Father Surrenders In Drug and Child-Abuse Case
LEAD: The father of two lice-infested young girls discovered in a suspected crack house in Brooklyn surrendered yersterday after seeking the help of a television reporter, the police said.


1 Slain in Manhattan Restaurant; Suspect Is Seized in the Shooting
LEAD: One man was killed and another was injured when a gunman opened fire in a lower Manhattan restaurant early yesterday, the police said.
A suspect was later arrested and charged in the shooting.


Older Skiers Gaining Interest in Slopes
LEAD: Gray power is becoming an important force on the ski slopes.


Cowboys, Not Boycotts
LEAD: If this is the Olympics, the headlines are supposed to be of politics and problems.
But not here in this Canadian prairie city of 640,000.
Not yet, anyway.


HOCKEY SPOTLIGHT SHUNNED
LEAD: Suddenly everybody wants to be a hockey underdog in the XV Olympic Winter Games.


New Squabbling In Israel Widens 2 Leaders' Split
LEAD: As violence flared again in the occupied territories, a rift in Israel's governing coalition widened today as Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir angrily accused Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of trying to ''sabotage'' his attempts at peace.


It's Time We Stopped Blaming the Homeless
LEAD: To the Editor:


Waldheim Backer Cites Jews
LEAD: A former Foreign Minister and close associate of President Kurt Waldheim charged today that the panel that investigated Mr.
Waldheim's wartime past was filled with Socialists or Jews.


Art: Opening of Degas Retrospective in Paris
LEAD: The Degas retrospective that opens Saturday at the Grand Palais is one of the great exhibitions this season.
With nearly 400 works, it is the largest Degas show in more than 50 years, spilling onto three levels of the museum.
It was so carefully selected and installed -and Degas's art, for all its nerve and audacity, is so reserved and discreet - that it is never unwieldy or overblown.


Refunds Bigger On '87 Returns
LEAD: Fewer Americans are rushing to file their Federal income tax returns this year as they grapple with the new rules of the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
Returns are due by April 15.
For taxpayers who have filed early, however, the average refund is up almost 20 percent from last year, the Internal Revenue


OUSTED CALIFORNIA JUDGE IN CENTER OF NEW STORM
LEAD: Since the California voters ousted Rose Elizabeth Bird as Chief Justice of the State Supreme Court in 1986, she has not shied away from controversy.


8 in French Terror Group Get 10-Year Terms
LEAD: Eight members of the terrorist group Direct Action were sentenced today to 10 years each in prison, the maximum term, on charges of criminal conspiracy.


Taiwan Bars Rice Pact
LEAD: Taiwan will not renew a five-year rice agreement with the United States when it expires at the end of 1988 because the accord is ''unfair and unnecessary,'' Koh Chin-chao, deputy chairman of the Council of Agriculture, said this week.
The accord limited Taiwan's total rice exports to 1.375 million tons from 1984 to 1988.


The Afghan Future: With Soviet Pullout Offer, the Talks Build Momentum
LEAD: The Soviet Union's proposal for a 10-month withdrawal of its 115,000 troops from Afghanistan has plunged the United States, Pakistan and the Afghan guerrillas into intensive negotiations with one another over the wisdom of demanding that a coalition government be established in Kabul before an agreement is signed.


Iran Gulf Raid Kills a Dane
LEAD: An Iranian helicopter firing rockets and machine guns attacked a Danish supertanker in the Persian Gulf today, shipping executives said.
They said a Danish seaman was killed and three others wounded.
A spokesman for the owner, A. P. Moller of Copenhagen, said the attack crippled the 390,000-ton Kate Maersk.


Hoyt to Start Term
LEAD: At a time when other players will be reporting for spring training, LaMarr Hoyt will be going to prison.
The 1983 Cy Young Award winner, whose career has been plagued by drug-related problems, will begin serving a year in Federal prison Feb. 22 for a probation violation in California.
On Thursday, Hoyt was sentenced in Columbia, S.C., to two and a half years in prison by Special Judge Frank Eppes.


Gannett-Cowles
LEAD: The Gannett Company, the diversified media company that publishes USA Today, said it had sold its 640,492 shares of the Cowles Media Company back to Cowles for $200 a share, or $128 million.
Gannett had acquired the shares of the Minneapolis-based concern in 1985 for about $83 million.
Most of the stake had been acquired in connection with Gannett's acquisition of The Des Moines Register, The Jackson (Tenn.) Sun and two Iowa weeklies from The Register and Tribune Company.


Test for Consumers: Finding the Real Bargain in Electronics
LEAD: It's high season for electronics bargains.
Presidents' Birthdays sales, running at full tilt, allow dealers to clear inventories before new products are introduced in April and May.


Misguided Guidelines on AIDS in Court
LEAD: AIDS inflicts suffering on its victims and their families - and unreasonable fear on many people who should know better.
The latest to succumb to such fear are New York State court officers and judges, many of whom apparently believe that defendants afflicted with AIDS imperil others in the courtroom.


Double Life Of a Murderer Shocks S.I.
LEAD: In the homeless shelters and the soup kitchens on Staten Island where he worked, Bob Lord was known as a gentle and compassionate man.


MMI MEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MMI MEDICAL (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 29
1988
1987
Revenue
9,168,000
6,881,000
Net inc
448,000
189,000
Share earns
.15
.06
Shares outst
2,979,429
3,232,989
9mo rev
26,084,000
20,595,000
Net inc
1,250,000
612,000
Share earns
.40
.19
Shares outst
3,094,743
3,226,652


HINDERLITER INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HINDERLITER INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,469,000
3,552,000
Net inc
b6,000
c4,705,000
Share earns
-
1.57
6mo sales
17,069,000
7,663,000
Net inc
b154,000
c5,885,000
Share earns
-
1.92


Dallas Medical School: Fortunes Shift
LEAD: In 1952, the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center was a struggling medical school - on probation, bereft of financing, abandoned by most its faculty and housed in shabby buildings that had once been military barracks.


Soybean Contracts Surge On Late Speculative Buying
LEAD: Soybean futures prices leaped as much as 10 1/4 cents a bushel yesterday as speculators spurred a final-hour surge on the Chicago Board of Trade.


Wings Rally to Top Devils
LEAD: Gerard Gallant scored two of his three goals in the third period tonight, and the Detroit Red Wings beat the New Jersey Devils, 4-3, to win their fourth game in a row.


HILB, ROGAL &amp; HAMILTON reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HILB, ROGAL &amp; HAMILTON
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,756,000
7,808,000
Net inc
810,000
511,000
Share earns
.23
.19
Yr rev
36,097,000
30,576,000
Net inc
3,387,000
1,803,000
Share earns
1.10
.66


Mattel Closes Two Plants
LEAD: Mattel Inc. said today that it had closed two plants in the Philippines where its Barbie doll production was slowed by labor strife and that it had dismissed 4,000 workers.
Doll making was transferred to the company's other plants in Asia and Mexico.


It's Safe With Me, Pat
LEAD: I'm not going to mention the line of work at which Marion (Pat) Robertson toiled before he started running for President of the United States.


TEMPEST TECHNOLOGIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEMPEST TECHNOLOGIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,393,000
7,144,000
Net inc
1,283,000
974,000
Share earns
.16
.14
9mo rev
20,438,000
13,442,000
Net inc
3,421,000
1,707,000
Share earns
.47
.24


Festival's Theater Program Offers O'Neill and Beckett
LEAD: While 20 of the 29 shows in the First New York International Festival of the Arts theater section are new or contemporary works, some of this century's most influential playwrights do get a doff of the hat.
In a few cases, they get a bit more.


Mets Say Gooden Accepts Idea of Cut
LEAD: Dwight Gooden's contract negotiations with the Mets took their most significant turn yesterday since Gooden filed for salary arbitration four weeks ago.
Al Harazin, the Mets' negotiator, said that for the first time, Gooden's agent had said he would be willing to accept the idea of a pay cut.


An Odd Stage in an Unusual Theater
LEAD: Thomas Eisenhardt performing yesterday on the platform of the Bowling Green subway station in Manhattan.
The show was a preview of ''Vespers Underground: Mass Transit'' to be put on next week by the Changing Dance Theater at the Merce Cunningham Studio. (The New York Times/Angel Franco)


Europeans Agree on a Budget Overhaul
LEAD: An emergency meeting of the leaders of the 12-nation European Community reached a laboriously negotiated agreement early today that will permit an overhaul of its finances and ease the transition to a barrier-free market by 1992.


Rumania, Faulted by West, Returns Aide to U.N.
LEAD: The Rumanian Government, which has been strongly criticized by Western governments for its human rights record, unexpectedly allowed one of its citizens to return to his United Nations post in Geneva today after confining him to Rumania for over two years.


UNREST STIFFENS RESOLVE OF JEW AND ARAB ALIKE
LEAD: Far from Flatbush, where her marriage proposal was conditional on the great adventure of migration to biblical Judea, Pauline Moskowitz said her husband is recovering now, his skull but not his spirit fractured by Palestinian stone throwers.


Banks' Plans On Mexico
LEAD: Leading United States banks are not expected to participate in Mexico's innovative debt-reduction plan, an American banker said today.
But a senior official at the Swiss Bank Corporation said his bank will tender some loans.


PUBLIC SERVICE INDIANA reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PUBLIC SERVICE INDIANA (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,070,500,000
1,049,100,000
Net inc
b239,700,000
c22,100,000
Share earns
4.08
-
b-After a gain on fuel settlement of $52 million and a gain from an accounting change of $42.4 million.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Maize-Products Co., Stamford, Conn., said it had canceled its proposed purchase of U.S.
Tobacco's dry snuff business.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Massachusetts U. Protest


OCEANEERING INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OCEANEERING INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
30,120,000
22,789,000
Net loss
2,572,000
2,811,000
9mo rev
94,635,000
83,574,000
Net loss
3,637,000
4,821,000


Bridge:; Transfer Concept Explains A Strange-Looking Auction
LEAD: The transfer concept, which was developed in Sweden and Texas more than 30 years ago, can have many ramifications.


Mr. Gephardt's Reckless Driving
LEAD: Richard Gephardt is campaigning for the Democratic Presidential nomination in a misused car.
A Hyundai costs $10,000 in America, he says, but a comparable Chrysler K car would cost $48,000 in South Korea because Seoul slaps on ''nine separate tariffs.'' Mr.
Gephardt's wrong-way stance on trade policy has led him to abuse the facts.


Post and Unions To Hold Session On Cost-Cutting
LEAD: Officials of The New York Post and the leaders of its 10 unions will meet Monday to discuss $24 million in cost cuts that Rupert Murdoch, the owner, calls mandatory if the paper is to be sold to a real-estate developer and not closed next Friday.


More Olympic Coverage For TV Dish Owners
LEAD: Television viewers with dish antennas able to receive signals directly from satellites can see far more of the Winter Olympic Games than is broadcast by ABC.
While 94 hours of network programming is scheduled from Calgary, Alberta, starting today and running through Feb. 28, satellites will carry a total of 550 hours of


Simon Puts His Hope On Party's Traditions
LEAD: It was late in the day near the end of a grueling week, but Senator Paul Simon stood ramrod straight before a group of New Hampshire residents and pleaded guilty to the charge of being ''an old-fashioned Democrat.''


Dravo Chairman's Illness
LEAD: The Dravo Corporation's chairman and president, William G. Roth, 49 years old, suffered a heart attack and will be absent for eight to ten weeks, the company said Thursday.
Thomas J. Ward, whom the board elevated from senior vice president to lead the natural resources company temporarily, said that Mr.


Getting Smaller
LEAD: The first game is three months away, but already the ranks of the International Basketball Association, the league for players 6 feet 4 inches and shorter, have been diminished.
The league has suffered the loss of one team and the movement of another one that is having trouble keeping its head above water.


MACROCHEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACROCHEM CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
39,523
52,042
Net loss
466,671
327,503
9mo rev
82,547
77,922
Net loss
1,528,609
978,386


Drug Unit Said to Have Neglected Evidence of Noriega Trafficking
LEAD: Members of Congress and Justice Department officials say the Drug Enforcement Administration appears to have overlooked strong evidence of drug trafficking by the Panamanian military leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, while seeking Panama's help in investigating other narcotics cases.


Future of South Africa Should Be Determined by All Its Citizens
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fed Minutes Show Revival of Old Policy
LEAD: With the economy calming down following the rout of the stock market, the Federal Reserve began reverting in December and January to its economic policies of the months before the collapse and worrying less about interest rates, the Fed said today.


Black &amp; Decker Is Backed on Bid
LEAD: The Black &amp; Decker Corporation announced that a group of commercial banks had arranged $2.2 billion in financing for the company's $2.1 billion hostile takeover attempt of American Standard Inc.
The syndicate comprises 19 domestic and foreign banks, including Chase Manhattan Bank, which earlier pledged $750 million of its own funds toward the deal, the company said.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 54.


KEMP ASSAILS USE OF 'SMEAR' TACTICS
LEAD: Representative Jack F. Kemp said today that he had been the victim of a ''deliberate smear campaign'' organized by members of Pat Robertson's staff.


U.S. TRADE DEFICIT NARROWS FURTHER AS EXPORTS GROW
LEAD: The nation's trade deficit narrowed by $1 billion in December, to $12.2 billion, the lowest level in 11 months, the Commerce Department reported today.


MEDALIST INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDALIST INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
37,654,000
34,833,000
Net inc
774,000
b4,029,000
Share earns
.34
1.72
Yr sales
147,428,000
130,718,000
Net inc
3,654,000
b7,173,000
Share earns
1.61
3.04


2 SOVIET WARSHIPS REPORTEDLY BUMP U.S. NAVY VESSELS
LEAD: Two Soviet Navy vessels deliberately bumped two United States warships in the Black Sea today as the American vessels sailed through waters claimed by the Soviet Union, the Pentagon said.


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 2-6, 28  Two Soviet Navy vessels bumped two United States warships in the Black Sea as the American vessels sailed through waters claimed by the Soviet Union, prompting a diplomatic protest from the Reagan Administration.
Page 1  Evidence of drug trafficking by the Panamanian leader appears to have been overlooked by the Drug Enforcement Administration in exchange for Panama's help in investigating other drug cases, officials said.


In a Dating Contract, Follow Your Head
LEAD: Beware of commercial cupids.
That's the Valentine's Day advisory from the Better Business Bureau of Metropolitan New York.


Haig Drops Campaign for Presidency And Gives His Endorsement to Dole
LEAD: Alexander M. Haig Jr. abandoned his campaign for the Republican Presidential nomination today and endorsed Senator Bob Dole, saying that Mr.
Dole ''is head and shoulders above George Bush.''


Cordero Returns To Aqueduct Stage
LEAD: Since Wednesday, Jose Santos had held the spotlight at Aqueduct as he became only the second jockey in New York thoroughbred history withU10 winners over two days.
Yesterday, he dropped off center stage by failing to win in his seven races.


BOW VALLEY INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOW VALLEY INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
257,200,000
377,700,000
Net inc
b46,700,000
c168,600,000
Share earns
.64
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $7.8 million.
c-Net loss and includes special charges of $159.3 million.


Blue-Collar New Hampshire: a Key Battleground
LEAD: The talk these days in Presidential campaigns is of a New Hampshire that is really an extension of the Massachusetts economy and the Boston media market.


TV: Opera by Tippett, 'King Priam,' on Bravo
LEAD: An operatic offering perhaps a little obscure for the average opera lover but of interest nonetheless will be presented this afternoon at 5 o'clock on the Bravo arts cable service.
It is the American television premiere of Michael Tippett's second opera, ''King Priam,'' first performed in 1962.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Music: American Songs
LEAD: A perhaps unintended message from Wednesday's evening with the Alliance for American Song was that social rectitude and the musical muse do not necessarily walk hand in hand.
Patrons of Weill Recital Hall, at any rate, were treated to a fascinating history - set to music - of this country's continuing indignation over the rich, the rapacious and the repressive among our own.


DANIEL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DANIEL INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
33,957,000
29,687,000
Net loss
726,000
795,000


CAVALIERS BEAT NETS ON 35 OF 47 FOUL SHOTS
LEAD: Ron Harper scored 28 points, and the Cleveland Cavaliers outscored the New Jersey Nets, 35-6, from the free-throw line to win, 98-96, tonight.


U.S. Bonds Post a Sharp Decline
LEAD: Treasury bond prices closed sharply lower yesterday after a session marked by an extreme swing in market sentiment.


INTERNATIONAL AMERICAN HOMES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL AMERICAN HOMES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
37,415,000
46,007,000
Net inc
1,238,000
1,397,000
Share earns
.15
.17
9mo rev
117,431,000
117,949,00
Net inc
b2,523,000
b2,614,000
Share earns
.30
.38
Shares outst
8,464,000
6,987,000


Palestinian Gets 30 Years for Rome Airport Attack
LEAD: A confessed Palestinian gunman was convicted and sentenced to a 30-year prison term today for his part in the Rome airport attack in 1985 in which 16 people died.
Two other defendants, including the Palestinian guerrilla leader known as Abu Nidal, were sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment for organizing the attack.


LACANA MINING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LACANA MINING (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,239,000
10,505,000
Net inc
b3,561,000
b3,745,000
Share earns
.14
.31
Shares outst
24,800,000
13,300,000
b-Includes tax credits of $570,000 and $1,979,000 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively.


Recital: Kiri Te Kanawa at Carnegie
LEAD: If Kiri Te Kanawa felt a sense of urgency or passion toward the music she sang in Carnegie hall on Wednesday evening, it did not make itself apparent.
There was a put-on, disengaged quality about her singing that gave to virtually all of this eminent soprano's performances a false ring.
Much as one admired certain aspects of her work - the regal tone, the control across a range of dynamics -Ms.


Anthony Streuli, 43, A CBS News Producer
LEAD: Anthony Streuli, a longtime newsman for CBS who was in New Hampshire directing the network's coverage of the presidential primary, died in his hotel room today, the network announced.
He was 43 years old.
Mr.
Streuli had been the Boston producer for CBS News since April 1986.
He joined the radio network as a newswriter in 1969, and worked on the CBS Morning News and CBS Evening News programs and as assistant bureau chief in


MINISCRIBE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MINISCRIBE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
116,179,000
52,877,000
Net inc
9,054,000
6,361,000
Share earns
.24
.17
Shares outst
37,760,000
36,592,000
Yr sales
362,467,000
184,861,000
Net inc
31,147,000
22,711,000
Share earns
.82
.63
Shares outst
38,002,000
35,982,000


A Wise Court Salutes Tolerance
LEAD: Homosexuals may not be kept out of the Army; their claims for equal protection under the Constitution are as strong as those of blacks and stronger than those the Supreme Court has ever recognized for women.
So concludes the U.S.
Court of Appeals on the West Coast.


The White House Stops Winking
LEAD: What a contrast: The White House has sent a letter forbidding Administration officials to encourage or assist the raising of private funds for the contras of Nicaragua.
The Reagan Administration that made winking at the law the hallmark of its contra aid policy is now taking pains to avoid more impropriety.


Robertson Backers Eager for Southern Test
LEAD: In the days since Pat Robertson finished second in the Iowa caucuses Monday night, ahead of Vice President Bush, his once invisible army is now out in the field, well drilled and intensely committed.


NATIONAL EDUCATION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL EDUCATION CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
117,048,000
91,786,000
Net loss
8,915,000
b7,216,000
Share earns
-
.30
Yr rev
378,926,000
305,640,000
Net inc
3,575,000
16,599,000
Share earns
.14
.68


Phelps Dodge Adds Accuride
LEAD: The Phelps Dodge Corporation, the nation's largest copper producer, said it had agreed to buy the Accuride Corporation, a maker of aluminum truck wheels, in a deal valued at about $270 million in cash and debt.


Prelate in Seattle Dispute Named Pittsburgh Bishop
LEAD: Bishop Donald W. Wuerl, a conservative cleric whose appointment to share power with Seattle's liberal archbishop in 1985 angered some Roman Catholics, was installed today as leader of the Diocese of Pittsburgh.


UNIVERSAL HEALTH SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSAL HEALTH SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
198,583,000
175,065,000
Net loss
b3,013,000
c15,108,000
Yr rev
774,953,000
665,784,000
Net inc
b11,758,000
c1,694,000
Share earns
.79
.10


WNYC-FM Plans Day Of Music of Americans
LEAD: ''Americathon '88,'' a daylong program of live performances by American composers and artists, will be broadcast on Monday beginning at 1 P.M. on WNYC-FM (93.9).
Those appearing in the annual broadcast, which will last until 11 P.M., include Wayne Horvitz, the World Saxophone Quartet, Jule Styne, the Roches, Eddy Clearwater and Women of the Calabash.


Margaret M. Heyman; Professor, 77
LEAD: Margaret M. Heyman, a social worker and retired professor at Hunter College who researched industrial programs on alcoholism, died of a cerebral hemorrhage last Sunday at New York Hospital.
She was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Found in Contempt, Landlord Begins a Term in His Building
LEAD: A Brooklyn landlord began serving a court-ordered stay in one of his neglected apartment buildings yesterday, a sentence imposed to give him a dose of his tenants' drab reality: leaky pipes, cold rooms, bold mice, falling plaster.


Rancher Awarded $8 Million In Police Drug Raid Mistake
LEAD: A sheep rancher and his family have been awarded $8 million because 60 law-enforcement officers took over their home and held them at gunpoint for eight hours, only to find the wrong place had been raided.


Campaign Trail
LEAD:  Bush Frolics in the Snow


Child, 4, Dies From Injuries After Fire in Bronx Apartment
LEAD: A 4-year-old boy died after a fire at his family's apartment in the South Bronx last night, the police said.


NORTHWESTERN NATIONAL LIFE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHWESTERN NATIONAL LIFE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b6,835,000
c14,216,000
Share earns
.61
1.27
Yr net inc
b37,982,000
c48,472,000
Share earns
3.40
4.71
b-After realized investment losses of $1,989,000 for the quarter and $3,228,000 for the year.


Panama Envoy Quits, Assailing Military Rule
LEAD: A senior Panamanian diplomat resigned today, saying he could no longer work in good conscience for a government ''characterized by corruption, illegitimacy and dishonesty.''


College Dismisses 2 Physicists Who Disputed Reactor Safety
LEAD: Two health physicists who complained about the safety of a nuclear reactor at the Georgia Institute of Technology have been dismissed by school officials, who said the moves were part of a program to improve safety and productivity.


'Hope and Glory' Succeeding Despite Slow Start
LEAD: Over the last two years John Boorman, the writer and director of ''Hope and Glory,'' has faced a multitude of problems, first in financing that film, then in keeping it afloat after a change in management at Columbia Pictures.
Yet the movie has managed to survive in a competitive marketplace, and Mr.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article on Thursday about police theories concerning a $6 million theft at a Manhattan art gallery incorrectly described the Art Theft Archives, a list of 28,000 stolen art works compiled under the auspices of the International Foundation for Art Research.
The list is not computerized.


Steel Group Seeks Renewed Quotas
LEAD: President Reagan's program of voluntarily restraining steel imports has been a success and a decision to renew it should be made promptly, the steel industry said in a statement today.


GLOBAL MARINE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GLOBAL MARINE (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
30,600,000
20,100,000
Net loss
33,800,000
b18,000,000
Share earns
-
.42
Yr rev
81,700,000
185,500,000
Net loss
131,500,000
209,200,000
b-Net income


Arizona Senators Sworn In
LEAD: Despite a request by Gov.
Evan Mecham of Arizona that his impeachment trial be delayed, the State Senate is moving ahead with the proceedings.
Chief Justice Frank X. Gordon Jr. of the Arizona Supreme Court swore in the 30 Senate members Thursday as impeachment judges and took the oath as presiding officer of the trial, which is scheduled to begin Feb.


HOME BENEFICIAL reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME BENEFICIAL (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b38,048,084
b43,503,458
Share earns
3.42
3.57
Shares outst
11,137,715
12,203,766
b-Includes capital losses of $26,331 for the latest year and $35,886 for the year-earlier period.


Campeau Threatens Suit in Takeover Bid
LEAD: Putting additional pressure on Federated Department Stores to surrender to its takeover offer, the Campeau Corporation yesterday warned Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Company, the No. 1 firm in leveraged buyouts, that it would sue if the firm entered into arrangements with Federated calling for ''breakup'' fees or ''lock-ups'' as part of a leveraged buyout.


Sakaide Journal; In the Other Japan, a Bridge Is a Two-Way Street
LEAD: Japan's Inland Sea is sometimes called the Aegean of the East.
On calm days, it is an emerald mirror, embossed with many hundreds of dark, thickly wooded islands across its 300-mile length.


Olympics Notebook; BIATHELETE, 39, TO CARRY AMERICAN FLAG
LEAD: Lyle Nelson of Essex, Vt., a biathlete who turned 39 years old Tuesday, was chosen today to carry the American flag in Saturday's opening ceremony of the XV Olympic Winter Games.


KERKHOFF INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KERKHOFF INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
11,753,000
-
Net loss
b831,000
-
6mo rev
20,003,000
-
Net loss
317,000
-
b-After an extraordinary charge of $265,000.
The company went public in October 1987.


C3 INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*C3 INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
35,257,000
25,255,000
Net inc
7,891,000
1,681,000
Share earns
.79
.17
9mo rev
84,030,000
65,240,000
Net inc
12,672,000
2,203,000
Share earns
1.27
.22


VIKONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VIKONICS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,251,292
983,771
Net inc
17,799
b4,447
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
3,433,041
3,365,391
Net loss
222,822
bc262,877
Share earns
-
.24
b-After tax credits of $2,000 for the quarter and $123,000 for the 9 months.


A Vilified Vanguard
LEAD: To the Editor:


COCAINE AND AIDS IN NEW YORK ADD TO INFANT DEATHS
LEAD: Cocaine abuse and AIDS are taking the lives of children born in the most devastated neighborhoods of New York City, nudging up the city's infant mortality rate after more than a decade of decline and sowing fears of steeper increases to come.


SHOWBOAT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHOWBOAT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
63,535,000
12,238,000
Net loss
3,424,000
b1,323,000
Share earns
-
.11
6mo net inc
964,000
2,767,000
Share earns
.08
.23
b-Net income  The company said it is changing its fiscal year-end to Dec.


Subway Group Protests Removal of Newsstands
LEAD: The Straphangers Campaign criticized the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday for demolishing newsstands at 14 subway stations.


The Dance: Ohio Ballet in 'Solstice'
LEAD: Heinz Poll, the Ohio Ballet's artistic director, not only choreographs for his company, he also commissions ballets from guest choreographers and encourages his dancers to do choreography of their own.
David Shimotakahara, one of those dancers, was the creator of ''Solstice,'' which received its New York premiere Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater.


Major Snowstorm Cuts Path From South to New England
LEAD: More than a foot of blowing snow and sheets of ice coated highways yesterday from the South to New England, closing schools and offices and stalling travelers.


I.B.M. to Raise Computer Rents
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said it would raise the monthly rental and lease charges on all of its computers and the maintenance fees on some of its mainframe computers by 7 percent, effective June 1.
I.B.M. said it had also raised the hourly service rates charged by its national service division by 15 percent, effective today.


COLEMAN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLEMAN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
132,852,000
113,824,000
Net inc
1,891,000
934,000
Share earns
.27
.13
Yr sales
598,497,000
501,589,000
Net inc
19,171,000
17,300,000
Share earns
2.72
2.48


Triple Crown Nominees
LEAD: Forty Niner, last year's champion 2-year-old colt and the favorite for the Fountain of Youth Stakes at Gulfstream Park on Monday, heads a list of 380 nominees for this year's Triple Crown that was released today by the sponsors of the three races.


Ethiopia Rebuts Atrocity Report
LEAD: The Government said today that a report that troops killed at least 20 civilians at a drought relief camp was an ''outright lie,'' and it accused foreign news organizations of a disinformation campaign.


American Cellular Deal Is Protested
LEAD: Frederick A. Moran, president of Moran Asset Management, said that he plans to solicit other bidders to top a $25-a-share, or $230 million, merger agreement between the American Cellular Network Corporation and the Comcast Corporation.


Financier Avoids Jail in Deal to Aid Homeless
LEAD: The financier Victor Posner avoided a jail sentence today on Federal tax evasion charges when he agreed to spend $3 million to help homeless men, women and children in south Florida and to devote 20 hours a week for five years to working with them.


MATTEL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MATTEL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
233,836,000
271,936,000
Net loss
b100,726,000
26,891,000
Yr sales
1,020,074,000
1,058,702,000
Net loss
b113,163,000
8,251,000
b-After charges of $1,068,000 for the quarter and $20,668,000 for the year from debt restructuring.


MANAGEMENT COMPANY ENTERTAINENT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MANAGEMENT COMPANY ENTERTAINENT
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,906,824
-
Net inc
74,871
-
9mo rev
14,263,088
-
Net inc
196,050
-
Share earns
.01
-
The company said that since the results for the year-ago periods do not include three of its five subsidiaries, direct comparison to the same periods for fiscal 1987 is not meaningful.


Why Radio's Thrill Is Gone at NBC
LEAD: Several months ago, the ups and downs of the National Broadcasting Company's six radio stations finally prompted the General Electric Company, NBC's parent, to put the stations on the block.
But it has only recently become clear just why G.E. decided to seek buyers.


PROGRAM STRESSES PRENATAL CARE IN EFFORT TO REDUCE PREMATURITY
LEAD: Nancy Sherman's first child, a boy, was born on Dec. 2, 1986, and lived for two hours.
Her second, another boy, was born on June 2, 1987, and died in a Bronx emergency room after one hour of life.


INTERNATIONAL TOTALIZATOR reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL TOTALIZATOR (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,503,735
2,696,070
Net inc
b18,962
c289,732
Yr rev
24,820,395
10,213,288
Net inc
b1,840,784
c1,183,502
Share earns
.26
-
b-After a $21,000 charge from the reversal of tax loss carryforwards for the quarter and a $245,000 tax credit for the year.


Film: Justine Bateman in 'Satisfaction'
LEAD: ''Hey, guys!'' That's Justine Bateman talking down and dirty as the lead singer of a female rock group called ''Mystery'' that tries to be the Bangles of the working class.
There is one drug-addicted guitarist, one man-crazy guitarist, a thieving drummer and a token male keyboard player -a last-minute replacement who switches from Chopin to rock in a day.


John Flynn; Yachtsman, 79
LEAD: John Flynn, a yachtsman and retired boat-yard manager associated with several America's Cup campaigns, died of cancer today at Newport Hospital.
He was 79 years old.


Islander Defense Takes the Night Off
LEAD: After the 6-2 loss tonight to the Capitals, the doors to the Islander locker room remained closed for 20 minutes.
When an ashen Terry Simpson finally emerged, he insisted the meeting's unusual length was not an indication of particular displeasure or panic.


Skaters' Appeal Rejected
LEAD: The United States Olympic Committee today denied the appeal of a speed skater, David Cruikshank, and two teammates who challenged their team's selection process.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''People get turned on by an emotional campaign.
Robertson's campaign is emotional.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Eastchester, N.Y.  $305,000  34 Tuckahoe Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 42-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, porch, fenced yard, walk to station; taxes $4,404.
Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $290,000  Crow Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old frame Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, playroom, stone walls, 1 acre; taxes $4,343.


Police Officers Tell of Strains Of Living as a 'Black in Blue'
LEAD: James Hargrove remembers the time he saw a robbery in progress in Manhattan.
As a police officer, he wanted to jump out of his patrol car.
As a black man in civilian clothes, carrying a weapon, he knew better.


When Women's Work Is Done
LEAD: A DECADE ago, outplacement firms saw relatively few women.
But as more women reach senior management posts, where outplacement counseling is a company-paid benefit, that is changing.


Focus on Current Directions in Jewelry
LEAD: ''JEWELRY plays a greater role in today's world than it ever did in the past,'' Oppi Untracht observed a few years ago in the introduction to his comprehensive volume ''Jewelry: Concepts and Technology.''


Report Says NASA Is Studying Problem With Shuttle Nozzle
LEAD: Problems with the heat-resistant material that protects the nozzles of the space shuttle's booster rocket should be corrected before the next shuttle flight scheduled for August, according to an internal report being reviewed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.


Getting Down to Brass Talks
LEAD: A curiosity of world politics is that many problems arise from military perceptions yet military adversaries seldom talk to each other.
Diplomats talk, often to discuss matters well understood only by the warriors.
Warriors, somehow, seem to talk directly only when the shooting stops.
All of which explains why there's something encouraging afoot between American and


FRANK A. SIEVERTS WED TO SUE HUBBELL
LEAD: Sue Hubbell, a beekeeper and writer, and Frank Arne Sieverts, the spokesman for the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, were married yesterday in Washington.
The Rev.
William A. Wendt, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Community of Hagar.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If we look back at history, always when there is a tendency toward improvement in our relations we see some military provocation.''  Gennadi I. Gerasimov,  the Soviet Foreign  Ministry spokesman.  [ 1:5. ]


MISS RUANE ENGAGED TO MICHAEL B. BARRETT
LEAD: William J. Ruane of New York has announced the engagement of his daughter, Elizabeth Arnold Ruane, to Michael Briggs Barrett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman K. Barrett of Berwyn, Pa.
A September wedding is planned.


Need to Edit Another Man's Pose?
LEAD: The two million own-ers of camcorders probably expected that making their own video tapes with these camera-recorder combinations was just a matter of point and shoot.
That, at any rate, is the impression fostered by advertisements that would have you believe that shooting video is as simple as taking snapshots.


Comparable Success
LEAD: ONE gym divided by two basketball teams at one small school equals two top big-school basketball teams six years later.
That, at least, seems to be the formula that explains why Temple is the top-ranked men's basketball team in the country and Iowa is the No. 1 women's squad.


MISS TIMMONS WED TO T. F. GIBSON 3D
LEAD: At St.
Alban's Episcopal Church in Washington, Kimberly Anne Timmons, a daughter of William E. Timmons of Washington and Jeane Lovegrove Stone of Lookout Mountain, Tenn., was married yesterday to Thomas Fenner Gibson 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gibson Jr. of Indianapolis.
The Rev.
Francis Wade performed the ceremony.


DRAMATIC RISE IN USE OF POWER BRINGS PUSH FOR CONSERVATION
LEAD: WHEN the state's utilities called on customers last month to cut back on the use of electricity, Judi C. Friedman and Elaine T. Moreland were at a loss.


Dallas Punches A Hole in the Heart Of Its Skyline
LEAD: Five years ago, the archi-tectural energy of Texas seemed concentrated in one city, and it was not Dallas.
This old and, by Texas standards, staid city could barely compete with the brashness of Houston, where towers popped into the sky at a mind-boggling rate, each one, it seemed, more flamboyant than the last.


Dollar Backing
LEAD: To the Editor:


3 Killed When Conrail Train Collides With an Automobile
LEAD: Three people were killed when a northbound Conrail train collided with the car in which they were riding, the police said today.


Czechoslovakia Upset in Opener
LEAD: Peter Schiller's backhand goal with 7 minutes 1 second left to play lifted West Germany to a 2-1 upset over Czechoslovakia at the Saddledome today in the first athletic competition of the Winter Olympics.


Opera: 'Macbeth' Recast
LEAD: WITH the exception of Samuel Ramey, as Banquo, new singers took over the principal roles Thursday evening in the Metropolitan Opera's troubled production of Verdi's ''Macbeth.'' After a last-minute cancellation by Shirley Verrett, Olivia Stapp took her place as Lady Macbeth, and suffice it to say that her performance was crude and melodramatic in a way that even the maniacal role cannot bear.


Blacks Postpone a Meeting On Resolving Campus Sit-In
LEAD: Black students occupying a University of Massachusetts building for the second day canceled a meeting this morning with the chancellor to discuss their demands that the school act against campus racism.


WEDDING PLANNED BY MISS PANCOAST
LEAD: The engagement of Stacy Pancoast to Frank W. Clark Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clark of Boston, has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Pancoast Jr. of Bronxville, N.Y.
An April wedding is planned.


78 for a Williamson
LEAD: With his father looking on, Maurice Williamson, son of John Williamson, the former guard for the Nets, set a Connecticut schoolboy record yesterday in New Haven when he scored 78 points as Wilbur Cross High beat Westbury (L.I.) High School, 108-92.


IN KENT, ALL EYES AND BETS ARE ON A FROZEN RIVER
LEAD: WOODEN ballot boxes sit on virtually every store counter and orange-colored posters are taped on the windows.
All around town, the people of Kent are studying the calendar, consulting their private muses and digging into their pockets for dollar bills.


Tracking AIDS Through World Since '81
LEAD: Since AIDS was recognized as a disease in the United States in 1981, it has appeared in three-quarters of the world's countries, about 160 nations in all, according to the World Health Organization.


WHEN SATIRE DIDN'T CLOSE ON SATURDAY NIGHT
LEAD:  GOING TOO FAR  By Tony Hendra.
Illustrated. 480 pp.
New York: A Dolphin Book/Doubleday. $19.95.


FOR SOME MEATLESS FARE, THE WOK OFFERS ALTERNATIVES
LEAD: KEN HOM, a prolific and spirited Berkeley, Calif., resident and cooking teacher who takes groups of students on weeklong trips to Hong Kong, has just written another cookbook.
This one, ''Asian Vegetarian Feasts'' (Morrow, $19.95), provides meatless recipes from Japan, Indonesia, Thailand, Korea, Singapore and Vietnam, although the majority are


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An answer in the Q&amp;A column on Jan. 17 gave an incorrect date for the Stefan Batory's last scheduled voyage.
The ship, owned by Polish Ocean Lines, set sail in January for a Caribbean cruise, which ends in March.


Why the Melody Doesn't Linger On
LEAD: What ever hap-pened to melody in popular music?
I'm not talking about tunes - hummable little ditties with short catch phrases - but a fluid, cohesive theme of at least 16 bars in which no musical phrase is repeated.
Richard Rodgers's ''Some Enchanted Evening'' has such a melody.
As it flows along, moving through rich, unforced chromatic harmonies, its indelibility can't be explained by the hammering home of a formula.


Trade Gap Narrows For the 2d Month
LEAD: The trade deficit for December was the lowest in 11 months, coming in at $12.2 billion.
With imports unchanged, the improvement came from a 4.2 percent gain in exports, to a record $24.8 billion.
Most predictions had been for a December deficit of at least $13 billion, and the financial markets strengthened when the report came out.


Back Home But Out of Place
LEAD: IT was when I was walking into the lobby of one of New York's finest old hotels that I realized the world isn't small after all.
I had just returned from summer vacation.
The distance between the remote Irish coastal village where we have a holiday cottage and this gilded and brocaded interior was so vast that they seemed separated not only by an ocean but also by centuries.


FEELING THE LOSS OF 2 LIGHTS OF MONTAUK
LEAD: WHEN I became editor of a weekly newspaper in Bridgehampton last May, there was a letter on my desk from Norman Kean's office in New York congratulating me.
I didn't know why this busy producer of ''Oh!
Calcutta!'' and other plays was taking an interest in me or the paper.


The Case Against Irradiation of Food
LEAD: IRRADIATION: A preservation technique that drenches food in a shower of radioactive gamma rays to destroy microorganisms, control insects or delay the ripening of fruits or vegetables.


U.S.A. MAKES FAST START
LEAD: The game was a shooting spree, a scenario that fit the offense-obsessed United States hockey team and enabled it to race to a 10-6 victory over Austria in its opening game at the XV Olympic Winter Games.


Recital: Renata Scotto In Italian and French Bill
LEAD: RENATA SCOTTO'S adoring followers don't find her on New York's opera stage that often these days, but when she appeared at Alice Tully Hall Thursday night they were there to throw out the traditional mating cries of the opera-singer aficionado.
What Miss Scotto gave in response to these whoops and yells of approval was approximately what she always has.


Soviet Says It Hopes 'Provocation' By U.S. at Sea Won't Hurt Talks
LEAD: The Soviet Union today blamed the United States for the ''military provocation'' in which two American Navy vessels and Soviet warships bumped in the Black Sea on Friday.


ART, AFTER A FASHION
LEAD:  When Diana Vreeland began staging her dynamic costume exhibitions at the Metropolitan Museum of Art 15 years ago, she not only narrowed the gap between fashion and art but also enhanced the perception of clothing as a field for serious study.
Art museums all over this country and in Europe followed with their own fashion exhibitions, and books examining the sociological and cultural implications of clothing proliferated.


EMERGENCY WORKERS AND AIDS
LEAD: Our desire to avoid ostracizing AIDS patients should not deter us from practicing appropriate public-health measures.
Although the risk of transmitting AIDS by touching a contaminated arrowhead must be exceedingly low, not to seal it in plastic would have been foolhardy.


On Safari in Kenya
LEAD: CAMELS are wondrous creatures.


WHERE TO RING IN YEAR OF DRAGON
LEAD: PACK up winter worries.
The season's woes melt away for one brief week in February.
Lovers are celebrating today with flowers and candy; shoppers are reving up for Presidents' Day sales; travelers are heading to New Orleans for Mardi Gras, and serious eaters are in training for Chinese New Year feasts.


Gephardt and Simon Fight for 2d Place
LEAD: Richard A. Gephardt and Paul Simon clawed at each other today in a fight for second place in the New Hampshire Democratic primary next Tuesday.
They were battling despite the fact that since 1952 no one has been elected President without coming in first in the New Hampshire primary.


Philadelphians Choosing Sides Over City Hall
LEAD: If there is anything in this city that is the target of more jokes than the city itself, it is City Hall. ''The world's most beautiful ugly building,'' a ''monument to corruption,'' an ''architectural abomination'' are among the many unflattering descriptions the building has earned.


How a Chain Reaction Killed G.O.P. Debate
LEAD: In the 1988 Presidential campaign, with its crowded field and surfeit of debates, about the last thing anyone expected was to have a deficit of candidates for a Republican debate three days before the New Hampshire primary.


Campaign Finance; Problems in the PAC's: Study Finds Frustration
LEAD: Political action committees say they are increasingly resentful of greedy lawmakers, yet go along with their demands for contributions for fear of losing vital access in Congress.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Forget Briefcases And Power Ties


Helping to Savor Mom's Apple Pie
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


AMTRAK PLANS A STOP IN YONKERS
LEAD: SIXTY parking spaces and a few signposts are all that stand in the way of new Amtrak rail service at Yonkers, according to Amtrak officials and Mayor Nicholas C. Wasicsko of Yonkers.


Notebook; Sutter Among 75 Seeking Post-Injury Comebacks
LEAD: IN the Georgia countryside north of Atlanta, in the town of Kennesaw, there's a piece of rustic property 50 acres or so in size.
Tucked away among the trees on that property are a pond, a swimming pool, a tennis court - and a pitcher's mound.
On that mound the past week has stood the man who owns the property, and Bruce Sutter wasn't standing on it just to survey his domain.


LOOKING AT PICTURES THE OLD-FASHIONED WAY
LEAD:  PAINTING AS AN ART  Bollingen Series XXXV No. 33  By Richard Wollheim.
Illustrated. 384 pp.
New Jersey: Princeton University Press. $45.


Sunday Observer; My Tinny Valentine
LEAD: ONE OF MY FAVOR-ite love songs is ''Tea for Two,'' probably because it is one of the few love songs I can sing.
There is a better love song in ''Don Giovanni,'' a serenade the Don sings under a balcony to woo one of his ladies, but it requires a mandolin accompaniment and the voice of Cesare Siepi, neither of which


Pointers on Points For Frequent Fliers
LEAD: THIS summer when J. Russell King of New York and his mother, Mary Ann King of Ardmore, Okla., fly to London on vacation, they will take different airlines and land at separate airports.
Mrs.
King will take Delta at no cost; her coupon was a Christmas gift from a son-in-law who travels in his work and had points to share.


PLANNED PARENTHOOD JOINS SUITS
LEAD: MANY of the teen-age girls who burst, giggling, past the bright blue doors of the storefront in Mount Vernon are dropping by after school to chat with staff members they know on a first-name basis.


All in the Eye Of the Beholder
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


CYNTHIA CANNELL BECOMES FIANCEE OF RAINER GROSS
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Peter B. Cannell of New York and Point O'Woods, Fire Island, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Ann Cannell, to Rainer Gross, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Heinrich E. Gross of Cologne, West Germany.


GEPHARDT PAPERS SUPPLIED BY BANK
LEAD: In an effort to show that its transactions with Richard A. Gephardt's Presidential campaign were legitimate, a Washington bank furnished documents today detailing $1.4 million in loans it made to the campaign last year.


New York Suburbs Spilling Westward
LEAD: Lured by out-of-date house prices and a twin set of superhighways, growing numbers of New York and New Jersey residents are settling into dozens of small northeastern Pennsylvania communities stretching from the old mill town of Easton to the heart of honeymoon land in the Pocono mountains.


Emigrant Flow From Poland Worries Regime and Church
LEAD: The young woman in Gdynia, on the Baltic coast, recounted how her father, a former close associate of Lech Walesa, the Solidarity founder, had left Poland with the rest of the family, complaining that there was no future.


Gurkhas Attack in India
LEAD: Militant Gurkhas blew up road bridges, set fire to government offices and ambushed a police patrol on Friday night as a 40-day strike called to press their demand for autonomy took hold, security officials said.


THE DRINK-A-DAY LORE
LEAD: At last, some straight talk about a highly ambiguous subject by a responsible commentator (Body and Mind: ''The Drink-a-Day Lore,'' by William Ira Bennett, Jan. 10)!
The flaws in the various studies that seem to demonstrate ''protective'' value in one or two drinks a day are not so subtle that the interested public could not understand them.


IMPERSONAL PROSE OF PERSONAL ADS
LEAD: A SMILING young couple pose above the caption ''They Found Each Other Through the Personal Ads,'' and each time I notice them, I wonder if they are merely some editor's fiction, extended from the fantasies reflected in the ads themselves.


Mexico
LEAD: To the Editor: Your readers should be aware of one inaccuracy in the otherwise very informative article on economic factors affecting tourists to Mexico (''Mexican Prices Down Just a Bit,'' Travel, Dec. 13).
While it may be true that in Mexico some credit cards ''use the controlled rate'' (about 1,750 pesos to the dollar) American Express does not.


Vermont Campus Builds Ties to Central America
LEAD: Jacqueline Dejud will return to her native Panama this spring with a bachelor's degree in business and a desire to ''find work, to help my family, and to improve, as much as I can, my country as well.''


Speed-Skating Event Offers U.S. Best Chance for Gold Medal
LEAD: If you enjoy watching Americans win gold medals, pay close attention when full-scale competition starts Sunday in the XV Olympic Winter Games.
The Americans' best chance for a gold medal in these Olympics will come in the men's 500-meter speed skating.


New Jersey Guide
LEAD:  NEW BRITISH FARCE


LAURA BEATRICE KAVESH, A COLUMNIST, TO WED DR. STEVEN STERN, A PROFESSOR
LEAD: Laura Beatrice Kavesh, a columnist for The Chicago Tribune, and Dr.
Steven Stern, a professor of psychiatry and psychology at the Northwestern University Medical School, plan to marry in May, the parents of the future bride, Ruth Kavesh of Montclair, N.J., and Dr.
Robert A. Kavesh of New York, have announced.


Ringing the Changes
LEAD: To the Editor:


MUSIC FAIR AIMS FOR YOUNG
LEAD: WAY before the advent of MTV and VCR's, the Westbury Music Fair, the eclectic entertainment center, was making a pitch for younger audiences.
Its co-producer, Shelly Gross, even remembers the time Stevie Wonder was an opening act - he doesn't remember the act that followed - and the Doors and the Beegees played the theater in the round in the early 1960's.


A Greater Role for Egypt's First Lady
LEAD: Suzanne Mubarak, the wife of the Egyptian President, rejects the job description of ''first lady.'' That, she says, is ''an imported, a Western title'' in Egypt.


Need for Bombs, Jobs, Safety Affect Fate of Plutonium Plant
LEAD: HOW much bomb-grade plutonium is required for national security?
The exact answer is secret, but the response of the Department of Energy has always been: more than we have now.


STEPHANIE PERELL TO MARRY IN JUNE
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Perell of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Stephanie G. Perell, to Clifford Krause, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Krause of Woodbury, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: A careful study of the newer types of statistics, like slugging percentage and on-base average, show that Mantle, particularly the Mantle of the 1950's, was one of the most prolific and valuable baseball players of all time, a shade below Ruth, Williams and Gehrig.


A Range Of Events At Emelin
LEAD: THE Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck, as it so often does, provides a wonderful diversity of musical treats this week.
Because many county youngsters are enjoying school holidays, children's programs fill the midday, midweek roster, starting tomorrow and Tuesday, when Puppetworks goes ''Around the World in 80 Days'' in what the troupe describes as ''a vivid and specially designed production'' of the Jules Verne classic.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. Recently I moved into a house that has a sunroom with a slate floor.
I suspect that the previous owners had kept pets in this room because there is a strong odor of urine, especially when the windows are closed.
I scrubbed the floor with a strong household detergent and the odor is not as strong, but it is still there.


Trump Appears Before Casino Panel
LEAD: Donald J. Trump was back on the witness stand here this week to explain to the State Casino Control Commission his maneuvering to buy total control of Resorts International Inc.


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: Where Mays prevails is in mythology.
He has been raised to a level where poets sing his heroics, where fathers brag to sons about having seen him.
Mantle is frozen as a good ol' boy, fronting a saloon, buddy to Martin and Ford, running to fat in public.


Dori Kuchinsky, Lawyer, Weds Peter P. Wantula
LEAD: At the Church Center for the United Nations in New York, Dori Anne Kuchinsky, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew E. Kuchinsky of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Peter Paul Wantula, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wladyslaw O. Wantula of Richmond Hill, Queens.
Judge Marie M. Lambert of Surrogate's Court in Manhattan officiated, assisted by the Rev.


Broadcast TV
LEAD: Televising an Olympic Games is only slighlty less complicated than staging one.
ABC, which televised both the Winter and Summer Games in 1984, has moved 17 tractor trailers of equipment to Calgary and plans 90 or so hours of programming, beginning last Saturday through Feb. 28.
Because of Calgary's Mountain Time zone location, most of ABC's coverage will be live.


Wendell S. Merick; Journalist, 60
LEAD: Wendell S. Merick, a retired correspondent for U.S.
News &amp; World Report, died of chronic liver disease Thursday at his home in Bethesda, Md..
He was 60 years old.
Mr.
Merick was a correspondent with the United Press, now United Press International.
He also worked for The Boston Traveler.
He joined U.S.


THE REGION: Redevelopment; Times Square Plan Takes A Shaky Step Forward
LEAD: THE long-delayed plan to redevelop Times Square moved a step forward last week as the Urban Development Corporation, New York State's principal development agency, authorized long-term leases with the project's largest builder.


A COUNTERBLOW OBLITERATES A BLOW
LEAD: WHEN kings are castled on opposite wings and each faces violent attack, it is hardly time to honor the precept of noblesse oblige, yet Michael Wilder did something very like that in his game against Grandmaster Sergei Kudrin in the United States Championship in Estes Park, Colo.
Not surprisingly, the 25-year-old Princeon, N.J., international master was awarded the $100 Craig


FOR SOME MEATLESS FARE, THE WOK OFFERS ALTERNATIVES
LEAD: KEN HOM, a prolific and spirited Berkeley, Calif., resident and cooking teacher who takes groups of students on weeklong trips to Hong Kong, has just written another cookbook.
This one, ''Asian Vegetarian Feasts'' (Morrow, $19.95), provides meatless recipes from Japan, Indonesia, Thailand, Korea, Singapore and Vietnam, although the majority are


Soviet Said to Harden Stance on Missiles
LEAD: The Soviet Union, in an apparent hardening of its position at the Geneva arms talks, has asked the United States to agree to limit the number of sea-launched cruise missiles that are armed with conventional warheads, according to Administration officials.


Georgetown Pledges Equality for Gay Groups
LEAD: Georgetown University has announced that it will accord ''equal treatment'' to groups of homosexual students and agreed to provide a $3,740 subsidy to such a group at its law school.


'A GIFT OF MURDER,' COMEDY WITH CLUES
LEAD: WHEN the action of a play takes place in a remote area of the north of England, it is a good clue that the play is in the mystery thriller genre.
Unfortunately, as is the case with the Arena Players current show, ''A Gift of Murder,'' the genre is not always mysterious or thrilling.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: FEBRUARY 14, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
DESTINY, by Sally Beauman. (Bantam, $4.95.)
The 30-year romance of a couple with diverse
backgrounds and ambitions.
2
14
WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
(Warner, $4.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall a
woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.


THE PASTOR'S PROBLEM
LEAD: I envy Henry G. Brinton for writing the About Men essay I was hoping to write someday (''The Pastor's Problem,'' Jan. 17).
I, too, work in a part of the world in which affluence is the way of life.
I, too, find there is too much month left at the end of the money.


In New Hampshire Presidential Primary The Watchword Is, 'Don't Bet on It'
LEAD: WHEN Vice President Bush was asked the evening of the Iowa caucuses last week how his surprisingly poor third-place finish would affect his political fortunes in the New Hampshire primary day after tomorrow, he had a ready answer.


Report Says Landfill Imperils Estuary
LEAD: A TEAM of Rutgers University biochemical engineers has charged that New York City has failed to clean up a toxic landfill that is leaching hazardous waste into Jamaica Bay, which empties into the Hudson-Raritan estuary, possibly imperiling North Jersey marine fisheries.


BEST SELLERS: FEBRUARY 14, 1988
LEAD:
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
F iction
1
1
15
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom
Wolfe. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.95.) A bond
trader caught in the jungles of New York.
2
2
12
THE TOMMYKNOCKERS, by Stephen King.
(Putnam, $19.95.) Two writers' zealous attempt to
unearth mysterious artifacts results in havoc.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. Recently I moved into a house that has a sunroom with a slate floor.
I suspect that the previous owners had kept pets in this room because there is a strong odor of urine, especially when the windows are closed.
I scrubbed the floor with a strong household detergent and the odor is not as strong, but it is still there.


Kennedy Seeks Care Program for All 4-Year-Olds
LEAD: Senator Edward M. Kennedy has announced plans to introduce legislation that would encourage states to create a program of education and day care available to all 4-year-olds.


Federation Celebrates Black History Month
LEAD: Associated Black Charities of New York, a federation of 59 health and welfare agencies, is using the observance of Black History Month in February to honor contemporary black leaders and underscore the early beginnings of black philanthropy.


FOR SOME, HOME IS WHERE BUSINESS IS
LEAD: The weather outside is frightful.
The roads are covered with ice; the trains are late.


DEATH AND GOOD INTENTIONS
LEAD:  UNDER THE SUN  By Erik Jay. 152 pp.
Chester Springs, Pa.: Dufour Editions. $16.95.


Food; A PIECE OF CAKE
LEAD: THE WEDDING CAKE WAS ORIGI-nally conceived as a table decoration.


DATA UPDATE: February 14, 1988
LEAD:
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(Thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Nov. 87
Nov. 86
Change
Starts
1,639
1,637
0%
Completions
1,156
1,774
-12%
Sales
643
691
-07%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau,U.S. Department of Commerce)
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago


Israeli Payments Plan Cited in Memo to Meese
LEAD: Planned payments to the Government of Israel and the Israeli Labor Party were mentioned in a 1985 memo to Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d describing a proposed $1 billion Iraqi pipeline project that never was brought to fruition, according to a Swiss businessman who was a partner in the plan.


Seeking the Gold Triumphs
LEAD: Seeking the Gold, the quickest 3-year-old in the country, survived a mostly successful experiment in a seven-furlong allowance race today at Gulfstream Park.
The Mr.
Prospector colt was held back off the early pace for the first time and still proved an easy winner, but his final time and final furlong were not up to his standards.


Koch's Ire Focuses Attention on Pension Increases
LEAD: Mayor Koch's vociferous campaign against a state bill to increase pensions for retired city workers has drawn attention for the first time to a system that has been in operation for more than a decade.


New TV Series Stars Newark Police Officers
LEAD: THE first television series to be shot entirely in New Jersey will make its debut next month on WWOR-TV, Channel 9, and its formula - like its locale - will be unusual.


JENNIFER DAVIS TO WED
LEAD: Jennifer Lynn Davis and Philip Michael Wilson, both members of the Pittsburgh Ballet Theater, plan to marry in May, the parents of the bride-to-be, Dr.
Eleanor Morin Davis and Dr.
Harold L. Davis of New York have announced.
Miss Davis studied at the Joffrey Ballet School in New York.
Her fiance, a son of Mr.


James FitzPatrick, 71, Ex-Head Of Power Agency and Lawmaker
LEAD: James A. FitzPatrick, a former state assemblyman who served as chairman of the New York State Power Authority from 1963 to 1977, died yesterday at Champlain Valley Hospital in Plattsburgh, N.Y.
He was 71 years old and lived in Plattsburgh.


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: An everyday player can compete in five areas: hit for average, hit for power, run, field and throw.
Mays could do all five excellently.
A lifetime .300 hitter, 660 home runs, a base-stealing threat at all times, he made great catches (see Vic Wertz, 1954 World Series) and great throws (see Billy Cox thrown out at home trying to score from third on a single to right-center field).


Boy Scouts to Allow Women to Be Leaders
LEAD: Officials of the Boy Scouts of America have voted to allow women in leadership positions, including scoutmaster, ending a male-only policy that has often been challenged in court, organization officials say.


Billy Wilder to Receive The Thalberg Award
LEAD: Billy Wilder is to receive the Irving G. Thalberg Award from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences on Oscar night, April 11.
The award honors a body of work that ''reflects a consistently high quality of motion picture production.''


VALENTINES OF YESTERYEAR ARE BROUGHT OUT FOR TODAY
LEAD: ACCORDING to 15th- and 16th-century diaries, Valentines were not cards but people upon whom such elaborate gifts as jewelry were bestowed.
Gradually the gifts became less expensive, and by the late 17th century, cards began to replace gifts, according to Christine Ermenc, a spokeswoman for the Connecticut Historical


SHINSPLINTS IN THE OLD WEST
LEAD:  THE FAST MEN  By Tom McNab. 345 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $17.95.


Q AND A
LEAD:  Security Deposit  Question: For several years we received interest on the security deposit for the apartment we rent.
This year we received notification that the interest had been withheld due to the Interest and Dividend Tax Compliance Act of 1983.
Can you tell me what this act is and why we did not get interest this year?


CENTRAL AMERICAN PEACE
LEAD: Because James LeMoyne wrote at considerable length on Nicaragua in his article on Costa Rican President Oscar Arias, I am compelled to respond to two inaccuracies.


WHAT'S NEW IN OUTPLACEMENT
LEAD: IN 1980, the outplacement industry - which, simply put, is the business of counseling people who have lost their jobs - recorded $35 million in revenues, according to James H. Kennedy, publisher of Consultants News.
By 1986, revenues had grown to $225 million, with the number of firms rising to 154 from 43.


'What The Butler Saw'
LEAD: ''JUST when one least expects it, the unexpected always happens.'' So observes Dr.
Rance, an investigator ''from the mental branch of the government,'' who has come to check up on Dr.
Prentice's private psychiatric clinic, a place where madness, according to Mrs.
Prentice, is not cured but liberated and exploited.


Racism in the F.B.I. Is a Hoover Legacy
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULT PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Canucks 6, Bruins 5: Doug Wickenheiser scored with 3 minutes 25 seconds remaining for the victory at Vancouver.
The goal, Wickenheiser's fifth of the season and first since last Jan. 17, was set up by a centering pass by Dave Saunders.
The victory, the Canucks' third in their last 11 games, snapped a six-game Boston winning streak.


Poetry and Word Processing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Income Up, Debts Down: After a Year of Subsidized Gains, Signs of New Hope
LEAD: WHEN Bob Kussman drops in for lunch at Jay's Cafe, down the road from the Farm Credit Services branch he manages in Keytesville, Mo., the greetings are a good bit warmer these days, and fewer eyes avoid his.


What to Look for in Laser Printers
LEAD: SOME companies justify the higher expense of a laser printer on a strict bottom-line analysis.
A laser costing $2,000 or more can be shared by several personal computers and cough out material quickly enough to keep everybody happy - none of the waiting in line that slower shared printers create.
On a per-user basis, that can eliminate the price advantage of daisy wheels and dot matrix printers.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  BANDITS, by Elmore Leonard. (Warner, $4.95.) An ex-con, an ex-cop and an ex-nun become involved with contras, Sandinistas and even a Miskito Indian in a plot to free a Nicaraguan woman from a leper colony in Louisiana.
Despite this ''preposterous business,'' Walker Percy said here last year, Elmore Leonard ''knows what he's doing.


NAUGHTY, BAWDY AND WISE - A VALENTINE FOR CHAUCER
LEAD: In college I took methedrine and read Chaucer.
This was in 1968.
During the day we sat in at Army induction centers, and at night we went to our boyfriends' apartments and took drugs and read Chaucer because there was a required Chaucer section on the senior English honors exam and we couldn't graduate with honors without it.


The Army and the Law
LEAD: 'Laws that limit the acceptable focus of one's sexual desires to members of the opposite sex, like laws that limit one's choice of spouse (or sexual partner) to members of the same race, cannot withstand constitutional scrutiny absent a compelling governmental justification. '


Private Enterprise Is Profitable Enterprise
LEAD: PRIVATIZATION is spreading and succeeding throughout the world -in developed and developing countries, in democracies and dictatorships and in capitalist, socialist and communist nations.


COLLEGES PROVIDE SETTINGS FOR SOUNDS
LEAD: MUCH of this week's musical activity is to be found on college campuses around the state.


Austria Provides Model for a Palestinian Treaty
LEAD: To the Editor:


NONFICTION
LEAD:  A FEW GOOD MEN FROM UNIVAC.
By David E. Lundstrom. (MIT, $19.95.) This personal memoir, the latest volume in the MIT Press's History of Computing series, recalls the early days of the electronic computer industry, when machines with the capacity of today's miniature computers were ''a little larger than a single car garage.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-25


1,000 Gallons of Fuel Spill on Liberty Island
LEAD: About 1,000 gallons of heating oil overflowed yesterday while being pumped into fuel tanks on Liberty Island, but most of the spillage was absorbed into emergency pads, the National Park Service said.


Fordham Tops St. Peter's in 3 Overtimes
LEAD: Greg Pedro hit a 3-point field goal to break a 63-63 tie and Fordham went on to register a 75-66 triumph over St.
Peter's in triple overtime yesterday at Rose Hill Gymnasium.


Hamilton Grange Needs Furniture (and $2 Million)
LEAD: There is a certain sweet sadness to the Grange.


Saudis Behead Four
LEAD: Four Saudi citizens and a Sudanese expatriate, all convicted murderers, were beheaded Friday in Riyadh, the Interior Ministry said.


THE DRINK-A-DAY LORE
LEAD: It seems to me that just because we do not understand how alcohol lowers the cardiac death rate is no reason not to recommend it.
After all, it took over 200 years for us to understand how digoxin helps the heart.
Furthermore, Dr.
Bennett might have mentioned that there are several other epidemiologic studies that show that the overall death rate, cardiac as well as noncardiac, is reduced by moderate alcohol intake.


CHALLENGES FACED BY THE CATHOLIC CHURCH
LEAD: Please accept the compliments of a Catholic with 20 years of Jesuit education and three degrees from Catholic universities, including one in theology.
The excellent article confirms the inflexible attitude of the Vatican hierarchy.
To lament the shortage of priests and to pray for more ''vocations'' (God's call, supposedly) to the priesthood is to stubbornly reject four solutions not opposed to


Brazil
LEAD: To the Editor: I appreciated the Dec. 27 ''Following the Sun'' feature with emphasis on the Brazil discoveries of Paraty and Sao Jose da Coroa Grande.
I lived in Brazil for two and a half years and am familiar with both areas.
They are ideal for the American who wishes to see parts of Brazil that the ordinary tourist would not see.


In Boston Courthouse, Justice at Risk
LEAD: When barricades went up at Dorcester District Court, not to keep prisoners in but to protect passers-by from falling masonry, few people noticed.


The U.S. Need to Lead in Israel
LEAD: While the situation in the occupied territories continues to deteriorate, neither the Palestinians nor the Israelis can or will make the first genuine move toward reconciliation.
Only strong action from Washington can end the violence.


ABOUT BOOKS
LEAD: SOME books aspire to do more than inform; they enlist our advocacy to attack a current ideology.


JOANNE BLODGETT ENGAGED TO MATTHEW LUXENBERG ROOT
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas N. Blodgett of New York and Dublin, N.H., have announced the engagement of their daughter Joanne Washington Blodgett to Matthew Luxenberg Root, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leon Root of New York and Roxbury, Conn.


An Alternative To the D.H. Rule
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  HISTORIC REGIMENT


Only the Long-Term Capital Gains Need Help; Indexing for Equity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Choices for Benefactors
LEAD:  Children's Show


Evening Wear, In Brief
LEAD: POSSIBLY the shortest spring and summer evening dresses in the recent Paris couture showings were the sequin-studded, printed silk styles by Per Spook.
Flowers or butterflies are among the prints.
These sophisticated patterns were used for dresses so brief that the designer felt compelled to add matching shorts.


Swami Falls From Grace In New Delhi
LEAD: At the height of his influence, the tall, bearded swami was regarded as one of the most powerful men in India and was an adviser to Indira Gandhi, then Prime Minister, and her son Sanjay.


One Killed and 20 Injured by Bombs in Strikes in Bangladesh
LEAD: Hundreds of small bombs exploded across the capital of Bangladesh today, killing one man and injuring 20 at the start of the latest in a series of general strikes, the police and witnesses said.


Red Cross in Maine Is Cited by the U.S. Over Worker Safety
LEAD: The Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration has cited the Portland office of the American Red Cross for not adequately protecting its employees from blood-borne diseases.


Tension, Pain, Satisfaction: Inside the Recruiting Game
LEAD: When I began coaching football in 1953, there was a phrase I picked up that was attributed to the late Red Sanders, then the head football coach at U.C.L.A.
He said that the best way to be a successful college football coach and produce winning teams was to ''come by some good football players.''


VOTERS TURN DOWN A NEW TOWN HALL
LEAD: AFTER two months of rancorous debate, political backbiting and a dispute over who could vote, residents of this fast-growing town have resoundingly rejected a proposal to build a $1.25 million town hall.


Street Fashion; High Diddle Diddle, It's Not a Real Fiddle
LEAD: ''EXCUSE me, ma'am, do you know how to get to Carnegie Hall?''


NONFICTION
LEAD:  NEW IMMIGRANTS IN NEW YORK.
Edited by Nancy Foner. (Columbia University, $27.50.) Wrap a subway map around this academic book and you have one of the most useful and up-to-date guides to New York City in years. ''New Immigrants in New York'' takes eight recently arrived groups - Dominicans, Haitians, St.


Body and Mind; Quirks and Oddities
LEAD: For by his face strait


Q AND A
LEAD: Older Drivers  Question: I understand that Ireland has a limit of 70 years old on drivers renting cars.
Are there such limitations in other European countries? - B. K., Ambler, Pa. -  Answer: Drivers over age 70 can rent a car in Ireland.
It is true that some auto rental companies there (not Ireland itself) set an age limit of 69 or 70, but the two largest agencies, which are both represented in the United States, do not.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  A COMMON ROOM: Essays 1954-1987.
By Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $23.95.) Most writers know something about their motives, though few are as impassioned - or as expansive - as Reynolds Price is in sharing them.
Indeed, in many of these 57 essays by the acclaimed author of ''Kate Vaiden'' and other novels, the treacherous business of examining artistic intent - in his own writing as well as in others' - is managed with considerable grace.


EMERGENCY WORKERS AND AIDS
LEAD: It is easy to sit in an ivory tower and say that the firemen of Baltimore overreacted.
I am a registered nurse, and the day I pricked my finger with a patient's bloody needle, my life changed.
Because it would be a violation of his rights to have him tested against his will, it is I who must endure months, maybe years, of testing, waiting, wondering.


Going for the Gold in California
LEAD: ON a small, grassy hill overlooking the ruins of Chinese Camp, an old mining settlement, stands St.
Francis Xavier Roman Catholic church.
The tombstones in its graveyard bear the names of Irish and English immigrants who crossed the Atlantic in search of gold.
But the most arresting monument to those who sought riches here is the lush canopy of trees that covers much of the town.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. Recently I moved into a house that has a sunroom with a slate floor.
I suspect that the previous owners had kept pets in this room because there is a strong odor of urine, especially when the windows are closed.
I scrubbed the floor with a strong household detergent and the odor is not as strong, but it is still there.


Fire Destroys Former Performing Arts High School
LEAD: The landmark Manhattan building that once housed the High School of the Performing Arts was destroyed in a five-alarm fire early yesterday.


From 7 Years on Streets To Aiding the Homeless
LEAD: Tony Marino was sleeping in a Boston doorway one winter night when Courtney Wayshak, a counselor at the Pine Street Inn homeless shelter, tried to coax him into the shelter's van for some soup and a blanket.


Afrikaner Farmer Is Ready to Negotiate, or Fight
LEAD: Andeon Visagie, only a few months past his 40th birthday, has most things in life that a successful white man in South Africa could seek.


DATA BANK: February 14, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
IV Q'87
III Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,870.0
$3,835.9
$3,702.4
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.2
4.3
1.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$141.9
$134.5
$130.2


A Balmy Beach Town In New South Wales
LEAD: I SAW Byron Bay for the first time three years ago.
I was driving north on the coastal highway from Sydney to Brisbane with my wife.
The rain had stopped just beyond the town of Ballina, where the highway snakes inland toward the foothills of the northern coastal ranges.
By the time we were west of Byron Bay, the iron-gray wedge of cloud had lifted to let the sun cast its warm, early evening light across the undulating grasslands to the flat brown marshes and pale dunes on the ocean's edge.


SHOWER DOORS FOR AN ELEGANT TOUCH
LEAD: IF your bathtub is installed in a recess, that is, if the tub is surrounded by walls on three sides, creating a built-in appearance, one of the easiest ways to add a touch of elegance is to install bathtub shower doors in place of a shower curtain.


Helping the Disabled Find Careers in the Arts
LEAD: CAN ONE be realistic about the arts and still make money?
Yes.
The New Jersey Department of Labor's Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services is a career-networking providing system that is designed to help the disabled find employment in the arts and promote the products of the division's clients.


Transkei Confronts Corruption After a Coup
LEAD: Among military leaders who have seized power in Africa, Maj.
Gen.
Harrington Bantubonke Holomisa is something of an exception to established patterns.


Jazz: Judy Carmichael
LEAD: THE stride pianist Judy Carmichael, who was one of the regular attractions at Hanratty's until that Upper East Side restaurant closed more than a year ago, has found a new home - a spacious room with hanging plants under a huge skylight on the second floor of the Fortune Garden Pavilion, a restaurant at 209 East 49th Street, near Third Avenue.


She Loved Him
LEAD: Once there was a little girl who had a crush on a little boy.
He had blue eyes, brown hair and trouble pronouncing ''th.'' Never mind: she loved him.


NEVADA-LAS VEGAS IS STUNNED BY MISSOURI, 81-79
LEAD: Derrick Chievous scored 26 points and Byron Irvin added 17 as Missouri held off a second-half comeback today and upset seventh-ranked Nevada-Las Vegas, 81-79.


Dance: City Ballet in Balanchine's 'Bugaku'
LEAD: GEORGE BALANCHINE'S ''Bugaku'' is very peculiar.
It often looks cliche-ridden, even corny.
But the cliches turn into surprises, and even the corniest scene has a serious point. ''Bugaku'' was as fascinating as ever when the New York City Ballet danced it Thursday night at the New York State Theater.


No Shortage of Applicants for Job Openings in Michigan
LEAD: Prospective employees lined up outside the Bendix Chassis &amp; Brake Components Division plant near St.
Joseph as more than 1,000 people showed up to apply for 20 openings.
About 150 new jobs will open there by next year as part of a company improvement program.


SARAH PIERCE MARRIED TO DRU BEGUELIN
LEAD: At the Congregational Church of Christ at Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H., Sarah Steinkamp Pierce, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald Franklin Pierce Jr. of Etna, N.H., was married yesterday to Winslow Drury Beguelin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dayton Beguelin of Locust, N.J.
The Rev.
Donald Mckenzie officiated.


Williams Goes Home
LEAD: Thousands packed the main street of Zachary, La., yesterday to welcome home Doug Williams, who passed for four touchdowns and led the Washington Redskins to victory in Super Bowl XXII.


SUCCESS FOR DARIEN HIGH SCHOOL INVENTOR
LEAD: LIKE most high school girls, Kimberly Allen's schoolday atire tends to the casual -jeans, a sweatshirt and sneakers.
As a freshman, though, she puzzled her friends by occasionally turning up at Darien High School in a blazer and skirt or a dress.


Straight Talk Brings Down Japan House
LEAD: All this week, Japan's Parliament was brought to a standstill because an influential member rejected one of this country's most cherished social graces, an apology.


LOST IN EACH OTHER JUST THAT ONCE
LEAD:  CAPTIVITY CAPTIVE  By Rodney Hall. 214 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $15.95.


ITALIAN FARE FOR HEALTHY APPETITES
LEAD: PEPPERCORN GRILL in Hartford is just what the ravenous diner ordered.
Slipping easily into the high-ceilinged storefront space formerly occupied by Panache, this sparkling new eatery has high-voltage visual impact.
Its white walls hold etchings, paintings and bright neon sculptures counterpointed by red chairs and park benches and track lighting in a black ceiling.


Sea Urchins
LEAD: To the Editor: I was surprised by the first-aid piece by Betsy Wade (Practical Traveler, Dec. 20) in which she recommended using tweezers or a needle to remove sea urchin spines from your skin.


Talking Heads and The Public-TV Pickle
LEAD: Public television should ''restate and clarify the social dilemma and the political pickle.''


Headliners; Conciliatorily, Kirk
LEAD: A rather large bone of contention has been formally settled in the dog-eat-dog world of high culture.
Over the objections of some people who will now be his subordinates, Kirk Varnedoe, a professor at New York University's Institute of Fine Art, was named last week to succeed William S. Rubin as director of painting and sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art.


ANNE MARIE ZISSU TO WED
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Benedict Zissu of Paris of the engagement of their daughter Anne Marie Zissu to Charles Austin Stone, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Stone of Port Washington, L.I.
A May wedding is planned by Miss Zissu, a professor of finance at Temple University, and Mr.


NURSES' LICENSING PLAN CLEARS ITS FIRST HURDLE
LEAD: A BILL to ease the nursing shortage cleared its first legislative hurdle last week, winning unanimous approval from the Public Health Committee in the General Assembly.
The bill would make it easier for out-of-state nurses to practice here.


Equalizers Let the Fingers Serve the Demanding Ear
LEAD: Audiophiles wishing to exercise their egos and perform other salutary tasks can do so by adding an equalizer to their sound systems.
These increasingly popular devices enable you to countermand von Karajan - or any other recorded conductor - in matters of tonal balance.
How's that for self-assertiveness?


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a Business Forum article by E. Norman Veasey on Feb. 7, about Delaware's new takeover law, omitted a phrase.
The second sentence of the first paragraph should have read: ''This statute requires certain hostile bidders to obtain the approval of the disinterested stockholders - other than the bidder or management - in order for the takeover bidder's shares to have voting power.


Brighter Mood for Zimbabwe Region
LEAD: A newfound optimism is flowering amid the rugged tangle of shrub and desert in southwestern Zimbabwe.


In the Region: Long Island
LEAD: Recent Sales


Spread of AIDS Abating, But Deaths Will Still Soar
LEAD: ''The way mankind responds to crisis is first disbelief, then denial, then the third stage is mobilization, and we're at the horizon of that now. ''  Dr.
Stephen C. Joseph  New York City Health Commissioner


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  What's Next for G.M.?


When a Public Hearing Is a Travesty
LEAD: TOO often, Trenton ''talks'' and the public does not hear.


KNICKS' GARDEN STREAK GROWS TO SEVEN
LEAD: The Knicks played Bill Cartwright both alone and teamed with Patrick Ewing last night, but it mattered little.
The 7-foot-1-inch Cartwright was the key as the Knicks trounced the Cleveland Cavaliers, 120-103, and extended their Madison Square Garden winning streak to seven games.


The Deficit: What, Me Worry?
LEAD: If President Reagan is worried about the Federal deficit, he conceals it well.
He is the man, after all, who has more than doubled the national debt in a mere seven years.
Yet his imminent Budget Message, leaked last week, takes credit for the trivial deficit-reduction package worked out with Congress after the October crash.


EILEEN CARROLL IS ENGAGED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Denis Edward Carroll of Bayside, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter Eileen Alanna Carroll to Donald Scardino, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Lawrence Scardino, also of Bayside.
Ms.
Carroll, a mechanical engineer with General Motors Corporation in Tarrytown, N.Y., graduated from the Columbia University School of Engineering.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption in The Times Magazine last Sunday about Jeffrey Katzenberg, chairman of Walt Disney Studios, misidentified the costumed character shown with him and his son.
It was Minnie Mouse, not Mickey.


H. GLENN MEIBURG AND MISS GIUSTI WED IN STAMFORD
LEAD: Patricia Ann Giusti and H. Glenn Meiburg were married yesterday at St.
Leo's Roman Catholic Church in Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Benedict Tighe performed the ceremony.


'Moonstruck' Hits Us in the Heart; 'Broadcast News' Aims for the Head - And Misses
LEAD: Somebody once de-fined literature as anything that was worth reading twice.
On the same principle, you might say that any movie worth seeing twice qualifies as a classic - in which case, I am duty-bound to claim classic status for ''Moonstruck.'' Seeing it just after it had opened, and knowing nothing about it, I was enchanted.


JAILED IN TURKEY
LEAD:  NEVER PASS THIS WAY AGAIN  By Gene LePere. 296 pp.
Bethesda, Md.: Adler &amp; Adler. $17.95.


FROM THE FOLKS WHO GAVE YOU LIQUID PAPER
LEAD:  MOTHERS OF INVENTION  From the Bra to the Bomb: Forgotten Women &amp; Their Unforgettable Ideas.
By Ethlie Ann Vare and Greg Ptacek.
Illustrated. 256 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $17.95.


THE WORLD: The Panama Canal; The Strategic Importance of A Waterway
LEAD: IN a blistering manifesto, Panama's military last week demanded that the United States Southern Command be expelled from its headquarters here.


A Task Force Plays Beat the Clock
LEAD: THE first time Robert R. Glauber saw room 1116 at the Federal Reserve building in New York, it depressed him.
That day in early November the big room where he would spend the next two months had one chair in it, one desk and one telephone.


INCREASE IN MOTH EGGS SEEN IN FAIRFIELD COUNTY
LEAD: JUST as a gypsy moth infestation that has plagued Connecticut since the late 1970's is moving out of the eastern part of the state, a new swarm seems to be moving into Fairfield County.


A Market Where Abundance Can Thrive
LEAD: To the Editor:


Commercial Property: Small Office Buildings; Developers Seek Alternative Uses in a Soft Market
LEAD: Shifting market conditions can move buildings in mysterious ways.
Take the case of 110 East 55th Street, where the developer of a 19-story office project that has been sitting vacant since it opened half a year ago is pondering plans to convert it into a hotel.


West Germany Upsets Czechoslovakia in Opener
LEAD: Peter Schiller of West Germany waving after firing a shot past the Czechoslovak goalie, Jaromir Sindel, for a goal in the third period.
West Germany won, 2-1.
Page 4. (Agence France-Presse)


P.L.O. 'Exodus' Sailing Is Postponed Yet Again
LEAD: Efforts by the Palestine Liberation Organization to secure a vessel for a symbolic voyage to Israel remained inconclusive today as one more target date for the ship's departure from the Greek port of Piraeus came and went.


2 Physicists Dismissed In Reactor Complaint
LEAD: Two health physicists who complained about the safety of a nuclear reactor at the Georgia Institute of Technology have been dismissed by school officials, who said the moves were part of a program to improve safety and productivity.


Ex-Basketball Star Waits for New Start
LEAD: DAY after day, Bill Willoughby waits for the telephone to ring and the voice on the other end to offer him a new chance to play professional basketball.


MS. FILMER TO BE BRIDE OF ROGER L. ANDERSON
LEAD: The engagement of Vivianne Susan Filmer to Roger Leigh Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas W. Anderson of Rochester, has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Filmer of Cary, N.C., and Bay Head, N.J.
The couple plan to marry in May.


'DON'T TAKE ANYTHING AT FACE VALUE'
LEAD: TIMOTHY WEST receives about 12,000 complaints a year as head of the Complaint Center at the Department of Consumer Protection.


Men's Style; THE PROPRIETIES
LEAD: TRADITIONAL WEDDINGS are glamorous spectacles, occasions to trot out the sort of finery one spies only at high official functions or in Andrew Lloyd Weber stage extravaganzas.
Starched collars, stick pins and ascots - the accoutrements alone suggest a period piece, to say nothing of the clothing, a panoply ranging from morning suits to tailcoats.


'AT-RISK STUDENTS' IN PROGRAM TO HELP KEEP THEM IN SCHOOL
LEAD: THEY are talking about going to college now, and some are even planning their careers.


MY DINNER WITH AUERSBERGER
LEAD:  WOODCUTTERS  By Thomas Bernhard.
Translated by David McLintock. 181 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.


The Prince and His Czar - Letters From Exile
LEAD: The countries of the world should be divided into two classes, countries of immigrants and countries of emigres.
Everybody knows that America - her might, her prosperity, her culture - has been created mainly, if not exclusively, by huddled masses yearning to breathe free.
The culture of Russia, on the other hand, has been created, almost to the same extent, by her emigres, the wretched refuse of that ancient, pompous empire.


How to Lose Influence
LEAD: An important figure in the community of American support for Israel commented privately the other day about the need for Palestinians to play an effective part if negotiations are to get anywhere in the Middle East.
It is essential, he said, that ''an empowered Palestinian leadership step forward.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. Recently I moved into a house that has a sunroom with a slate floor.
I suspect that the previous owners had kept pets in this room because there is a strong odor of urine, especially when the windows are closed.
I scrubbed the floor with a strong household detergent and the odor is not as strong, but it is still there.


LAT IN THE NIGHT, A BATTLE OF WITS
LEAD: MANY of us can recall, probably before the enthusiasm of youth gave way to the settled habits of middle age, playing rubber bridge or Chicago for most of the night and perhaps for longer periods.
Some 40 years ago this writer played non-stop for 34 hours, in a tournament, a hotel bedroom, a train and a club, before succumbing to sleep.


LOCAL PROTECTION OF GROUND WATER
LEAD: For almost two years, the Housatonic Valley Association has been engaged in a Groundwater Action Project in four towns in northwestern Connecticut, so we were pleased to see attention drawn to this issue in the excellent article by Paul Guernsey (''Contaminants Seeping Into Ground Water Supplies,'' Jan.


HUMAN FIGURES ENSHRINED BY THE EARLY GREEKS
LEAD: Like other Greek sculptures of standing women, or korai, this figure is frontal, her left leg slightly in front of the right.
Her face is fleshy, ripe, her expression both attentive and aloof.
Unlike Greek sculptures of standing males, she is clothed, but she seems both more naked and more secret than male figures nearby.


Sports of The Times; 'No Jokers on This Team'
LEAD: FLYING Huey helicopters for the Jamaica Defense Forces might best be described as ''hours of tedium, moments of sheer terror,'' Dudley Stokes says, but steering a bobsled down a hillside lives up to his innermost need to ''let go.''


Opera: A New 'Siegfried' at the Met
LEAD: BY now we know with some certainty what to expect of the Metropolitan Opera's new ''Ring,'' the third installment of which was delivered Friday night with the premiere of ''Siegfried.'' As in the previous productions of this evolving cycle, the emphasis remained firmly on traditional Wagnerian staging.


Annual AIDS Test
LEAD: Boxers are not one of the groups known to be at heightened risk of contracting AIDS.
Nevertheless, over the last year, British boxing authorities have screened foreign boxers for acquired immune deficiency syndrome, New Jersey authorities have mandated plastic gloves for all cornermen, and the medical advisory board to the New York State Athletic Commission has recommended that all boxers and ring personnel undergo tests for the virus.


Amid Murky Struggle, Italian Premier Is Told to Try Again
LEAD: President Francesco Cossiga tonight ordered Giovanni Goria, who resigned as Prime Minister on Wednesday, to again seek the confidence of a Parliament that has repeatedly defeated him.
The President cited the need for Parliament to pass ''indispensable'' budget legislation.


Committee Leaders In Congress to Give Priority to Trade Bill
LEAD: Congress resumes work on a complex trade bill next week, giving it high priority but confronting events pulling members in opposite directions.


BIG MAN IN THE KITCHEN
LEAD: I was reading Linda Wells's article about Charles Palmer, ''Big Man in the Kitchen'' (Dec. 13).
Mr.
Palmer was making me feel right good about cooking in general and New York cooking in particular, until I ran up on his disparaging remark about one of the genuine delicacies of this world: catfish.


A JUNE WEDDING FOR MISS GLADNEY
LEAD: Mrs.
Graves Gladney of St.
Louis and New York has announced the engagement of her daughter, Hope Gladney, to Theodore Carrington Jessup, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Peterson Jessup of Chevy Chase, Md.
A June wedding is planned.


Queens Museum Inquiry Ends
LEAD: An investigation into the use of city money by a museum in Queens has ended without criminal charges, according to a spokeswoman for the Manhattan District Attorney's office, which conducted the inquiry.


Notebook; EAST GERMAN WOMEN LOOK STRONG IN LUGE
LEAD: It was business as usual for East Germany's female lugers today in two training runs for the XV Olympic Winter Games.


PAMELA MARCUS TO WED IN MAY
LEAD: The engagement of Pamela Stacey Marcus to Jeffrey Allan Erksine, a son of Phyllis E. Small of New York and the late Victor Erskine, has been announced by the bride-to-be's parents, Dianne Wallace of New York and Alan J. Marcus of New York and Atlantic Beach, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: Who was better, Mantle or Mays?
The answer is ungrammatically obvious.
Both of them.
KEN MACKENZIE  Guilford, Conn.


PROTECTED AREAS INCREASE ON CAPE
LEAD: More than 80,300 acres on Cape Cod, nearly a third of its estimated land mass, is now protected from developers' bulldozers.


Correction
LEAD: The Practical Traveler column on page 3 in some copies of the Travel section today misstates airline policy on frequent flier programs.
Points cannot be shared among family members belonging to an airline's program, although the coupons awarded at fixed point levels can be.


Duel Looms in Downhill
LEAD: As he smiled and posed with Michael Mair of Italy, who was celebrating his 26th birthday today, Pirmin Zurbriggen stole a glance of the result board at the bottom of the men's downhill run, his smile slowly fading as he appeared a bit preoccupied.


CHALLENGES FACED BY THE CATHOLIC CHURCH
LEAD: The article on the declining number of Catholic priests  [ ''As Catholic Rolls Rise, Priests Diversify,'' Jan. 17 ]  presents graphically a challenge that the church on Long Island and throughout the world should be addressing realistically.


TRACES OF HISTORY': ART OF AFRO-AMERICA AT ROBESON GALLERY
LEAD: BLACK History Month has rolled around again and, with it, exhibitions by black artists.


THE ART OF MAILBOX STUFFING
LEAD: FLOODED.
The word brings to mind torrential downpours building to such awesome proportions that entire roads, submerged underwater, are temporarily lost from sight.
That's a word picture that for many people comes to mind with the mention of the word.


DOLE, ACTING ON VICTORY IN IOWA, RECASTS NEW HAMPSHIRE STRATEGY
LEAD: After a speech in a packed auditorium at Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter the other night, Senator Bob Dole turned to questions from the audience.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  High-Flown Sex
Much has been said about the unpersuasiveness of Hemingway's sex scenes, and George Plimpton found Papa rather defensive when he asked about them.
He is quoted in ''The True Gen: An Intimate Portrait of Ernest Hemingway by Those Who Knew Him'' (Grove) by Denis Brian.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: The Fight for Federal Funds; California Is Losing Its High-Tech Edge
LEAD: WHEN it comes to science and technology, California has long been blessed - from the founding of Berkeley, Caltech and Stanford in the late 1800's, to the aerospace boom during and after World War II, to the rise of Silicon Valley.


South Africa Reports Attack By Zimbabwe-Based Rebels
LEAD: Guerrillas attacked a white farmer's house with rockets and firearms early today, then fled across the border into Zimbabwe, the Government said.


Focus: Chicago; The Loop's Expanding
LEAD: A $170 million office development planned for 1.25 acres over some railroad tracks near the Chicago River is expected to continue the outward push of office growth from Chicago's commercial core, the Loop.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; From a Sturdy Mill, Stately Apartments
LEAD: WHEN the Bigelow-Sanford Carpet Mill moved to the South in 1971, it left more than a dozen enormous brick buildings standing vacant in Enfield, a Connecticut city of 45,000 residents on the Massachusetts border whose economy Bigelow had dominated since 1914.


A Palestinian Revolution Without the P.L.O.
LEAD: TWO weekends ago, Hani Al Hassan, a senior official of the Palestine Liberation Organization, held a dinner party at his home in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Most of the guests were successful Palestinians working in the gulf region, and it became almost immediately obvious, in the heated, emotional exchange that ensued with the P.L.O.


Poetry and Word Processing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Joyner-Kersee Sets Mark
LEAD: Jackie Joyner-Kersee jumped farther than ever tonight at the annual Vitalis/U.S.
Olympic Invitational track and field meet, far enough to claim an American record in the long jump, 23 feet 1/2 inch.


ABIGAIL JOHNSON TO WED C. J. MCKOWN
LEAD: The engagement of Abigail P. Johnson to Christopher J. McKown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. McKown of Sandy Creek, N.Y., has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund C. Johnson 3d of Boston, parents of the bride-to-be.
A June wedding is planned.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.40
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.42
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.78
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.99
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
14.50
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


'Ives, Songs': A Rollicking, Exquisite Odyssey
LEAD: Both free association and a play with memory remain hallmarks of the 20th-century modernist sensibility.
Literature showed the way with Marcel Proust and James Joyce, among others.
But dance was not far behind in bringing nonlinear narrative to public awareness.
The works of Antony Tudor and Martha Graham as well as George Balanchine's unexpected stream-of-conciousness approach to his ''Don


In Search of Minority-Group Voters
LEAD: In a 10th-floor apartment of the Albany Houses, a housing project in Brooklyn, two dogs howled and scratched, itching to get at whoever was knocking at the door.


MISS MCKENZIE ENGAGED
LEAD: Catherine Bates Mckenzie and Donald Campbell Bowman Jr., 1987 graduates of the University of Georgia School of Law, plan to marry in May.
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Mckenzie of Wyckoff, N.J., have announced their daughter's engagement to a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bowman of Columbus, Ga.
The future bride's father is president of the Japan/Canada, Australasia/Pacific Group of Sterling Drug in New York.


KEY SENATORS BACK IMMIGRATION SHIFT
LEAD: The Senate's two leading experts on immigration policy have agreed on a new bill that would make major changes in the system for deciding who can legally immigrate to the United States.


Lawmakers Fill War Chests
LEAD: NEW JERSEY lawmakers have stockpiled more than $3.3 million in political contributions from corporations, unions, special-interest groups and individuals in anticipation of the 1988 elections, with more than half of it for Senator Frank R. Lautenberg's campaign.


Neighbors of Afghanistan Seek Orderly Departure By Russians
LEAD: AS leaders of the Soviet Union must know by now, foreign occupiers have sought many times to extricate themselves gracefully from Afghanistan.


Big East Conference; Hoyas Overcome Orangemen, 71-69
LEAD: Mark Tillmon scored 19 points and Charles Smith added 17 today as Georgetown rallied twice for a 71-69 Big East Conference victory over Syracuse.


Tourist Center to Open
LEAD: A free performance by music ensembles from Staten Island will mark the official opening Thursday of a visitors' and information center at the Staten Island Ferry terminal in lower Manhattan.
The center, sponsored by the Staten Island Council on the Arts, has been offering information about cultural events on Staten Island for about a month.


OH MY CRACKING PISTONS!
LEAD: I GAVE THE WOMAN A CHECK FOR $500, drove off in her '74 Datsun and left behind a whole life style.
That was two years ago.
Up to then, the only cars I had ever owned were Porsches.
But as I wound the steep slopes of western Connecticut on my way home, my mind wasn't heavy with comparisons of hill power, or rack and pinions or swaybars.


Fire Destroys Brooklyn Warehouse
LEAD: Hoses snaking from a fire truck yesterday morning at the scene of a five-alarm blaze at First Avenue and 53d Street on the Brooklyn waterfront.
Some 200 firefighters worked over four hours to bring the blaze under control.
Four businesses were in the building, but there was apparently no one inside at the time of the fire.


Resort Competition Rises as Skiing Popularity Levels Off
LEAD: IN 1936, when the Union Pacific Railroad began developing the mountain valleys around Ketchum, Idaho, into America's first alpine ski resort, engineers were given a daunting challenge: how to transport skiers to the top of the mountain, so they could then savor the thrill of rushing back down.


Joseph Barnea; U.N. Official, 77
LEAD: Dr.
Joseph Barnea, a natural resources expert for the United Nations and former chief economist for the Israeli Foreign Ministry, died Monday at his home in Queens.
He was 77 years old.


Consultants Pull Strings Of Electoral Marionettes
LEAD: THE name of Louis Del Santo, a candidate for the Poughkeepsie Town Board, was signed to letters sent to residents of his ward during the 1985 election campaign, but the first he knew about what the letters said was when he looked in his mailbox like any other voter.
And though his campaign literature advocated a master plan for the town, he testified before the New York State Commission on Integrity in Albany last month, ''I didn't know what a master plan was.


LAURIE ANN BARTLETT, A LAWYER, WEDS DR. MARK KEATING
LEAD: At Grace Episcopal Cathedral in San Francisco, Laurie Ann Bartlett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund G. Bartlett of Piedmont, Calif., was married yesterday to Dr.
Mark Taylor Keating, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Keating of Wellesley Hills, Mass.
The Rev.
Canon Marc DuPlan Lee performed the ceremony.


STAMFORD PUPILS KNIT WITH 'PEACE FLEECE'
LEAD: TORRENCE SEWARD, a seventh grader at Cloonan Middle School in Stamford, says he sees knitting as ''uniting two things, like you can unite two countries.''


PROBLEM WITH OLD HOUSES IS THEY'RE OLD
LEAD: WHEN my new husband and I moved to Putnam County into our first house, a 200-year-old Colonial, it wasn't two weeks before the predictions started coming true. ''You'll see,'' family and friends had told us, smiling kindly but, I thought, a little grimly.
They were all homeowners, these Cassandras.


Political Notes; The '92 Race Begins Early For D'Amato
LEAD: Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's 1992 re-election campaign is already under way - or, at least, fund raising for it is.
The New York Republican has set up two finance committees, D'Amato in '92 and Friends of Senator D'Amato '92, that have so far raised $771,000, according to Arthur W. Jaspan, the Garden City, L.I., lawyer who is the D'Amato campaign treasurer.


TURBULENT TIMES AHEAD FOR GRUMMAN
LEAD: THE Grumman Corporation, the producer of more than 33,000 fighter planes, bombers and cargo jets, may soon be out of the airframe business.
At least that's the word from Washington to Wall Street.
Many Government and financial analysts predict, as one Washington company wrote in its 1988 forecasts, that ''Grumman will drop out of the airframe building business.


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: The sight of Mantle limping to home plate, of Mantle dripping blood down the right leg or fruitlessly chasing Roger Maris elevated a generation as he carried a team.
The human frailty of his fatal flaws made Mantle a mythical hero and made baseball accessible to 10-year-old boys who would marvel at the Joe Hardy in pinstripes and wait for next year when the Mick would play a full season without being injured.


SHOWER DOORS FOR AN ELEGANT TOUCH
LEAD: IF your bathtub is installed in a recess, that is, if the tub is surrounded by walls on three sides, creating a built-in appearance, one of the easiest ways to add a touch of elegance is to install bathtub shower doors in place of a shower curtain.


Splendor and Shock
LEAD:  KING LEAR  Starring Paul Scofield (in photo), Irene Worth, Jack MacGowran, Alan Webb, Cyril Cusack, Patrick Magee, Susan Engel, Annelise Gabold, Tom Fleming.
Directed by Peter Brook. 1971.
Warner Home Video. 137 minutes. $19.98.
Rated PG.


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: Duke Snider.In some hard-to-define way, he represented all that was the unique baseball team - the Dodgers of the late 40's and 50's.
MATTHEW BAUM  Baltimore


Panamanians Use Technology to Balk Censor
LEAD: With the help of modern-day technology, a small band of exiles is piercing the censorship in Panama.


City Auctions
LEAD: To the Editor:


LEVERAGED BUYOUTS: ON THE LEVEL?
LEAD: I have recently analyzed a sample of 76 management buyouts of public companies, each worth at least $50 million.
Post-buyout financial data were available for 42 of these companies.
Several surprising results emerged.


The Classic Victorians Of San Francisco
LEAD: FOR an intimate introduction to the San Francisco Bay Area's Painted Ladies, its Victorian houses, visitors can tour three of them widely varying in style and just a few blocks apart.
A short trip across the bay to two of Oakland's architectural grand dames will complete a good survey of local Victoriana from 1860 to 1900.


FRESHMAN DIES AFTER A FRATERNITY PARTY AT RUTGERS
LEAD: A Rutgers University freshman died early Friday morning after a fraternity party, and the chief investigator in the case said the party ''involved a serious amount of drinking.''


On Language; Falling in Love With Luv
LEAD: ON VALENTINE'S day, philologists wonder: What's happening to love?


Move Over, Ozzie and Harriet
LEAD: The only family that can disappoint you more than your own is a network executive's vision of a family.
Television betrayed us when it gave us the perfect 1950's families in which every daughter was a princess and every son an honest and brave all-American boy.
Our parents could never measure up to the kindness and patience we saw dispensed on television, and yet it seemed they should.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on Jan. 17 about Rio de Janeiro misstated the correct pronunciation for chope, the Portuguese word for beer.
It is pronounced SHOW-pee.


At the Met, New Gloss for an Emperor's Retreat
LEAD: Roman fantasies, en-riched by architecture and mythology, dominate the 17 painted panels from the bedroom walls of an ancient country villa that have been restored and reinstalled at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Off view for almost 40 years, these shimmering frescoes show aristocratic swans -wings spread, necks crooked and holding swagged ropes in their beaks - the sea nymph


Words Can Be Their Own Music
LEAD: Some years ago, i was fascinated to learn that an ambitious British composer had chosen as a theme thoughts from Ludwig Wittgenstein's ''Tractatus Logico-philosophicus,'' one of the most brilliantly arcane works in the history of linguistics.
For all I know, many musicians who were also professional philosophers took it into their repertories, but I never heard of it again.


Bedford-Stuyvesant: The First Condos
LEAD: A three-story brick building at 876 Jefferson Avenue, completed last month, offers the first six condominiums in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, beating out two other nearby projects for that distinction by a few months.
But when Del Dellal, a partner in MFD Holding Ltd., purchased the vacant building at a city auction in 1986, he was rejected by several banks for financing and had to finance the $280,000 project himself.


IF WE'RE SO RICH, WHY AREN'T WE SMART?
LEAD:  MONEY AND CLASS IN AMERICA  Notes and Observations on Our Civil Religion.
By Lewis H. Lapham. 244 pp.
New York: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $18.95.


Sewage Flows Into a Massachusetts Harbor
LEAD: Raw sewage was being pumped into Beverly Harbor at the rate of about 500,000 gallons an hour today because of a break in an underwater pipeline, officials said.


AID AND COMFORT
LEAD: IT MAY SEEM CONTRADIC-tory that the extravagant formal wedding is regaining popularity in an age when both brides and their mothers have so little time to actually execute their plans.
It all makes sense, though, given the increasing popularity of bridal consultants.


In Britain, Renewed Labor Unrest
LEAD: THE sprawling car plant stands abandoned, and outside the factory gate picketing workers cluster around an oil-drum fire, smoking and talking, as the police keep watch from a nearby van.


Piano: Perahia and Lupu Play Duets
LEAD: THE smallest and the largest piece on Friday's program of piano duos at Avery Fisher Hall was the Schubert F-minor Fantasy.
It is the work a serious Schubertian longs to hear at such a concert, but almost dreads seeing there.


A Literacy Corps For Americans?
LEAD: IT HAS been estimated that 23 million people in the United States are illiterate and that 35 million others can barely read.


When Will the O-T-C Wake Up?
LEAD: DULLNESS attracts Binkley Shorts.
He figures that by buying good-quality dull stocks - those small, obscure ones that nobody pays much attention to - you can make thrilling amounts of money. ''The duller a company appears on the surface,'' he said, ''the more invisible it becomes and thus the greater the opportunity.


97 Percent Pure Heroin For New York Is Seized
LEAD: More than $2 billion worth of top-grade heroin bound for New York has been intercepted in what was believed to be the largest single seizure of the drug, the authorities said today.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  ON HOME GROUND  By Alan Lelchuk.
Illustrated by Merle Nacht. 72 pp.
San Diego: Gulliver Books/ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $9.95. (Ages 10 and up) &lt;


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: As a Brooklyn Dodger fan living in the Bronx I did my best for the Duke against the Say Hey Kid and the Mick.
But now, looking back, I'd have to rate my man third behind Willie (number one) and Mickey (a close second).
NORMAN KRASNE  Mount Vernon, N.Y.


AMERICA THE EXTREME
LEAD:  ABORTION AND DIVORCE IN WESTERN LAW  By Mary Ann Glendon. 197 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.
Harvard University Press. $25.


FLOWER SENTIMENTS
LEAD: Bring in another pot of tulips, daffodils, crocus or hyacinths from the coldframe or pit and force them into bloom indoors; keep the soil moist, but the pots cool until leaves form, then provide full sun when flower buds appear.
Don't delay mailing orders to nurseries for new trees and shrubs, plants, seeds and supplies.


Trying On Some New Attitudes
LEAD: EVEN before Oct. 19, the barrage of pink slips had begun on Wall Street, and the new year is expected to bring widespread dismissals on the Street and beyond.


Jobless Rate Is Top Woe for Spain's Socialists
LEAD: On the fashionable north side of town, Spain's Socialists held their 31st Congress last month, planning how to maintain their overwhelming majority in Parliament, discussing sophisticated economic policies and paying homage to their charismatic leader, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez.


TAKEN BY SURPRISE BY GRIEF'S POTENCY
LEAD: ON a Sunday in June 1986, my two teen-age daughters and I celebrated my parents' 47th wedding anniversary with them.
The next day, I drove from my home in Connecticut to theirs in New York to pick up my mother and drive her to a hospital for elective surgery, a hip replacement.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: 9 Flew Over the Osprey's Nest LOOKING like the American soldiers raising the flag at Iwo Jima, the nine East Hampton nature lovers struggled to raise a 20-foot-long telephone pole with an odd-shaped frame attached to the top.


MISS HUSTING WEDS ON L.I.
LEAD: The marriage of Alison Mead Husting, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene E. Husting of Locust Valley, L.I., and Cedric Christopher Janien, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cedric J. Janien of Chatham, Mass., and Boca Raton, Fla., took place yesterday at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley.


Music
LEAD: New Yorkers are never long deprived of the chance to hear top-notch pianists perform, with at least two or three usually scheduled somewhere in town each week.
The next several days, however, provide an especially fine opportunity to hear a range of established and up-and-coming young players, both as soloists with orchestra and in recital.


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: It is the durability factor that would persuade me to pick Mays over Mantle.
HENRY L. NAIZTAT  Merrick.
L.I.


ORTON'S 'LOOT' STAGED BY BOSTON POST ROAD
LEAD: FAY, a murderous nurse, urges a widower, McLeavy, whose wife has been dead three days, to remarry at once, granting that a fortnight, perhaps, is ''a decent interval of mourning.'' Having done in his wife - and, it seems, seven of her own husbands as well - Fay offers herself as the next Mrs.
McLeavy, only she has her eye on Dennis, who also happens to be the undertaker, a bank robber and the bisexual lover of McLeavy's son


Talking: Mortgages; New Rules On Tax Deductions
LEAD: Those who intend to buy a vacation home that would raise the total mortgage debt on a first and second home to more than $1 million, or are buying a primary residence needing more than $1 million in financing, will be limited by the Federal Government on the total loan amount eligible for tax deductions.


Winter Shopping Season Ends as 'Spring' Arrives
LEAD: ARMED with a bag full of money - sorry, no discount coupons accepted - Peter O'Malley and friends took off on a shopping spree this winter.


Borrowing Capitalism, but Not Freedom, From the West
LEAD: ON the face of it, there is little common political ground between Singapore, with its resoundingly successful free-market economy, and Communist Vietnam, which seems only to grow more desperately poor.
But new currents are flowing in Southeast Asia, and they cross in unexpected places.


Correction
LEAD: A correction in this section on Jan. 10 misidentified the translator of Octavio Paz's Dec. 20 review of ''Mexican Churches.'' He is Roberto Tejada.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending Jan. 30  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $320,000  61 West 9th Street  (Windsor Arms)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, fireplace, 2 exposures; maintenance $958, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)


THE WEDDING
LEAD: THE MORE THINGS CHANGE, the more they stay the same.
Almost.
The formal, traditional wedding is back, in many cases with unprecedented lavishness.
Even second weddings are more festive today.
But rather than following a standard script, more brides and grooms are putting their personal stamp on the wedding ceremony and reception.


Next Week; What's the Best Winter Olympic Sport?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


REACTOR REPORT STIRS UP SEABROOK
LEAD: Few residents were impressed in January when the largest owner of this town's dormant power plant filed for bankruptcy protection.
What caused a stir instead was the release of a 300-page report saying that the plant might be unsafe because of drug and alcohol abuse among workers and that the plant's management tried to hide the problem.


Cadets' Bus in Collision
LEAD: Nine people were injured Friday when a bus carrying 26 West Point cadets crashed into a jackknifed tractor-trailer on icy Interstate 81 near Avoca, the authorities reported.
The truck was blocking the southbound lanes of the highway when the bus struck it, the authorities said.


Cuomo Proposes a Rights Unit in Abrams's Office
LEAD: Governor Cuomo made a surprise appearance today at a meeting of black and Hispanic elected officials and civil-rights leaders, and, in an apparent effort at compromise, proposed the creation of a special civil-rights unit in the State Attorney General's office.


FOR SOME, A POT OF GOLDFISH WAITS AT RAINBOW'S END
LEAD: ''PLEASE, Robert, if you will just try the jacket on I will buy you any candy bar of your choice from Woolworth's, anything at all.
Within reason.''


NANCY FREEMAN TO WED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Freeman of Brielle, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nancy Jean Freeman, to Joel B. Moshin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Moshin of Brooklyn.
Miss Freeman, who graduated from New York University, is a legal secretary at the New York law firm of Spengler Carlson Gubar Brodsky &amp; Frischling.


The End of a Campaign
LEAD: Workers removing posters from Alexander M. Haig Jr.'s campaign office in Manchester, N.H.
Mr.
Haig has quit the Republican Presidential race. (NYT/Jim Wilson)


MISS PARKMAN WEDS REV. ALAN FRENCH
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York, Mary Robinson Parkman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Parkman of New York and Seal Cove, Me., was married yesterday to the Rev.
Alan Cochrane French, the rector of St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Murray Hill, N.J.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.


SCIENTIST FAULTS TOBACCO COMPANY
LEAD: A former research scientist for Liggett &amp; Myers testified in Federal District Court this week that the cigarette manufacturer told him in the mid-1950's and early 60's not to publish the results of experiments that corroborated findings linking cigarette smoke and cancer.


France's Stylish Earthenware
LEAD: THE antiques shop window, just off the Grande Place in the French city of Nancy, was filled with ceramics from many regions of France, but one particular platter captured the eye.
The proprietor explained that the harmonious colors and graceful flowers were the signed work of Joseph Hannong, a member of the family responsible for some of the most beautiful ceramics ever produced in


Film: Whoopi Goldberg in 'Telephone'
LEAD: THE idea for ''The Telephone'' might have seemed great at around 3 in the morning, after a long night out.


The XV Olympic Winter Games Open in Calgary
LEAD: Dancers performing in McMahon Stadium at the University of Calgary yesterday during the opening ceremony of the Games.
Competition in eight sports will take place over 16 days.
Section 5. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''Those people looking for a consumer-led recession may have to re-evaluate.
The consumer is not spent out.''


KEITH VAN HORNE TO MARRY ELEANOR J. MONDALE IN APRIL
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Walter F. Mondale of Minneapolis have announced the engagement of their daughter, Eleanor Jane Mondale, to Keith Van Horne, a son of Jean Van Horne of Clarendon Hills, Ill., and the late John Van Horne.
The couple plan to marry in April.


BOSTON POST ROAD STAGES ORTON'S 'LOOT'
LEAD: FAY, a murderous nurse, urges a widower, McLeavy, whose wife has been dead three days, to remarry at once, granting that a fortnight, perhaps, is ''a decent interval of mourning.''


Biden Is Alert After Surgery For Fault in Artery to Brain
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware was alert and talking with members of his family today after surgeons corrected a fault in an artery supplying blood to his brain.


KATHY L. BORGOGNONI WED TO JOHN M. AYRES
LEAD: The wedding of Kathy Louise Borgognoni to John Morgan Ayres took place yesterday in Syracuse.
Msgr.
Charles Borgognoni, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at the St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Center at Syracuse University.


Loved Ones Inspire Gifts To Neediest
LEAD: ''In loving memory of those dearest to me who left with me their love and hope for the future,'' Steffi Stern of Elmhurst, Queens, wrote.
The note accompanied a $25 contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, earmarked for the Children's Aid Society.


Magazine Now Calls Waldheim Paper a Fake
LEAD: The West German news magazine Der Spiegel said today that it ''regretted'' publishing a document that purportedly linked President Kurt Waldheim of Austria to war crimes.
The document was declared a forgery by the Yugoslav authorities last week.


CENTRAL AMERICAN PEACE
LEAD: The right questions were asked of the wrong men in the articles on Central American Peace (''Arias, Whom Can He Trust?'' by James LeMoyne, and ''Ortega: Can He Be Trusted?'' by Stephen Kinzer, Jan. 10).


SPEAKING MUTI'S LANGUAGE
LEAD: Minutes before a Philadelphia Orchestra rehearsal not long ago, Riccardo Muti, the music director, was lying down, his feet dangling over the arm of a dressing room couch at Carnegie Hall.
He looked happy and relaxed.
He cajoled an assistant about packing luggage for a trip, and chatted, one after the other, with the orchestra's general manager, Joseph Kluger, and its concertmaster, Norman Carol, about the ensemble's recent labor disputes.


Ballet: Winners Name In Boston Competition
LEAD: ''This is the place to be,'' one member of the audience murmured to another on Thursday at the Wang Center, where the Boston Ballet presented its Boston International Choreography Competition.
Indeed, it seemed that much of Boston had turned out for the culminating event of the project, initiated 10 years ago by E.


Froese Is Ready With No Complaints
LEAD: Two months ago, they took away Bob Froese's goal, thereby erasing his barely dry name from the record books.
Shortly afterward, he had his regular spot in the Rangers' goaltending rotation revoked and since then his name has rarely been penciled into the lineup.


Holiday Tomorrow
LEAD:  Washington's Birthday will be observed tomorrow.
Following are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.
Sanitation: No collection or street sweeping.
Government offices: Federal, state and city offices closed.
Post offices: Closed, except for special delivery and Express Mail delivery.


An Iraqi-Fired Cruise Missile Passes Close to U.S. Warship
LEAD: A cruise missile launched by an Iraqi aircraft passed close to an American warship in the Persian Gulf on Saturday night before veering away to explode on the horizon, according to the Defense Department and press reports from the scene.


Parsippany Hotel Suites: On a Circle
LEAD: A guest of an Embassy Suites hotel under construction in Parsippany, N.J., will see more than trees and waterfalls when he leaves his room.
Across the landscaped atrium, doors to all 273 other two-room suites will be visible beyond the circular walkways.
The low-slung, 260,000 square foot building will rise only five stories but stretch the equivalent of three city blocks.


Focus: Chicago; The Loop's Expanding Westward
LEAD: A $170 MILLION office development planned for 1.25 acres over some railroad tracks near the Chicago River is expected to continue the outward push of office growth from Chicago's commercial core, the Loop.


MUSSEL FARMING ON RISE IN MAINE
LEAD: For as long as apparently anyone along the Maine coast can remember, mussels have not been popular among many shellfish eaters.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  In the Mood  Starring Patrick Dempsey, Beverly D'Angelo, Talia Balsam, Michael Constantine.
Directed by Phil Alden Robinson. 1987.
Lorimar Home Video. 98 minutes. $79.95.
Rated PG-13.


MISS SMITH IS ENGAGED TO ADAM BLACKWOOD
LEAD: Announcement of the engagement of M. Michele Smith to Adam R. Blackwood has been made by the parents of the bride-to-be, Dr. and Mrs.
Leon G. Smith of Essex Falls, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.


Braintree, Mass.: Classrooms To Condos
LEAD: The classrooms where generations of Braintree students struggled with algebra and passed notes are well on their way to becoming the kitchens and bedrooms of condominiums, the result of a conversion project by Francis X. Messina, Braintree's largest developer.


SHOWER DOORS FOR AN ELEGANT TOUCH
LEAD: IF your bathtub is installed in a recess, that is, if the tub is surrounded by walls on three sides, creating a built-in appearance, one of the easiest ways to add a touch of elegance is to install bathtub shower doors in place of a shower curtain.


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: Mantle was clearly superior to Mays, which is obvious at the first look at statistics.
The two had identical lifetime slugging percentages, at .557, but Mantle's on-base percentage was higher, .420 to .383.
Since these are the two most important offensive categories, Mantle already has him beat, but Mantle also had a higher stolen-base percentage, .80 to .77, and grounded into six fewer double plays per year than Mays.


An 1840 Pact Again Haunts New Zealand
LEAD: To avoid embarrassing questions, New Zealand marked Waitangi Day, its national day, this week with as little fanfare as possible.


Columbia Campaign Raises $600 Million, Exceeding Its Goal
LEAD: A five-year fund-raising campaign by Columbia University has raised $600 million, $200 million more than the original goal.


Let the Computer Do the Walking
LEAD: COMPUTERS are showing up in the outplacement business in the form of sophisticated job data bases.


Our Interstate Highways Are Becoming a Falling-Rock Zone
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Run in New Hampshire Is Now a Run for the Money
LEAD: More than ever before, the voters of New Hampshire have it in their power when they cast their ballots Tuesday to drive many of the Presidential contenders from the race forthwith.
The reason is money.
All but a few of the candidates are broke or in debt, before even a single primary vote has been cast.


BROOK DESILTING PLAN UPSETS MATINECOCK
LEAD: A NASSAU COUNTY project to reserve land adjacent to Kaintuck Brook, a privately owned brook in Matinecock, for stream desilting and a detention area, has taken residents by surprise and has met with serious environmental concerns.


Headliners; Innocently, Lyn
LEAD: When Lyn Nofziger signed documents pertaining to meetings with White House officials in 1982, he might as well have been signing a confession, in the view of jurors who last week convicted Mr.
Nofziger of illegal lobbying.


WENDY RANCE TO WED PETER FRANCIS DUNNE
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Cyril E. Rance of Hamilton, Bermuda, have announced the engagement of their daughter Wendy Lee Rance to Peter Francis Dunne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Dunne of Garden City, L.I.
The couple plan to wed Sept. 24.


Classrooms To Condos
LEAD: THE classrooms where generations of Braintree students struggled with algebra and passed notes are well on their way to becoming the kitchens and bedrooms of condominiums, the result of a conversion project by Francis X. Messina, Braintree's largest developer.


Gossage the Cub
LEAD: At the age of 36, he has been around, and now after four seasons with the San Diego Padres, Goose Gossage will take another turn, this time with the Chicago Cubs, a team he helped San Diego defeat for the 1984 National League championship.
The reliever, who came to the Padres from the Yankees as a free agent in 1984, agreed to be traded to the Cubs in a four-player deal that sent Keith Moreland, a hard-hitting third baseman and outfielder to the


MY FRIENDS THE HIT MEN
LEAD:  DONNIE BRASCO  My Undercover Life in the Mafia.
By Joseph D. Pistone with Richard Woodley.
Illustrated. 373 pp.
New York: New American Library. $18.95.


Prisoners Learning How to Be Parents
LEAD: THE prison psychologist at the Edna Mahan (formerly Clinton) Correctional Facility for Women freely admits that he laughed when inmates told him a year ago that they intended to design a child-abuse-prevention program that would win a coveted grant from the New Jersey Children's Trust Fund.


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD:  The Final Tally  The Times received 58 letters in response to last week's question.
Here is the breakdown:
Too Tough
Mays
Mantle
Snider
To Call
22
15
8
13


59 SPECIES FOUND TO BE THREATENED
LEAD: The Fish and Wildlife Service added 59 species to the list of endangered and threatened species last year, the second-highest number ever, the service has reported.
The most ever added was 68, in 1979.


MEG MCKEE ENGAGED TO ROBERT T. MULLANEY
LEAD: The engagement of Margaret Greenway McKee to Robert Trainer Mullaney, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Mullaney of Westfield, N.J., and Hilton Head Island, S.C., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mary Greenway Carr McKee of Memphis and John Baskervill McKee of Friars Point, Miss.


Headliners; Desperately, Scott
LEAD: In 1937, F. Scott Fitzgerald was 40 years old and in need of quick cash.
His best-known work, ''The Great Gatsby,'' was 12 years behind him; perhaps he sensed that death, then three years away, was closing in.
In any case, Fitzgerald produced a short story that year, titled ''A Full Life,'' that was shot through with uncharacteristic black humor.


This Butcher, Imagination: Beware of Your Life When a Writer's at Work
LEAD: One crisp fall day, while admiring the flora and fauna in Riverside Park, I was stopped by a woman who announced that we had attended the same kindergarten.
She said a few kind words about a book of mine, all the while looking at me with such great concern that I assumed someone had told her I had 10 days to live.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  GOTTA HAVE HEART  Just in case the calendar failed to make its mark, today is Valentine's Day and some libraries are celebrating in noncaloric fashion, mostly saying it with music.
For example, in Oyster Bay, at the library at 89 East Main Street, there's a concert at 3 P.M. of love songs and sentimental ditties, courtesy of Dayle, while down the road a bit, at the Manhasset Library, 30 Onderdonk Avenue, also at 3 P.M., the mezzo-soprano Susan Wagner, the soprano Teresa Arrigo and the tenor-baritone Ben Arrigo use tunes by Mozart, Brahms, Puccini, Gershwin and Rodgers and


Food Inspection Results
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 30 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


This Butcher, Imagination: Beware of Your Life When a Writer's at Work
LEAD: Since it's the experience of most writers that prizes invariably go to the wrong people, I take it that this year I am the wrong person.
I accept this predicament with the appropriate chagrin.


Tools of Childhood
LEAD: Some things are inexplicably magical.
One is ''Goodnight Moon,'' the children's book by Margaret Wise Brown, wonderfully illustrated by Clement G. Hurd and brought back to mind by news of his recent death.


Officials Have Applied Brakes at the Daytona 500
LEAD: The 150,000 spectators who will jam into the Daytona International Speedway today for the Daytona 500 stock car race, and the millions more that will watch it on television (Channel 2, 12 P.M.), will almost certainly see a slower race than last year.


VALENTINE EXPERIMENT: GIVE AND Take
LEAD: I JUST can't get over how the freshmen are responding to Dr.
Gerald G. Jampolksy book ''Love Is Letting Go of Fear,'' again this semester.


AS CHILDREN AND OTHERS SEE IT
LEAD:  EMPEROR OF THE AIR  By Ethan Canin. 179 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $15.95.


CONSERVATIONISTS HAIL 5-YEAR PLAN FOR OPEN SPACES
LEAD: CAUTIOUS and keeping commitments may be the most used descriptions for Governor O'Neill's 1988-89 budget proposal.
But conservation groups are calling the spending plan historic in its generosity.


A Woman Of Two Minds, Both in Turmoil
LEAD: He's successful, he's rich.


Reagan's Disappearing Bureaucrats
LEAD: SURROUNDED BY COMPUT-er gear, Federal personnel directories, and the requisite framed, signed photograph of himself with Ronald Reagan, Louis J. Cordia describes his predicament. ''I've probably got a hundred people in the Administration calling me,'' he complains. ''They're telling me, 'I'm looking to move into the private sector, and I understand you have that kind of operation.


Sea Urchins
LEAD: To the Editor: In many parts of the world where sea urchins and humans are apt to collide, ammonia is the antidote of choice.
Betsy Wade might not have been aware of this since each community assumes ammonia is a local remedy and most do not have access to the bottled household variety, making the subject somewhat delicate for an


Computer Failure Delays Southern Flights
LEAD: Almost 850 airline flights to and from Florida and the Southeast were delayed Friday night when a flight data computer system failed for three hours, Federal aviation officials said.


Elisa Monte: Choreographer Seeking Ancient Beginnings
LEAD: 'I ALWAYS SUSPECTED I would choreograph, but I never knew at what point it would start,'' said Elisa Monte, the modern-dance choreographer whose company opens on Tuesday for a one-week season at the Joyce Theater.
That calm assurance also characterizes Ms.
Monte's work, which pulsates with a forceful energy and a clear intelligence.


RECOMBINANT JAZZ: EVERY STRUCTURE TELLS A STORY
LEAD: For six decades, ever since Louis Armstrong thrust soloists into the foreground of jazz, the vast majority of jazz performances have had the same form: theme-solos-theme.
But since the 1930's, at least, some jazz musicians have been trying alternatives - narrative pieces, symphonic-scale suites and rhapsodies, free-form improvisations.


BUSH ASSAILS DOLE'S LEADERSHIP SKILLS
LEAD: Vice President Bush delivered a detailed attack on Bob Dole's Senate leadership skills today, suggesting that he was to blame for some of President Reagan's legislative setbacks.


Alfonso Valdes Cobian; Dies in San Juan at 98
LEAD: Alfonso Valdes Cobian, an industrialist, banker, sportsman, politician and member of one of the most prominent families in Puerto Rico, died Monday in San Juan after suffering a heart attack two days earlier.
He was 98 years old.


EMERGENCY WORKERS AND AIDS
LEAD: In his article ''An AIDS Nightmare'' (Jan. 17), John B. Judis reported on the moving case of Jewel Foster Lyles, a pregnant woman with the AIDS virus who was murdered.
Emergency workers cited their ''right to know'' whether they had been exposed to the virus and called for full use of the criminal law to punish those who intentionally try to transmit AIDS.


Medical Teams Cite Rising Severity Of Beatings of Palestinians by Army
LEAD: The beating of Palestinians by the Israeli army appears to have grown more severe, with medical workers and family members reporting that four Palestinians died this week after being beaten by soldiers.


BETH DANIEL LEADS IN SARASOTA CLASSIC
LEAD: Beth Daniel, who is trying to end a slump of two-and-a-half years, matched par 72 today in the third round of the Sarasota Classic to take a two-stroke lead into the final 18 holes of the $225,000 L.P.G.A. tournament.


EXTRAORDINARY PEOPLE
LEAD:  THE INCREDIBLE ESKIMO  Life Among the Barren Land Eskimo.
By Raymond de Coccola and Paul King.
Photographs.
Illustrations by James Houston. 435 pp.
Surrey, B.C.: Hancock House Publishers.
Paper, $14.95.


Perspectives: Midtown Theaters; Offering an Incentive for Preservation
LEAD: A novel zoning incentive from New York City planners, intended to preserve Broadway's legitimate theaters, is heading toward final Board of Estimate action as part of a package of midtown zoning amendments.


THE WORLD: Contrasting Birth Rates; Old World Fearful Of Third World's 'Silent Invasion'
LEAD: ''WE are obsessed by the East,'' said an adviser to President Francois Mitterrand, referring to the menace of the Soviet bloc. ''But the threat of destabilization comes from the South.''


One More Time, Lowell on Jarrell
LEAD: To the Editor:


Notes on the Soviet Union; Hints of Internal Friction on Afghan Withdrawal
LEAD: Some unusual breaks in Kremlin routine in recent weeks have suggested the possibility of internal friction over Soviet policy in Afghanistan.


Gay Spokesmen
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: Mantle's injuries are legend, but Snider's were just as debilitating.
Mays has to emerge as the best because his prime lasted longest.
LEE DEJASU  Rehoboth, Mass.


Snowstorm Pounds the Northeast
LEAD: A storm that plastered parts of the Northeast with more than two feet of snow and gale-force winds petered out yesterday after shutting schools, government offices, highways and much of New Hampshire's Presidential campaign on Friday.


New Hampshire's Battle on the Right
LEAD: The battle for the heart of Republican conservatives here has turned into a blood feud between Representative Jack F. Kemp of New York and Pat Robertson, the former television evangelist.


Origin of Virus Is Murky, But Signs Point to Africa
LEAD: The evidence is getting stronger that the AIDS virus first simmered in Africa before it exploded into a worldwide epidemic.
But whether the AIDS virus is a relatively recent mutation or an ancient germ that has resided in some humans for tens of thousands of years is a mystery.


Back Before Bach, There Was Bach
LEAD: The musical and procrea-tive fecundity of the Bach family is legendary, but it is often assumed to have begun with the most celebrated Bach of all: Johann Sebastian.
The fact is, however, that there were Bachs in the music business well before J. S. was so much as a tune in his parents' sketchbook.


Letting Off Steam: Con Ed Rebates
LEAD: To those unfamiliar with central air-conditioning systems, steam seems the last thing to make them go.
But two types of systems are powered by steam heated to more than 400 degrees.
To remind building owners and co-op boards that steam can do more than provide heat, Consolidated Edison, which sells the steam it makes to generate electricity, is offering rebates until the end of the year of up to 50 percent to those that either upgrade a steam system or install a new one.


Life With Campeau: Allied's Year of Constant Change
LEAD: AS CHAIRMAN and chief executive of the Allied Stores Corporation, Thomas M. Macioce spent much of his time in the company's Manhattan headquarters, meeting only occasionally with the chiefs of his 22 store divisions around the country.
Austere and autocratic, Mr.
Macioce kept a tight rein on operations from afar, handing down orders to the field through a layer of seven group executives.


HUSBAND'S AWAY? IT MUST BE SNOWING
LEAD: IT never fails: when it snows in unpredictably large proportions, my husband is always out of town and I'm left to do the dirty work.
There is no consolation when I pick up the phone at 6 A.M. on a Tuesday and hear my teaching colleague say, ''School's closed today.
Pass the word.'' She can well afford to be happy about it, because her husband will be there to shovel the driveway and revive the frozen automobile.


Correction
LEAD: A caption on the cover of the Guide, Section 2A, gives an incorrect time for the live television coverage on ABC of the men's downhill skiing competiton.
The coverage starts at 1:30 P.M.
Eastern Standard time.


Gay Spokesmen
LEAD: To the Editor:


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article on Feb. 7 misidentified the bus line serving Roosevelt Island.
It is Queens/Steinway Transit Corporation.


Dr. Krim's Crusade
LEAD: AS SHE SAT ON THE podium at Christie's, the auction house on Manhattan's Upper East Side, Mathilde Krim was in familiar company.
She was sharing the stage with Leo Castelli, the SoHo gallery owner, and her friend Elizabeth Taylor, who set the tone for the evening by quoting Marcel Proust: ''Only through art can we get outside of ourselves and know another's view of the universe .


FOR SOME MEATLESS FARE, THE WOK OFFERS ALTERNATIVES
LEAD: KEN HOM, a prolific and spirited Berkeley, Calif., resident and cooking teacher who takes groups of students on weeklong trips to Hong Kong, has just written another cookbook.
This one, ''Asian Vegetarian Feasts'' (Morrow, $19.95), provides meatless recipes from Japan, Indonesia, Thailand, Korea, Singapore and Vietnam, although the majority are


Outdoors; Seminars Are Reeling In Anglers for a Day
LEAD: THE average fisherman's hunger to learn more about his sport is insatiable.


CONQUERING THE PEAK
LEAD: ''People hate to stand in line, and they especially hate standing in a banking line at lunchtime,'' said LeRoy M. Richey, explaining one of the reasons for The Bank of New York's new part-time teller program.


Wine; CHAMPAGNE'S KICK
LEAD: CHAMPAGNE IS AS IMPOR-tant as the groom. Well, not quite.


Soiled Sails In the South Seas
LEAD: THEY'RE KNOWN, TECHNICAL-ly, as ''tension membrane structures.'' But officials of World Expo 88, which opens in Brisbane, Australia, on April 30, call them ''sun sails,'' which seems appropriate; the theme of Expo 88 is, after all, ''Leisure in the Age of Technology.'' Made of a polyester fabric, the eight translucent canopies, each about 390 feet in diameter and together sheltering a ground area of close to 360,000 square feet, form the most striking architectural feature of the exposition site.


U.S. Adds to Lead Over Soviet in 'Star Wars'
LEAD: THE Pentagon's successful ''Star Wars'' experiment last week vividly illustrates the growing gap in how East and West measure up on exotic anti-missile arms.
As the United States pushes ahead with space spectaculars seen as vital to the perfection of orbiting battle stations, the Soviet Union is keeping a lower profile, seeming to concentrate on basic research confined to the laboratory.


Streetscapes: The Leonori; A Building That Recounts The Multiple-Dwelling Story
LEAD: Workmen are putting finishing touches on the new marble in the lobby of the turn-of-the-century Leonori, at the southeast corner of 63d and Madison Avenue, a building whose successive alterations document both the history of the multiple dwelling and of the Upper East Side.


Nelson's 'Ultimate Accolade'
LEAD: WEARING a white hat with a brim as wide as his smile, a white scarf and a navy blue overcoat, Lyle Nelson carried the American flag yesterday as he led the United States team into McMahon Stadium for the opening ceremony of the XV Olympic Winter Games.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:  SERENADES AND ROSES  Lovers may arrange to have the objects of their affections serenaded with their song and presented with a fresh red rose during a cabaret in New Britain today.


NASHVILLE OFFICIAL ASKS CURB ON SEX
LEAD: A bill to ban sexual activity in about 200 city buildings as a means of fighting sexual harassment of female employees has drawn some ridicule, but the sponsor says the issue needs to be addressed.


GAMES BEGIN ON HIGH NOTE
LEAD: The long countdown for Calgary that began more than six years ago reached its climax today as Jeanne Sauve, the Governor General of Canada and Queen Elizabeth's representative, declared open the XV Olympic Winter Games.


Music: Kyoko Takezawa Gives Violin Recital at Y
LEAD: KYOKO TAKEZAWA, who made her New York recital debut Thursday night at the 92d Street Y, has a familiar biography, if a rather more distinguished one than most.
Born in Japan, she won prizes for violinists there before coming to the Aspen Music Festival in 1985 to work with Dorothy Delay.
She has continued her studies at the Juilliard School with Miss Delay and Masao


About Men; Life Intrudes
LEAD: I NEVER SPOKE BACK. I was quiet and obedient.


WANTED: HITLER'S SCIENTISTS
LEAD:  THE PAPERCLIP CONSPIRACY  The Hunt for the Nazi Scientists  By Tom Bower. 309 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $17.95.


What's Doing In Puerto Vallarta
LEAD: It is still possible to hear a rooster crow at dawn or midnight in Puerto Vallarta, but one must listen carefully.
The city is on the go almost nonstop, especially from now until Easter.
Streets are jammed with cars, trucks and shoppers in the daytime.
Restaurants and bars are open late; 10 P.M. is a respectable time for supper.


Vermont Seeks to Help Dairy Farms
LEAD: These have been frustrating years for Laval and Rita Bilodeau.
Two artifical hips and a bad heart limit the amount of physical labor Mr.
Bilodeau can perform on the 265-acre dairy farm he bought here in 1955.
That means the milking and most of the heavy work fall to his two sons.


F.B.I. Stand Is Contradicted On Surveillance of Policy Foes
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation says its widespread inquiry into opponents of the Reagan Administration's Central American policy ended two years ago, but Dr.
Paul F. Knitter says he has reason to believe that, in his case at least, that is not so.


SUSANNAH DWIGHT TO MARRY LAWYER
LEAD: The engagement of Susannah Fanshawe Dwight to James P. Prout has been announced by the future bride's parents, Margaret O. Bradley of Riverside, Conn., and George H. P. Dwight of New York.
Mr.
Prout is a son of Anne C. Prout of Cranford, N.J., and John Prout of New York.
A September wedding is planned.


CLARE MIDDLETON LUCE TO WED
LEAD: Clare Middleton Luce and Clifford Louis Abbey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William V. Abbey of Sweet Home, Ore., plan to marry in April, the parents of the bride-to-be, Margarget H. Howe of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., and Peter P. Luce of Boulder, Colo., have announced.


A Costly Surprise From Mutual Funds
LEAD: THOUSANDS of investors who thought they had outsmarted the tax collector by year-end selling of mutual funds in which they had big losses received an unpleasant surprise during the last few weeks.
Large capital gains distributions from the funds, paid in 1988 but taxable in 1987, have upset their careful tax-planning maneuvers.


THE PASTOR'S PROBLEM
LEAD: As a former Connecticut pastor, I have struggled with the same concerns as Mr.
Brinton, and he has my sympathy.
However, in his concluding remarks, he obscures what is at issue by turning the problem in upon himself.
A pastor's poverty or relative poverty is useful in biblical terms only if it has symbolic import: effectively positing the need for an otherwordly ethic in a too worldly society.


Leon Goossens, Well-Known Oboist, Is Dead at 90
LEAD: Leon Goossens, an oboist who helped refine the instrument's potential and inspired composers to write music to showcase it, died Friday night at the age 90, his family said today.


PSYCHOLOGY, TOPOLOGY AND THE WISE OLD MAN
LEAD:  JUNG  A Biography.
By Gerhard Wehr.
Translated by David M. Weeks.
Illustrated. 549 pp.
Boston: Shambhala. $25.


Yugo GVX Is in Its Element in U.S. and Remains Unfussy
LEAD: The man who named this town, they say, was a transplanted New Yorker who combined ''California'' and ''Saratoga'' to make himself feel at home.
But that was then and now is now, and what is at home here today is the Napa Valley's newest winery, Clos Pegase.


CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Feb. 7 misstated the number of condominiums in Scrimshaw House now under construction in Yonkers.
It will have 138 units.


Princeton Eating Club Weighs Alcohol Policy
LEAD: An eating club for Princeton University upperclassmen suspended the serving of alcoholic beverages this week after a 19-year-old student nearly drank himself to death at the club's annual initiation party.


Disorientation Express
LEAD:  ROCKING AROUND THE CLOCK  Music Television, Postmodernism, and Consumer Culture.
By E. Ann Kaplan.
Illustrated. 196 pp.
New York: Methuen.
Cloth, $29.95.
Paper, $11.95.


A TOWN LOST IN THE GALAXY
LEAD:  SANDMOUTH  By Ronald Frame. 476 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Cincinnati Bus Strike Ends
LEAD: Bus drivers and mechanics overwhelmingly approved a contract proposal Friday night to end an 11-day strike that had left 90,000 daily riders without public transportation.
The Queen City Metro transit system hoped to restore bus service by Sunday morning.


ARTHUR MIZENER, FIRST BIOGRAPHY OF FITZGERALD AND CRITIC, DIES AT 80
LEAD: Arthur Mizener, a professor, critic and author of the acclaimed first biography of F. Scott Fitzgerald, died of congestive heart failure Thursday at the Metacom Manor Health Center, a nursing home, in Bristol, R.I., where he lived.
He was 80 years old.


Art
LEAD: The print, more than the painting, has been the chosen medium for political and social comment by artists.
Traditionally, it's had a wider audience, and it's closer to the printed word.
In recent years, though, we've been trained to view prints as more related to painting, alternate means for the artful expression of forms and colors.


9 Seized on a Ship Off Beirut Reported Released by Militia
LEAD: Eight seamen and a teen-age boy who were seized by Lebanon's main Christian militia seven weeks ago were freed today, militia figures and Lebanese officials said.


A WITTY CELEBRANT OF AN AGE OF PLEASURE
LEAD: The youth and early manhood of Jean-Honore Fragonard (1732-1806) are a joy to contemplate.
He was quick, gifted, eager and adaptable.
In a stocky, well-fleshed way he was very good looking.
Everything went well for him, though he missed out on the classic art education that he could have got from the Academie in Paris.


THE LAWYERS OF DEATH ROW
LEAD: DAVID BRUCK leaves his law office in Columbia, S.C., one cool, bright December morning and drives by the Civil War-era courthouse just around the corner.
A few minutes later, he parks in front of the sprawling brick and granite state penitentiary, parts of which are as old as the courthouse.


SABINE JACOB TO MARRY LANCE KIMMEL IN MAY
LEAD: A May wedding is planned by Sabine Jacob, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Willy Jacob of Wilhelmshaven, West Germany, and Lance Jon Kimmel, a son of Irwin Kimmel of New York and Adele Kimmel of Forest Hills, Queens.


Cable TV
LEAD: What do ''King Kong'' (1933), ''The Letter'' (1940) and ''Lost Horizon'' (1937) have in common besides quality?
Three of the best Hollywood scores ever written, so snugly integrated they're easy to take for granted.
Lend an ear this week.


One Farmer's Story: It Looks as if the Children May Go to College After All
LEAD: WHAT a difference three years, a little luck and a lot of hard work have made, Shorty Gladbach mused as he sat at the kitchen table in his 100-year-old yellow farmhouse, while his wife, Gerry, smiled down from her chores at the sink.


MS. IX IS MARRIED TO A. S. PEDERSEN
LEAD: The marriage of Constance Ann Ix, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander F. Ix Jr. of Spring Lake, N.J., and John's Island, Vero Beach, Fla., to Andrew Soren Pedersen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Pedersen of Cedar Grove, N.J., took place yesterday at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York.


A LA CARTE
LEAD: A DECADE ago, I spent every summer Sunday on the beach and every winter Sunday searching for the perfect eggs Benedict at restaurant brunches.
Those were the days of Long Island's brunch craze, when even the most unlikely restaurants offered these midday melanges.


Bail Is Set for Robbery Defendant Who Has Awaited Trial Since '85
LEAD: A Federal judge has set bail at $1 million for a defendant who has been imprisoned for 30 months without an opportunity to be released while awaiting trial in a Wells Fargo robbery.


'Khovanshchina' at Met
LEAD: Three singers will make their Metropolitan Opera debuts on Feb. 22 when Mussorgsky's opera ''Khovanshchina'' is performed for the first time since the 1985-86 season.
The singers are Elizabeth Knighton, soprano; Stefania Toczyska, mezzo-soprano, and Timothy Noble, baritone.
Others in the cast include Wieslaw Ochman, Denes Gulyas, Aage Haugland and Martti Talvela.


Where Mr. Bush Won
LEAD: Though Vice President Bush lost in Iowa last week, he scored an easy win in the race to get on the ballot for New York's April 19 primary.
Unfortunately, it's a victory over democracy.
New York's nit-picking election law forces Presidential candidates to spend inordinate time and money collecting petition signatures for delegates.


Only the Long-Term Capital Gains Need Help
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE DILEMMA OF HIGHER PRICES
LEAD: THE dollar's drop in the international currency market is boosting the cost of photography.
Since the year began, companies as geographically far apart as E. Leitz in West Germany and Nikon in Japan have raised the list prices of their cameras, lenses and accessories.
Given that the dollar's fall has been especially steep against the German mark and Japanese yen, and that Germany and


ELDERLY'S PLIGHT SURPRISES LEGISLATORS
LEAD: THE State Senate will form a special panel to look into the problems of the elderly.
Officials said they were acting in the wake of a report last week that documented employment, transportation, housing and other issues affecting the aged.


Industry to Give Vast New Data On Toxic Perils
LEAD: Beginning next month, industrial plants all over the country will be required to disclose to state and local committees a flood of information on whether they are using and storing any of more than 300 ''extremely hazardous substances.''


INSIDE
LEAD:  A Ritual Vote in Paraguay


DEBORAH HASZKO TO WED
LEAD: Deborah Ann Haszko, a staff nurse at the primary medical clinic at Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan, and Nicholas Shulgach, the founder and president of Aplogica Inc., a computer research and development consulting company in Manhattan, plan to be married in June.
Miss Haszko is a daughter of Mr.


AMY MILLMAN TO WED ROGER CONANT FAXON
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Louis Millman of Riverdale, the Bronx, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Millman, to Roger Conant Faxon, a son of Frances Parker Faxon of Concord, Mass., and the late William Faxon.
The couple plan to marry May 1.


Sexism on Film: The Sequel
LEAD: When the characters in John Hughes's ''She's Having a Baby'' catch a brief glimpse of the old ''Dick Van Dyke Show'' on television, the film sounds an amazingly nostalgic note.
There, amid the sourness, petulance and misanthropy of Mr.
Hughes's new comedy, are Rob and Laura Petrie, who led simple lives and fought over the silliest things.


Dorothy Kurgans Goldberg, 79; Artist, Writer and Rights Figure
LEAD: Dorothy Kurgans Goldberg, an artist, writer and human rights advocate, died of lung cancer Saturday at the Memorial Sloan Kettering Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 79 years old.


Thomas M. Peters, 99, Ex-Arizona Lawmaker
LEAD: Thomas M. Peters, a former Arizona state legislator who succeeded in several businesses and then turned his attention to charities for children, died Tuesday at the Venice (Fla.) Hospital.
He was 99 years old.


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: In the end the answer comes down to this: If you're a Yankee fan, Mantle was the best.
If you're a Giant fan, Mays was the greatest.
If you're (still) a Brooklyn Dodger fan, the Duke was better than the two of them put together.
MICHAEL J. ESPOSITO  Brooklyn


Toll Agencies Face Increased Scrutiny
LEAD: THE Garden State Parkway's quest for a general toll increase has been slapped down, at least for the remainder of the year, but the public indignation that greeted the proposal will continue to reverberate in the Legislature for months to come.


Only the Long-Term Capital Gains Need Help; The Not So Well-to-Do
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOSPITAL AIDES SEEK U.S. HELP
LEAD: EXECUTIVES representing 45 New Jersey hospitals have told members of Congress that the Federal Government should help the state's financially strained hospitals by appropriating additional funds.


Some Vanity, Some Plates
LEAD: October's market crash may have humbled some Masters of the Universe, as Tom Wolfe calls the movers and shakers in his recent New York novel, but not the owners of a brown Rolls-Royce Corniche convertible seen the other day on East 61st Street.
Such a car sells for about $184,000, so a certain audacity emanates from the vanity license plate.


CLASH OVER DRUGS AS REAGAN MEETS WITH MEXICO CHIEF
LEAD: Tensions between the United States and Mexico over the control of international drug traffic flared today at a summit meeting between President Reagan and President Miguel de la Madrid.


ST JOHN'S HALTS A 3-GAME SLIDE
LEAD: After three consecutive losses to Big East Conference opponents, St.
John's found a team it could beat yesterday.
And, oh, how the Redmen beat Providence.


Dance: Ruby Shang's 'Languages'
LEAD: RUBY SHANG, a modern-dance choreographer with many unusual ideas, has now come up with a theatrical work that features an unusually erotic central duet, a leading Butoh artist from Japan and a marriage of concepts that might normally appear incompatible.


Tension Ushers in a Ritual Election in Paraguay
LEAD: After a campaign marked by a surprising level of anti-government protests, the cyclical ritual of Paraguay's ''democracy without Communism'' climaxes Sunday with the election of Gen.
Alfredo Stroessner to an eighth presidential term.


Sites With Views And Extra Taxes
LEAD: A TAX on the view from your home?
Some newer residents of Burlington, Conn., complained last year that part of the town's property tax seemed to add up to that.


HISTORIC EVENTS SHOWN ON NEW ISSUES
LEAD: RECENT issues highlight major events of the past 50 years.
Last November, the Arab nation released three stamps with a theme ''International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People.'' A previous set of three spread the message, ''Al-Quds (Jerusalem) is an Arab City.''


Singapore Plan for Vote Change Stirs Dispute
LEAD: The Government of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, asserting that British-style parliamentary democracy is not adequate for the country's long-term needs, is proposing a new electoral system in which voters in some constituencies will choose teams of legislators rather than single candidates.


Poetry and Word Processing
LEAD: To the Editor:


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: Getting a Break On Car Rentals In Europe


Design; BY THE BOOK
LEAD: HOW MANY SALAD BOWLS or toaster ovens or salt and pepper shakers does a just-married couple need?
Usually, one is enough.
To avoid receiving duplicates of such useful (and obvious) gifts, a growing number of couples are registering for china, crystal, silver and household objects at local department and gift stores.


DRESSING FOR TODAY, WITHIN THE LIMITS
LEAD: A BIG WHOOP-DE-DO WED-ding is like most gala occasions today.
Everyone involved can dress in any number of ways and look just fine.
But a wedding does impose a few fashion parameters, some traditional and others contemporary.
One universal: The bride sets the tone; this is her day.
She can be swathed in clouds of tulle and trailing a train.


New Hampshire Will Give Iowa Vote Its Meaning
LEAD: AND so, at long last, after two years of preliminary skirmishing, strategizing, campaigning, fund raising, organizing, pontificating and poll-taking, the electorate, or at least a tiny sliver of it, has finally joined the labor of picking the two major parties' 1988 Presidential nominees.


CASTLE GALLERY FEATURES COMPOSITIONS OF FOUR 'ASSEMBLERS'
LEAD: IN the beginning was collage, pioneered as a kind of trompe l'oeil by the Cubists.
Then came assemblage - or three-dimensional collage - in which found objects were transformed into Surrealist mysteries.


THE NEVER-ENDING HUM OF THE UNIVERSE
LEAD:  LONGING FOR THE HARMONIES  Themes and Variations From Modern Physics.
By Frank Wilczek and Betsy Devine.
Illustrated. 361 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


FOR SOME MEATLESS FARE, THE WOK OFFERS ALTERNATIVES
LEAD: KEN HOM, a prolific and spirited Berkeley, Calif., resident and cooking teacher who takes groups of students on weeklong trips to Hong Kong, has just written another cookbook.
This one, ''Asian Vegetarian Feasts'' (Morrow, $19.95), provides meatless recipes from Japan, Indonesia, Thailand, Korea, Singapore and Vietnam, although the majority are


THE BLOODIEST OF WARS
LEAD:  BATTLE CRY OF FREEDOM  The Civil War Era.
By James M. McPherson.
Illustrated. 904 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $30; after July 1, $35.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  SLEIGH RIDE FESTIVAL


LINDSEY GRUSON PLANNING TO WED JANE E. WHITNEY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Leo C. Balzereit of Jupiter Island, Fla., and Jenkintown, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jane Ellen Whitney, to Lindsey Gruson, the son of Flora Lewis Gruson of Paris and Sydney Gruson of New York.
The couple plan to marry May 8.


LEVERAGED BUYOUTS: ON THE LEVEL?
LEAD: I have just read the indignant complaint of Benjamin J. Stein, an apparently honest man tilting with the windmills of greed, and I have to laugh (''Leveraged Buyouts: On the Level?'' Jan. 17).


REAL THINGS AT LAST
LEAD:  SISTER SHIPS  And Other Stories.
By Joan London. 118 pp.
New York: Penguin.
Paper, $5.95.


U.S. Is Asked to Sharply Limit Use of Sedative
LEAD: A private organization asked the Government Friday to sharply restrict the use of a widely used intravenous sedative that the group says has been associated with 40 deaths in its two years of use.


ANTISMOKING CRUSADER: Richard A. Daynard; Using Liability Law To Put Tobacco On Trial
LEAD: WHEN rumors hit Wall Street in late November that Richard A. Daynard, professor of law at Northeastern University, was about to disclose something embarrassing to the cigarette industry, it was enough to send the stocks of tobacco companies down 4 percent.


War on Smog Is Rude Awakening for Athens
LEAD: With a sudden sweep of measures, the Greek authorities have begun a crusade against air pollution that seems to tilt at the country's intertwined obsessions: smog and the siesta.


A NEW ASSOCIATION AND OLD FILMS SAVE A THEATER
LEAD: For years, the 1,250-seat Stanford Theater, like so many movie palaces of the Art Deco era, has been unable to justify itself economically.
Its future, some thought, was as a shopping mall.


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: The answer is clearly defined by my recent issue of a baseball card collector's price digest which is the bible of the east coast.
Mantle is worth $2,000+.
Mays is worth $700+.


Question of the Week; Who Was Better, Mantle, Mays (or Snider)?
LEAD: In a career spanning almost exactly the same seasons, Hank Aaron won twice as many r.b.i. titles and as many batting titles as Mantle, Mays and Snider combined.
He accomplished this while winning as many home run titles as any of the celebrated triumvirate.


MGM Confection
LEAD:  BROADWAY MELODY OF 1938  With Eleanor Powell, Judy Garland (in photo) and Robert Taylor.
Directed by Roy Del Ruth.
MGM/UA Home Video. 113 minutes. $29.95.


SHOWER DOORS FOR AN ELEGANT TOUCH
LEAD: IF your bathtub is installed in a recess, that is, if the tub is surrounded by walls on three sides, creating a built-in appearance, one of the easiest ways to add a touch of elegance is to install bathtub shower doors in place of a shower curtain.


CIVIC GROUPS SPLIT OVER MARINA PLAN
LEAD: A PROPOSAL to build a complex of condominium town houses with clubhouse, swimming pool and tennis courts has divided the South Shore community of Seaford and led to a split in the local civic association.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Branchburg Township  $144,000  59 Station Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; 2-car detached garage, patio, dining room; taxes $1,243.
Livingston  $435,000  12 Homestead Terrace  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old colonial; den, C/A, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $5,266.


Poetry and Word Processing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Humane Lay-Offs
LEAD: To the Editor:


New on Riverside: As Good as Old
LEAD: The first new apartment building on Riverside Drive in 35 years was designed to look 35 years old.
Though the 21-story condominium now rising at 94th Street will not attempt to match the weathered appearance of the venerable structures to either side, it will use the same materials.
An Indiana limestone base will give way to Norman brick.


Unisex Insurance Inching Ahead
LEAD: SOME states prohibit sex discrimination in automobile and health insurance - for which women have usually paid more than men.
Last year, the Massachusetts Insurance Commissioner issued a regulation barring sex bias in all forms of insurance - including life, for which women have usually paid less.


Now, About That Chandelier That Goes Crashing
LEAD: Shall we begin by acknowl-edging that ''The Phantom of the Opera'' never did make sense?


STOP THE DECLINE IN STUDENTS' FITNESS
LEAD: IT was ''Meet the Teacher'' night in our district - an annual open house throughout the country, but in our very upscale junior high school, an event attended by a large percentage of parents.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on Jan. 17 about northern California oysters characterized oysters incorrectly.
They are mollusks.


Anchovies From Spain
LEAD: ALL along the Costa Brava, the stretch of coast that runs from Barcelona to the French border, Catalan bread topped with anchovies is a typical way to begin a meal at home and in restaurants.
Pa amb tomaquet, slices of bread lightly toasted, rubbed with fresh tomato, then doused with one of the region's virgin olive oils, is the base.


Soldier of Fortune Magazine Is Sued Over Slaying
LEAD: A suit against the magazine Soldier of Fortune, brought by the family of the victim of a hired killer, will be heard in Federal District Court here next week.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: FRED WESTHEIMER admits it.


Russia's Divisive War
LEAD: ALEKSANDR SIMONOV returned from the war in Afghanistan last summer, tanned and sinewy from carrying his weight in weaponry on mountain patrols.


Cubs Beat Dawson In Arbitration Case
LEAD: Andre Dawson, who virtually had to beg the Chicago Cubs for a job a year ago, encountered another setback with them yesterday.
Despite becoming the National League's most valuable player while earning only $700,000 last season, Dawson lost his salary arbitration case and a chance to establish an arbitration record.


PERCEPTION TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PERCEPTION TECHNOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,461,737
4,240,101
Net loss
61,042
b846,524
Share earns
-
.23
b-Net income


CAMPAIGN TO FIND DRUGS FOR FIGHTING AIDS IS INTENSIFIED
LEAD: After a sluggish start that provoked criticism and bitter disputes, Federal and private efforts to develop new drug treatments for AIDS are accelerating.


East Bloc Aircraft Deals Seen
LEAD: Western aircraft manufacturers are positioning themselves for possible sales to Eastern Europe, as chinks appear in what was once a closely walled Soviet market.


The Sick Are Under Siege and Need Rescuers
LEAD: To the Editor:


SHOPSMITH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHOPSMITH INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,127,000
11,697,000
Net inc
574,000
725,000
Share earns
.39
.50
9mo sales
25,792,000
28,467,000
Net loss
185,000
401,000


TRION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRION INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
15,042,000
9,646,000
Net inc
974,000
795,000
Share earns
.24
.20
Yr sales
40,396,000
29,927,000
Net inc
2,747,000
2,163,000
Share earns
.68
.53


U.S. TEXTILE INDUSTRY'S TURNAROUND
LEAD: Five years ago the textile industry looked pretty bad.
It was battered by imports and hampered by outmoded plants.
Since then, however, it has poured money into modernization and today has become one of the most efficient industries in the United States - operating at near capacity and turning out steady profits.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Golden Words
LEAD: Former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger likes to quote Churchill to the effect that history will treat him well ''because I intend to write the history myself.'' Even before writing the first sentence of his planned book, Mr.
Weinberger is busy telling his version of current affairs in speeches for which audiences like the New York Bankers Association, where he spoke in


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Abraham &amp; Straus, Brooklyn, N.Y., appointed Joseph Yewdell senior vice president.


STATESWEST AIRLINES INC reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STATESWEST AIRLINES INC
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
3,863,532
-
Net loss
5,894,987
-
This is the company's first fiscal year of operations.


Steer Away From Tragedy
LEAD: ''Come ride with me,'' beckons an advertisement for all-terrain vehicles, ''and I'll take you where you've never been before.'' Buyers of the balloon-tire buggies often don't realize where that might be.
In the last five years more than 900 riders of all-terrain vehicles wound up dead, and another 330,000 wound up in the hospital.


Brazil Seeks To Mend Rift With Lenders
LEAD: One year after suspending most payments on its $113 billion foreign debt, Brazil has quietly abandoned its confrontational debt strategy and is now seeking to restore normal relations with its creditors as soon as possible.


TMK-UNITED INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TMK-UNITED INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
57,273,000
51,987,000
Net inc
b7,580,000
c7,474,000
Share earns
.20
.20
Yr rev
227,269,000
202,749,000
Net inc
b34,504,000
c40,860,000
Share earns
.91
1.08


Ghandi Is Shuffling Cabinet to Reinforce His Party in North
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi shuffled his Cabinet today in a move to strengthen his standing in the populous northern Hindi-speaking areas, where his political foes have gained strength in recent months.


AUSTRIA'S LEADER ASSERTS WALDHEIM IMPERILS COALITION
LEAD: Chancellor Franz Vranitzky of Austria said today that he might resign if the furor raging around President Kurt Waldheim continued to prevent his Government from dealing with other problems.


Companies Match Gifts To Neediest
LEAD: The members of the Finance Department of the Beauty Group of Avon Products, Inc. of Manhattan, sent $927 in contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


The Sick Are Under Siege and Need Rescuers; New Strategies Needed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Music:Smith Singers and Chanticleer
LEAD: SERIOUS choral singing took on a bi-coastal air Saturday night when the Gregg Smith Singers and San Francisco's Chanticleer came together at St.
Peter's Church.
It was a program of the old and the new.


Political Marketing; Candidates Sharpen Attacks In New Hampshire TV Ads
LEAD: Presidential candidates are airing more negative television advertising than ever before, and they are doing it earlier in the campaign.


Bridge: Small, Specialized Concerns Filling a Void in Publishing
LEAD: In the past two decades general publishers have shown diminished interest in publishing bridge books and thus opened a door for small, specialist houses that do not have general distribution.


Rise of Refugees Leaving Soviet Taxes Agencies
LEAD: While still only a trickle compared with the heyday of detente in 1979, the increasing number of Jews being allowed to leave the Soviet Union since the recent improvement in superpower relations has strained the resources of the charitable agencies that resettle them in America.


In U.S., 30 Juvenile Offenders Await Execution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nixon Says Kennedy Should Be Candidate
LEAD: Former President Nixon said today that Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts should run for President this year.


Canada Gets Stern Test in Hockey
LEAD: The Canadian Olympic hockey team started its quest for a medal here with a shutout of Poland, a team that was expected to collapse before the Canadians but instead played a grim defensive game that allowed the Canadians just a single goal, but left itself with none.


CALFED INCOME PARTNERS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALFED INCOME PARTNERS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
166,000
-
Share earns
.01
-
Yr net inc
2,383,000
-
Share earns
.19
-
The partnership said that since it began operations in December 1986, there are no comparable results for the year-ago periods.


COMPUTER NETWORK TECHOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER NETWORK TECHOLOGY CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,635,105
258,712
Net loss
140,406
655,457
Yr rev
2,873,790
349,070
Net loss
1,871,396
2,725,882


Campaign Trail
LEAD:  Getting the Business


3 Die in Explosion at Ski Area
LEAD: Three employees of the Canaan Valley Ski Resort were killed today in an explosion at a maintenance building.


FIRST HOME FEDL ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST HOME FEDL ASSN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
295,914
618,780
Share earns
.21
.43
Yr net inc
1,763,202
1,761,936
Share earns
1.22
-
There are no common share earnings for the 1986 year because the S&amp;L converted from a mutual to stock form in August 1986.


Federal Judges Deny Bail More Frequently
LEAD: Judges have used broad discretion granted under the Bail Reform Act of 1984 to jail a much higher percentage of people awaiting trial for Federal crimes, the Government said today.


Thatcher Is Choice for President, British Poll Says
LEAD: Forget about Dole and Dukakis, Bush and Babbitt, or any of the other Presidential aspirants.
If the American people had their druthers, and the chance, they would elect Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher President of the United States.


Nora Astorga, a Sandinista Hero And Delegate to U.N., Dies at 39
LEAD: Nora Astorga, Nicaragua's chief delegate to the United Nations and one of her Government's leading voices on the international scene, died of cancer yesterday in a Managua hospital.
Thirty-nine years old, she had been one of the Sandinistas' leading guerrilla heroes in the revolution that overthrew the Somoza regime in


FIRST FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FINANCIAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,446,000
d3,398,000
Share earns
.33
.77
Yr net inc
c11,465,000
d10,891,000
Share earns
2.59
2.49
b-Includes a tax credit of $1,426,000 which includes a pretax charge of $2.2 million that was reserved for disposition of West Coast mortgage banking operation.


U.S. Refuses Polish Credits
LEAD: Poland failed to get trade credits to finance imports at a meeting of American and Polish trade officials last week, but came away with a broad program to expand commerce between the countries.


Orser, Boitano On Two Paths To Same Goal
LEAD: FOR the last four years, they have stalked each other, only occasionally in close proximity.
For all their intensity and electricity, those times only served as a tease for the ultimate showdown.


Day-Care Effort Pressed For Municipal Workers
LEAD: A few weeks after the first baby sitter arrived, Beverly J. Hoff began to notice money and food missing from her home.
The second sitter kept Ms.
Hoff's son David in his playpen all day.
The third let him run into the street one day as his mother drove up.


Jansen Falls in Bid for Gold Medal
LEAD: One of the United States' few chances to win a gold medal in the Calgary Olympics ended in stunning fashion tonight when Dan Jansen fell entering the first turn and Nick Thometz finished eighth in the men's 500-meter speed-skating race.


Russian Wins Cross-Country
LEAD: Vida Ventsene, a 23-year-old Soviet student in only her third season of international racing, held off Raisa Smetanina, her 36-year-old teammate, by 8.7 seconds to win the women's 10-kilometer cross-country ski race at the Canmore Nordic Center yesterday and earn the first gold medal of the Winter


Springfield Journal; Standing In for a Myth In the Land of Lincoln
LEAD: Even in the Civil War, being the 16th President of the United States may have been a very easy job in a way; Abraham Lincoln just had to be himself.
But it's quite something else to live up to the myth of Abraham Lincoln in 1988 when you're really Harry Hahn.


Clarinet: Richard Stoltzman
LEAD: IN the murky musical territory known as ''classical crossover,'' where jazz and pop meet and mingle with traditional concert fare, there are almost as many roads to take as there are artists willing to travel them.
Some performers - especially singers - use the opportunity to pander to pop audiences.


James FitzPatrick, Power Agency Head And Lawmaker, 71
LEAD: James A. FitzPatrick, a former state assemblyman who served as chairman of the New York State Power Authority from 1963 to 1977, died of leukemia Saturday at Champlain Valley Hospital in Plattsburgh, N.Y.
He was 71 years old and lived in Plattsburgh.


Phyllis Eleuthera Harrison Is Married To Mark To Ballantine in the Bahamas
LEAD: Phyllis Eleuthera Harrison and Mark Thompson Ballantine were married yesterday at the Harbor Island Anglican Church on Eleuthera Island, the Bahamas, by the Rev.
Donald George.
The bride, a daughter of Sarah S. Harrison and Preston Harrison, both of Richmond, graduated from the Trinity School in Richmond, the Oldfields School and Mount Vernon College.


South Koreans Protest U.S. Trade Pressure
LEAD: Police arresting a protester in Seoul.
About 300 people took part in protest of what they said was Government suppression of labor movements and U.S. pressure to open South Korea's restricted markets.


ABIOMED INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABIOMED INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
1,174,737
1,397,239
Net loss
32,054
b39,211
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
3,270,645
3,890,841
Net loss
214,618
b138,479
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Lisa Jayne Oppenheim Marries Robert Schultz
LEAD: Lisa Jayne Oppenheim, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Jay Oppenheim of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Robert David Schultz, a son of Mrs.
David Schultz of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Schultz.
Rabbi Norman Kahan performed the ceremony at the Chieftans estate.


Stephens vs. Lukas: New Round Begins
LEAD: Racing's best rivalry since Affirmed and Alydar a decade ago will be renewed at Gulfstream Park on Monday.
The rivals are not specific horses, but their handlers.


Mary S. Hays Marries Robert Stern in Florida
LEAD: The marriage of Mary Susan Hays, a daughter of Mrs.
Joseph Karl Hays of Winter Haven, Fla., and the late Mr.
Hays, to Robert Stern, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Stern of Stamford, Conn., and Palm Beach, Fla., took place yesterday at the Ringling Museum of Art in Sarastoa, Fla.
Rabbi Lewis Bogage and the Rev.


MOLECULAR BIOSYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOLECULAR BIOSYSTEMS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,145,219
649,382
Net inc
961,578
36,981
Share earns
.11
-
9mo rev
4,300,843
2,471,924
Net inc
1,368,043
781,864
Share earns
.16
.11
The company indicated that all revenue figures include interest income.


Office Growth Slows in Boroughs Outside Manhattan
LEAD: A campaign by New York City to attract large-scale office developments to the boroughs outside Manhattan is being stalled by a wave of economic uncertainty created by the stock market collapse, according to city officials and business executives.


In Debate, Bush Issues a Plea for Help
LEAD: Vice President Bush, who has seen his once overwhelming lead in New Hampshire evaporate in a matter of days, tonight issued a cry for help in his struggle to salvage his Presidential candidacy.


76ers Falter, And Nets Win by 4
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers' troubles began in the second quarter today with the ejection of Charles Barkley; they ended with a 14-point final quarter.
The combination paved the way for a 109-105 Net victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


MICRO BIO-MEDICS INC reports earnings for Year to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICRO BIO-MEDICS INC
Year to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
31,883,031
28,928,238
Net inc
300,511
95,149
Share earns
.06
.02
Shares outst
5,176,406
4,422,706


Falling Debris Shuts the Belt
LEAD: The Belt Parkway was closed to all traffic for about six hours yesterday in Brooklyn when pieces of concrete fell on the six-lane highway from an overpass at Flatbush Avenue, the police said.
Traffic was backed up as far as the Van Wyck Expressway and Cropsey Avenue as the police detoured traffic around the overpass starting at 3:30 P.M.


HCC INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HCC INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,688,000
8,874,000
Net loss
599,000
c351,000
9mo sales
22,573,000
26,664,000
Net loss
b1,092,000
c897,000
b-Includes a loss of $39,000 on settlement of EPA superfund claim.


Cyprus Chief Loses Election; Runoff Set to Pick Successor
LEAD: President Spyros Kyprianou lost his bid for re-election, returns showed early today, leaving a conservative and a Communist-backed millionaire in a runoff next Sunday.


Library as Day Care: New Curbs and Concerns
LEAD: Public libraries across the nation are increasingly being used, and librarians say abused, by parents who drop off their children for hours because day care is too expensive or unavailable.


CHASE MEDICAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHASE MEDICAL INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,306,000
1,096,000
Net inc
302,000
33,000
Share earns
.12
.02
Shares outst
2,257,000
1,662,000
9mo rev
6,344,000
2,845,000
Net inc
924,000
315,000
Share earns
.41
.19
Shares outst
2,257,000
1,662,000


R. M. (Max) Leggette, Hydrogeologist, 88
LEAD: R. M. (Max) Leggette, a hydrogeologist, died in San Diego Feb. 2.
He was 88 years old and lived in the San Diego retirement community of Wesley Palms.


Art: Orsay's 'Van Gogh in Paris'
LEAD: For the first major exhibition at the Musee d'Orsay, ''Van Gogh in Paris'' is a natural.
With van Gogh, popular success is assured.
The subject is the crucial period between March 1886 and February 1888, when van Gogh lived in Paris and introduced his palette and brush to space and light.
Defining the importance of 19th-century Paris for a great Dutch artist underlines the importance of this year-old museum of 19th-century French art.


Joyce Brown's Ascent From Anonymity
LEAD: Not too long ago, Joyce Brown lived on an Upper East Side sidewalk in front of a restaurant's hot air vent.
She hurled insults at some passers-by, made friends with others and used the street for her bathroom.


CENTRAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,449,000
-
Net inc
55,000
-
Share earns
.01
-
Yr rev
19,168,000
-
Net loss
3,556,000
-
Year-ago comparisons are not meaningful as the company was in a developement stage at that time.


Rise of Shearson as a Deal Maker
LEAD: When Frederick M. Frank received the telephone call on Jan. 4, he had to think fast.
Mr.
Frank, a managing director of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., had been discussing the Eastman Kodak Company's strategic options with a group of Kodak executives.
The caller told him that Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company had just made a surprise bid for Sterling Drug Inc., a drug company that


Paris Journal; Merci, Senator, but We Are Not a Charity Case
LEAD: ''It is scandalous to say that Jews in France, whoever they are, are discriminated against,'' said Jacques Lazarus, a journalist who came here from Algeria. ''What is even more scandalous is the magnitude of the money.
When we heard this we said this must be a peculiar American crazy story.''


Virgil D. Hawkins; Broke Color Barrier To Become Lawyer
LEAD: Virgil D. Hawkins, who waged a 28-year battle to practice law in Florida and helped break the color barrier at the University of Florida Law School, died Thursday after a long illness.
He was 81 years old.


New Gas Leak at Plant in Maine
LEAD: A hazardous gas leaked today for the third time since late January from an International Paper Company mill that has continued operating during a strike, and seven people were taken to hospitals, officials said.


Put an End to Failed One-Way-Toll Trial on Verrazano Bridge
LEAD: To the Editor:


Judge Gives Naturalized Citizens Right to U.S. Security Clearances
LEAD: A Federal district judge has ruled that naturalized American citizens have the same rights as other Americans to security clearances that give them access to government secrets.


The Sick Are Under Siege and Need Rescuers; We're Growing Older
LEAD: To the Editor:


Franklin H. Kissner, Rare-Book Collector Who Was Financier
LEAD: Franklin H. Kissner, a financier and collector of rare books, died Feb. 4 at New York Hospital after a fall and cerebral hemorrhage.
He was 77 years old, with residences in Manhattan and in Bethlehem, Pa.


Portuguese Voice Dismay Over U.S. Aid Cut
LEAD: A Reagan Administration decision to cut aid to Portugal is creating political problems for Prime Minister Anibal Cavaco Silva, who has threatened in the past to scrap a treaty that allows American use of a base in the Azores Islands.


What to Call Pat Robertson
LEAD: Pat Robertson has taken to portraying himself as a victim of religious oppression because of what people call him.
If he keeps it up, what they are apt to call him is a dissembler.


Metro Matters; Battle to Block The Re-naming Of Fifth Avenue
LEAD: ''How can a Negro be conservative?'' Marcus Garvey once asked. ''What has he to conserve?''


TRANS LEASING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANS LEASING INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,227,000
2,835,000
Net inc
235,000
154,000
Share earns
.07
.05
6mo rev
6,383,000
5,638,000
Net inc
557,000
417,000
Share earns
.17
.12


Bangkok Emerges as a Major Jewelry Center
LEAD: Bangkok is rapidly climbing to the top of the international jewelry trade, and Thai jewelers say it is partly because cutting and setting gemstones is still a traditional family craft here.


TRC COS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRC COS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,849,752
5,357,927
Net inc
153,962
104,086
Share earns
.07
.05
6mo rev
15,825,546
8,366,631
Net inc
361,547
245,171
Share earns
.17
.12


The Dance: Atlanta Ballet In 'Kinesthesis' Premiere
LEAD: THE Atlanta Ballet presented three new works Saturday night under the auspices of the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College, where the company from Georgia has been involved in a visiting residency program for five years.


The Next Generation
LEAD: Skiers representing the United States at the Olympics will have a long way to go to top the performance of a group of youngsters who represented this country at the world junior championships.
They won one gold medal, two silvers and a bronze, and an informal point count put the team way ahead of any of the other nations competing.


Markets Closed Today
LEAD: The nation's stock and commodity markets are closed today in observance of Washington's Birthday.
Government offices, banks and many businesses are also closed.


SPECTRUM CONTROL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPECTRUM CONTROL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
8,433,000
7,135,000
Net loss
493,000
b849,000
Share earns
-
.16
Yr sales
33,700,000
26,000,000
Net inc
33,000
3,300,000
Share earns
.01
.62


Cartwright's Hopes For Trade Linger
LEAD: With the National Basketball Association's trading deadline only 10 days away, Bill Cartwright, unhappy with his role of backing up Patrick Ewing at center, would prefer that the Knicks trade him.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Tuning Out
LEAD: When viewers of the Christian Broadcasting Network tune in on Tuesday to find out how the New Hampshire primary is going, what will they learn?
Absolutely nothing.
The television network, which was founded by Pat Robertson, the Republican Presidential contender, has decided not to cover the race.


SEABOARD S&amp;L ASSOC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEABOARD S&amp;L ASSOC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
271,426
348,900
Per share
.30
.34
Yr net inc
839,610
892,059
Per share
.94
1.12


Stacy Richmond Married In West to James Wallman
LEAD: At Temple Isaiah in Los Angeles, Stacy Shaw Richmond and James David Wallman were married yesterday by Rabbi Robert Gahn.


PERSONAL DIAGNOSTICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PERSONAL DIAGNOSTICS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,965,000
1,450,000
Net inc
22,000
b517,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr rev
8,197,000
6,340,000
Net inc
78,000
b1,668,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Yankees' Fortune Hinges on Pitching
LEAD: EVER since their season ended on a cold, blustery day in early October, the Yankees have been doing the things they do best.
They dismissed a general manager, resurrected Billy Martin once more, added a potent bat to the lineup and tried desperately to shore up their typically vulnerable pitching.


GROUP 1 SOFTWARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GROUP 1 SOFTWARE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,034,000
2,257,000
Net inc
544,000
380,000
Share earns
.16
.13
Shares outst
3,326,831
3,000,000
9mo rev
8,216,000
5,604,000
Net inc
1,404,000
724,000
Share earns
.42
.24
Shares outst
3,324,229
3,000,000


RESULTS AND STANDINGS
LEAD:  PAIRS SHORT PROGRAM


Two U.S. Wars
LEAD: Two wars that Americans think of quite separately have begun to converge in middle America.
It is a matter of priorities that overlap and distort policy decisions.


For Bucharest, a Great Leap Backward
LEAD: President Nicolae Ceausescu's bristly stand toward his allies in the East and friends in the West has led Rumania to what Western and Communist analysts here say is virtual isolation.


MID MAINE SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MID MAINE SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
423,271
361,193
Per share
.30
-
Yr net inc
1,913,373
1,582,989
Per share
1.36
-
The bank became publicly held in December 1986.


The Editorial Notebook; A Tale of Two Georges
LEAD: George III and Henry VI were the two maddest kings of England.
They had another connection, through the school for needy scholars that Henry VI founded in the shadow of Windsor Castle.
George III (pictured here) often sought refuge there from the intrigues of London and his attacks of porphyria, a disorder that affected his mental balance.


Sports World Specials; Flying Tackle
LEAD: Chad Hennings has always seemed just a bit out of place at the Air Force Academy, a school where the big men on campus tend to be wiry types with cool-eyed gazes dreaming of the day they will squeeze into the cockpits of jet fighters and leave contrails streaked across the sky.


British Inflation Eases
LEAD: Britain's annual inflation rate registered its sharpest decline in 15 months in January, the Department of Employment said Friday.
It said that the Retail Price Index remained unchanged for the month and that the price increase for the year came to 3.3 percent.
The annual inflation figure in December was 3.7 percent.


M.S. CARRIERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*M.S. CARRIERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,489,553
9,772,115
Net inc
1,197,119
827,023
Share earns
.23
.17
Yr rev
47,485,162
34,861,424
Net inc
4,584,054
3,614,020
Share earns
.88
.83


Metro Datelines; Off-Duty Patrolman Held in Firing of Gun
LEAD: An off-duty police officer was arrested Saturday and suspended from the force after he was accused of firing his service revolver at a traffic-enforcement agent who had ticketed his parked car, the police said.


'SLIPPED OUT FROM UNDER ME'
LEAD: THE ICE is smooth now, glazed by a Zamboni machine.
But for more than an hour during the Olympic 500-meter sprint last night, the white smear leading to the red base of the padded gray wall resembled the skid marks of an automobile accident.
And in the years to come, spectators at the indoor Speed-Skating


Watson's Problems Help Wadkins Win
LEAD: Given breathing room by Tom Watson's four-putt collapse, Lanny Wadkins came on with a six-under-par 66 to score a one-stroke victory today in the Hawaiian Open.


Olympian's Fall Ends His Dream
LEAD: Dan Jansen of the United States, whose sister died of leukemia early yesterday, fell and lost his bid for a gold medal in the 500-meter speed-skating event at the Winter Olympics in Calgary, Alberta.
Jansen was the favorite in the event, which was won by Uwe-Jens Mey of East Germany in world-record time.


Ballet: 2 Bolshoi Stars
LEAD: HAVING passed through a baptism by fire last week, the New York City Ballet's two young guests from the Bolshoi Ballet came back for a second round Saturday afternoon.
Mixed metaphors notwithstanding, the result was a triumph.


Donnica Moore, Physician, Weds
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
Donnica L. Moore, a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the Temple University Hospital in Philadelphia, to Dr.
Stanley Bernard Jr., a medical marketing consultant, took place yesterday in Philadelphia.
Rabbi Max Hausen performed the ceremony at the Fairmount Park Horticultural


Ferdinand Loses To His Stablemate
LEAD: Judge Angelucci scored a 3 1/2-length victory today over Ferdinand, his stablemate and 1987 Horse of the Year, in winning the $269,000 San Antonio Handicap at Santa Anita.


Vote Set to End U.S. Control Of a Jersey Teamsters Local
LEAD: A court agreement setting a date for elections that would end Government control over a crime-ridden New Jersey teamsters local has been approved by a Federal District judge.


No More Thursday Parties
LEAD: The University of Rhode Island's Thursday night fraternity parties have succumbed to the complaints of professors who teach Friday morning classes.
The Interfraternity Council voted last week to halt the parties after professors complained that too many students were sleeping in class or cutting class the next day.


Markets Form Joint Venture
LEAD: Members of the Chicago Board of Trade have ratified a joint venture agreement with the Chicago Board Options Exchange that will allow members of both exchanges to trade new options and futures, officials said.


A West Bank Village's Sons Return
LEAD: Joe Hammad's long white Mercedes, paid for by his chain of liquor stores back in California, climbed the steep ancient paths with the plodding power of the goatherds being nudged aside by the returning son.


Women's Style Suits Globetrotters
LEAD: It started out as a gimmick, a way to add flair to a team that thrives on trickery.
The Harlem Globetrotters, the clown princes of basketball, added a princess to the lineup as an extra attraction to their unique show.


Lucky Dukakis Sits Above the Fray
LEAD: ''Steady as she goes,'' Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis says with a smile and an equanimity he easily can afford.


Senators Say Black Sea Affair Casts Doubts on Soviet Aims
LEAD: The Senate majority leader said today that the bumping of United States Navy warships by Soviet naval vessels in the Black Sea on Friday was bound to make Americans and Europeans more skeptical of the aims of the Soviet leadership.


FASTENAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FASTENAL CO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,665,303
3,870,416
Net inc
460,103
269,620
Share earns
.16
.11
Shares outst
3,161,572
2,583,000
Yr sales
20,295,262
15,039,878
Net inc
1,693,045
1,123,794
Share earns
.61
.44
Shares outst
2,793,822
2,583,000


FIRST STATE FINCL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST STATE FINCL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
962,000
1,196,000
Share earns
.30
-
The company converted to public ownership in December 1987.
The company attributed the earnings decline to gains on the sale of investments during 1986.


Biden's Condition Improves
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware was listed in satisfactory condition today after undergoing surgery to correct an aneurysm that burst in an artery supplying blood to his brain, a hospital spokesman said.
The 45-year-old Senator, who remained in intensive care at Walter Reed Army Medical Center, was ''alert and talking to his family and resting comfortably,'' said Michael M


Big Losses For Health Insurers
LEAD: Surging inflation in medical costs and heavy expenses associated with starting health maintenance organizations have resulted in record losses for the nation's health insurance industry.


Apartheid Foe At University Bridges a Gap
LEAD: A red and yellow poster advertising a campus symposium on the 70th anniversary of the Russian Revolution last November is the only decoration on the dark-wood panels of Jakes Gerwel's office.


U.S. Cites Asian Piracy
LEAD: The United States is not satisfied with Asian efforts to end piracy of patents and other intellectual property rights, a senior State Department official said Friday.


Washington's Birthday Observed
LEAD:  NEW YORK  Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.
Sanitation: No collection or street sweeping.
Government offices: Federal, state and city offices are closed.
Post offices: Closed, except for special delivery and Express Mail.
Banks: Option to close.
Financial markets: Closed.
Transportation: Subways and buses on Saturday schedule, Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North on holiday schedule.


IRVINE SENSORS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IRVINE SENSORS CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
615,200
270,200
Net loss
256,200
578,600


INDUSTRIAL TRAINING SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INDUSTRIAL TRAINING SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
784,000
856,000
Net inc
28,000
65,000
Share earns
.02
.06
6mo rev
1,625,000
1,710,000
Net inc
112,000
138,000
Share earns
.10
.15
Shares outst
1,126,373
949,473


BODDIE-NOELL RESTAURANT PROPERTIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BODDIE-NOELL RESTAURANT PROPERTIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,126,627
-
Net inc
1,692,104
-
Share earns
.75
-
The company went public in May 1987.


Man is Held in Death Of His Bride on Cruise
LEAD: The body of a woman who was on a honeymoon cruise has been found in the Pacific Ocean, and her husband has been booked for investigation of murder, the authorities said today.


A Car Bomb Kills 3 P.L.O. Officers in Cyprus
LEAD: A car bomb killed three senior officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization in the Cypriot resort of Limassol today.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Capitals 5, Flames 4: Mike Gartner's second goal of the game 20 seconds into overtime gave Washington its victory over Calgary yesterday in Landover, Md.
Mike Ridley sent a centering pass into the slot and Gartner beat Doug Dadswell, giving Washington its third straight victory.


A Pole Apart for Nordic Skiing
LEAD: AN unusual new pole for cross-country skiing has been banned for use by Nordic skiers at the XV Olympic Winter Games.
But biathletes competing in Calgary can use it, and so can you on cross-country trails near home.


Dr. Deborah Sherman Weds Dr. Mark Rubin
LEAD: Dr.
Deborah S. Sherman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Sherman of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Mark I. Rubin, the son of Geraldine Rubin of Floral Park, Queens, and the late Murray Rubin.
Rabbi Steven Lerner performed the ceremony at the James House in North Tarrytown, N.Y.


BARTON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARTON INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,281,892
1,151,034
Net loss
131,402
445,596


ABC Technology Brings Fire to the Ice
LEAD: THE Winter Olympics have always generated a sense of grace, and not just the raw power of the Summer Games - from the stylized body movements of the speed skaters, to the hunched-down aerodynamic forms of the ski jumpers, to the fluid dance of the figure skaters.
But ABC-TV has taken the Games to a new dimension: sensuality.


New Shuttle Defect Reported
LEAD: An internal report being reviewed by the space agency recommends correcting problems with the heat-resistant material that protects the nozzles of the space shuttle's booster rocket before the next shuttle flight, scheduled for August.


ARTIST'S PAINTINGS DEPICT THE ANTARCTIC EXPERIENCE
LEAD: ''We came to probe the mystery, to reduce this land to the terms of science,'' the Australian explorer Douglas Mawson wrote of Antarctica, ''but there is always the indefinable which holds aloof, which rivets our souls.''


Metro Datelines; 2 Surrender, 1 Seized In Slaying of Cabby
LEAD: Two men surrendered to the police over the weekend in the slaying of a gypsy-cab driver in the Williamsbridge section of Bronx on Friday, the police said yesterday.


North Carolina Needs a Rally
LEAD: Jeff Lebo scored 18 points and North Carolina overcame a 17-point deficit to outscore Virginia, 12-2, in the final 4 minutes 5 seconds today, beating the Cavaliers, 64-58.


Books of The Times
LEAD: MAN WITH A GUN. By Robert Daley. 475 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


Men's Downhill Postponed a Day
LEAD: At the base lodge, Swiss fans carried their country's red flag with its white cross and rang cowbells in anticipation of the downhill race their skiers were expected to dominate.
Spectators mingled in a party tent, others rode chairlifts to the intermediate slopes and, at ABC's request, Bill Hudson of the United States team wished a happy Valentine's


Koch and Unions End Their Feud And Agree to a City Pension Rise
LEAD: Ending a bitter political battle over pension increases for New York State and city workers, Mayor Koch and union leaders announced yesterday that they had reached a compromise.
The agreement would save the city $70 million but would fall far short of the savings the Mayor had sought.


GENERAL METALS &amp; ABRASIVES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL METALS &amp; ABRASIVES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
486,669
393,443
Net loss
76,728
b43,830
Share earns
-
.06
6mo sales
952,561
828,271
Net loss
69,105
b104,329
Share earns
-
.15
b-Net income


Villagers in the Golan Heights Battle Israeli Police
LEAD: Druse villagers in the Golan Heights, which Israel captured from Syria in 1967, battled the police today to protest Israeli rule over the area, as sporadic unrest continued in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


James King, 74, Dead; Expert on Arms Control
LEAD: James E. King, a specialist in arms control and disarmament who served for many years in Government and academic posts, died of lung cancer on Feb. 1 at his home in Garrett Park, Md.
He was 74 years old.
Mr.
King, a native of Sumter, S.C., was a graduate of Harvard and a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford.
He taught government at Harvard before serving in the Army in World War II.


Iran Warns the Saudis Not to Block Pilgrims
LEAD: Iran warned Saudi Arabia today not to bar Iranians from the annual pilgrimage to the Moslem holy city of Mecca.


FORSCHNER GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORSCHNER GROUP INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
11,040,000
9,204,000
Net inc
469,000
718,000
Share earns
.11
.13
Shares outst
4,135,000
5,331,000
Yr sales
36,462,000
29,303,000
Net inc
1,855,000
b4,368,000
Share earns
.45
.74
Shares outst
4,113,000
5,928,000


Rail System Fined Over Safety
LEAD: The Government is levying fines of $734,900 against the Northeast's Guilford rail system for an array of safety violations over a four-year period, the Federal Railroad Administration has reported.


Scandals Slow Tory Rebound in Canada
LEAD: The improving political fortunes of Canada's ruling Progressive Conservative Party, which last year recorded some of the lowest public-opinion ratings ever for a Canadian Government, appear to have been set back by allegations of financial impropriety by members of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's Cabinet, including Mr.


EMONS HOLDINGS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMONS HOLDINGS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,852,317
4,091,902
Net inc
b291,466
c2,208,026
Share earns
.06
-
6mo rev
3,673,329
8,158,520
Net loss
b1,849,984
d1,849,984
b-Includes tax credits of $93,269 and $244,866 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 1988
LEAD:  International Report


Reporter's Notebook; Private Talks on a Broken Knuckle at the Chambers Trial
LEAD: Robert E. Chambers Jr.'s right hand was so badly injured that he couldn't even make a fist.
There were bite marks and he apparently had a broken knuckle.
About three hours after he was arrested and charged with the murder of Jennifer Levin, and about 19 hours after her body was discovered, he was taken by the police to a hospital emergency room for treatment.


Tyson-Spinks: It's On
LEAD: Mike Tyson and Michael Spinks will fight for the heavyweight title.


Frederick Loewe Dies at 86; Wrote 'My Fair Lady' Score
LEAD: Frederick (Fritz) Loewe, the composer who with his longtime lyricist partner Alan Jay Lerner created the scores for ''My Fair Lady,'' ''Camelot,'' ''Paint Your Wagon,'' ''Brigadoon,'' and ''Gigi,'' died yesterday in Palm Springs, Calif..
He was 86 years old.


Dionne Earns Rangers A 4-4 Tie
LEAD: Phil Esposito, who may or may not prove to be a learned general manager, clearly knows something about the business of scoring goals.
Having scored 717 himself, he was asked yesterday afternoon how Marcel Dionne had managed to accumulate 719.
Esposito, smiling at his own immodesty, simply pointed to his head.


BOLT TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOLT TECHNOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,819,000
1,495,000
Net loss
1,387,000
2,271,000
6mo rev
5,631,000
2,623,000
Net loss
2,615,000
4,852,000


DELTA DATA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELTA DATA CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,800,000
6,000,000
Net inc
51,000
62,000
Share earns
.01
.01


Washington Talk; Aide Says Fears Led to Contra Affair
LEAD: A senior Justice Department official says the Reagan Administration might have avoided its mistakes in the Iran-contra affair if it had the political nerve to stand by its plan to curb leaks with widespread polygraph tests and expanded censorship.


Winter Downpour
LEAD: Cory Thompson of St.
Joseph, Mo., riding his bicycle to work in the snow yesterday.
Showers were reported across western Missouri, but when the cold air came, the rain changed to snow.
On the northern Plains, a cold front sent temperatures plunging and generated strong winds and snow that caused traffic accidents and closed highways.


Karen B. Cohen Is the Bride of Steven O. Moldin
LEAD: Karen B. Cohen, the administrator of the department of radiation oncology at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York, was married yesterday to Steven O. Moldin, a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at the Ferkauf Graduate School of Psychology of Yeshiva University.
Rabbi Louis Frishman performed the ceremony at the Dellwood Country Club in New City, N


Ukrainians, in Pravda, Urge Election Reforms
LEAD: Advocates of liberalization in the Communist Party proposed today in an article on the front page of Pravda that more than one candidate be put forward for top party posts and that all party members be allowed to vote.


DISTRIBUTED LOGIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DISTRIBUTED LOGIC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,552,001
3,497,613
Net loss
125,087
b74,135
Share earns
-
.03
Yr rev
15,867,168
14,822,495
Net loss
385,072
b880,801
Share earns
-
.35


Running: Good for the Soul, Too?
LEAD: ANY research psychologist worth his Ph.
D. must, from time to time, cast a yearning glance at the runners he sees passing in the streets.
Surely, runners must be different psychologically from everyone else, prime subjects for a research project that would probe their personalities and inner resources.


Soviet Musicologist Set for Exchanges
LEAD: Boris Ivanovich Kulikov, rector of the Moscow State Conservatory, paused last Friday in his headlong flight across musical America to talk about Soviet-American relationships.
He is for them.
Mr.
Kulikov commented briefly on the sleet and wind (''Moscow weather,'' he said) then launched enthusiastically into pending projects for exchanges between the two countries.


Believers Hold Out for God's Tornado
LEAD: Annie Sims, the preacher's wife, delivered the prophecy at a prayer meeting late in December:


Winter Is the Time to Set Stage for Smooth Going
LEAD: MOST world-class athletes work at their sport all the time, tweaking and tuning their skills, even on days off.
Sailors are among them, taking advantage of winter's downtime to keep the heat on.
You don't have to be as compulsive as the best, but you can pick up a few hints from them - enough to give you a head start on the summer racing season.


Manned Space Station Commits Us to Future
LEAD: To the Editor:


VM SOFTWARE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VM SOFTWARE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,499,088
10,425,642
Net inc
2,326,973
2,475,306
Share earns
.37
.39
Yr rev
30,619,873
27,026,805
Net inc
3,409,409
4,927,744
Share earns
.53
.77


New Jersey Worried Over Crowded Ballot
LEAD: New Jersey election officials hope more Presidential candidates drop out before the state's primary, or they may have to rent voting machines to accommodate crowded ballots.


Catching On
LEAD: There are very few basketball courts in Venezuela, where Alex Roberts was born, or in Trinidad, where he spent his adolescence.


Wisconsin Pursues Chrysler Suit
LEAD: Gov.
Tommy Thompson asked Wisconsin's Attorney General on Friday to prepare a lawsuit against the Chrysler Corporation because of its plans to close its auto plant in Kenosha, Wis., but left open the possibility of a settlement.


The Treaty, Europeans and the Jitters
LEAD: What does Europe think of the treaty to eliminate Euromissiles?
The answer, as the Senate weighs ratification, is clear: Virtually all West European leaders support the treaty.
Some Americans say that behind the official blessings lie deep divisions and doubts.
But they confuse genuine support for this treaty and equally genuine concern about the state of the alliance.


Dollar Soars Against Yen
LEAD: The dollar soared against the Japanese yen in early trading in Tokyo today after last Friday's report of a lower United States trade deficit.


American Home Enters Limelight
LEAD: In an era when companies with new wonder drugs are the darlings of the investment world, the American Home Products Corporation has been something like a church deacon: solid and respectable but hardly flashy.


SYNTECH INT'L INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYNTECH INT'L INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
942,000
b564,000
Share earns
.07
.03
Shares outst
9,470,000
8,389,000
b-Includes income of $146,000 from discontinued operations.
The company previously reported on a calendar year basis.


Grocer Seen as Leader Of Possible Buyout Deal
LEAD: Byron Allumbaugh got his start in the grocery business as a meatcutter.
But for the last 12 years he has been chairman of the Ralphs Grocery Company, a 129-store Southern California supermarket chain owned by Federated Department Stores Inc.


POLK AUDIO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POLK AUDIO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
5,951,861
5,759,534
Net inc
617,733
577,629
Share earns
.25
.22
9mo sales
14,962,052
12,638,397
Net inc
1,339,386
1,087,565
Share earns
.52
.45


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; No Business Like the Real Estate Business
LEAD: Broadway may be enjoying its best year of the decade, with blockbuster hits lighting up every available playhouse, but to hear the story told by Gerald Schoenfeld, the biggest name in the theater business, you would think this season represents nothing more than a temporary respite in the 60-year decline of the industry.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Industrial Production...
Jan.
Housing Starts...
Jan.
Thursday  Capacity Utilization...
Jan.
Friday


Colonel Belew Wed in Texas
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Beverly Ann Belew, an Army nurse who is attending the Army Command and General Staff College in Fort Leavenworth, Kan., and Col.
Michael Richard Antopol, a cardiothoracic surgeon and the commander of the Brooke Army Medical Center at Fort Sam Houston, Tex., were married yesterday.
Col.


TV Reporter Expelled For Panama Coverage
LEAD: A reporter for the Cable News Network has been expelled from Panama after the Government said his coverage of the political situation here lacked objectivity.


REICH &amp; TANG L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REICH &amp; TANG L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,555,000
8,601,000
Net inc
3,376,000
3,538,000
Share earns
.34
.35
Yr rev
36,969,000
30,829,000
Net inc
15,554,000
13,219,000
Share earns
1.56
1.32


Makers of Semiconductors Meeting to View the Future
LEAD: For many in the computer industry, the International Solid State Circuits Conference, which will begin here Wednesday, serves as an unofficial leading indicator of technological prowess.
It is a place where engineers are let out of the back room to discuss the latest in the tiny silicon circuits that can do everything from perform millions of multiplications a second to draw pictures on a computer screen.


DIVERSIFIED INVESTMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIVERSIFIED INVESTMENT (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
493,720
794,160
Share earns
.28
.45
Yr net inc
2,123,439
3,765,004
Share earns
1.20
2.14
The company said that in 1987 it realized profits on the sale of loans and investments of $1,854,562; in 1986, the company experienced a loss on such sales of $62,839.


STATEN I. HAS FRESH OUTLOOK FOR TOURNEY
LEAD: Two all-star players, one most valuable player award, a coach of the year award, and a first-place league record of 13-1 are the makings of a potential championship team.


Reagan Plan to Privatize Government Is Gaining Support From Democrats
LEAD: In the budget he submits to Congress this week, President Reagan revives the debate over one of his oldest and most contentious causes - his desire to turn over more of the Government to private industry.


GAMMA BIOLOGICALS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GAMMA BIOLOGICALS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,169,000
4,060,000
Net loss
56,000
273,000
9mo sales
13,290,000
13,164,000
Net inc
14,000
b660,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


PARAGUAYAN WINS HIS EIGHTH TERM
LEAD: The Government announced today that Gen.
Alfredo Stroessner had been overwhelmingly elected to an eighth presidential term, and the opposition charged the voting was marked by widespread fraud.


GEONEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEONEX CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,890,000
4,429,000
Net loss
248,000
b433,000
Share earns
-
.14
b-Net income


Coe Upset by Poor Showing
LEAD: The contrast between the performances of Sebastian Coe and Doina Melinte was a sharp one.


WINTER OLYMPIC MEDAL WINNERS
LEAD:  Speed Skating  Men's 500 Meters


Piano: An Austrian in Debut
LEAD: ONLY 23 years old, Stefan Vladar has already won the International Beethoven Piano Competition in his native Vienna.
The Austrian Institute brought him to Weill Recital Hall Sunday afternoon in a program that reflected both Mr.
Vladar's seriousness of purpose and his central-European roots.


Stage: A Black Athlete's Struggle, in 'Anchorman'
LEAD: PAUL CARTER HARRISON'S musical drama ''Anchorman'' is subtitled ''a blues operetta,'' but that doesn't mean it contains any of the buoyancy one associates with operetta.
This hysterically enraged expression of racial antagonism is about as lighthearted as a wake.


Arthur Mizener, 80, Critic Who Wrote Work on Fitzgerald
LEAD: Arthur Mizener, a professor, critic and author of the acclaimed first biography of F. Scott Fitzgerald, died of congestive heart failure Thursday at the Metacom Manor Health Center, a nursing home, in Bristol, R.I., where he lived.
He was 80 years old.


Smokers on Trains Lament New Ban
LEAD: In the crowded bar car on the New Haven Line's 5:23 express train from Manhattan Friday night, commuters savored one last legal smoke and lamented the passing of an era.


Profit Reported by Aeroflot
LEAD: Aeroflot, the Soviet national airline, carried 119 million passengers and earned $3.3 billion in 1987, officials said Friday.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Feb. 14, 1988:  MONDAY  Chicago Rivet &amp; Machine  Goodrich (BF) Co  Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber  Realty Refund Tr  Dana Corp  Wendy's Intl  TUESDAY  Briggs &amp; Stratton  First Interstate Bancorp


Auto Racing
LEAD: Bobby Allison raced to his third Daytona 500 victory today, outdueling his son Davey to win stock car racing's top event.


Lakers Hold Off Celtics' Late Drive
LEAD: Byron Scott scored 17 of his 38 points in the final quarter today as the Los Angeles Lakers, after wasting a 20-point halftime lead, rallied to beat the Boston Celtics, 115-106.


Mets Have a Confident Lame Duck
LEAD: DAVE JOHNSON approaches his fifth and presumably final year as manager of the Mets this week with several constants in his mathematical mind.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-9, A22


India Confronts Horrors Of the Past in TV Series
LEAD: Forty years after the upheaval of India's birth and partition with Pakistan, an extraordinary television series is confronting millions of Indians anew with questions of blame for past and present violence.


Richard A. Buch Weds Cynthia Marks, Writer
LEAD: Cynthia Marks, the daughter of Dorothy Marks of New York and Stanley Marks of Hollywood, Fla., was married in New York yesterday to Richard Allan Buch, the son of Joseph Buch of Buffalo and the late Shirley Buch.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony at the Pierre.


BALCHEM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALCHEM CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,874,800
1,519,400
Net inc
95,600
89,300
Share earns
.08
.08
Yr sales
6,827,200
5,761,500
Net inc
363,200
290,400
Share earns
.31
.24


Washington Talk: The Executive Branch; Push for New U.S. Fees Has Touched Off Furor
LEAD: Ever since stagecoaches clattered over the first American toll roads and cattle began grazing on public lands, the United States Government has tried to get those who benefit directly from Federal services to pay for them.


HOLIDAY-RV SUPERSTORES reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOLIDAY-RV SUPERSTORES
Year to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
23,203,823
19,843,186
Net inc
745,901
272,132
Share earns
.15
.05


BIO-VASCULAR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIO-VASCULAR INC
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
212,357
208,654
Net loss
216,057
202,632
Yr sales
727,032
1,237,286
Net loss
b774,185
253,410
b-After a $74,306 gain on the forgiveness of debt.


Far-Reaching Changes Seen in Soviet Science
LEAD: -delegation of Soviet scientists to a meeting here today outlined sweeping institutional reforms and a new climate of candor that the delegates said were stimulating far-reaching changes in Soviet science.


MARGAUX reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARGAUX (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
5,580,000
1,309,000
Net loss
282,000
9,883,000
9mo rev
17,397,000
4,577,000
Net loss
579,000
14,072,000


Business and the Law; Suits Mounting On Toxic Waste
LEAD: IN what has become a virtual race for the courthouse, manufacturers and insurance companies are filing a flurry of lawsuits against one another over who must pay for the cleanup of toxic waste sites throughout the nation.


Caren A. Zwickler Is Wed To Michael David Levine
LEAD: The marriage of Caren Amy Zwickler, the daughter of Seymour Zwickler of Hollywood, Fla., and Sandra Lewin of Floral Park, Queens, to Michael David Levine, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Levine of Plainview, L.I., took place yesterday.
Rabbi Joseph I. Singer performed the ceremony at the Manhattan Beach Jewish Center in Brooklyn.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Palestinian-American Link  In Deir Dibwan, a village in the occupied West Bank, Palestinians return from the United States with wealth, pride and hope.
Page A6.
Estrangement for Rumania  Rumania is reported to be virtually isolated as a result of its leader's bristly stand toward allies in the East and friends in the West.


Governor Backs Residency Rule For Policemen
LEAD: Governor Cuomo said this weekend that he plans to propose legislation requiring newly hired New York City police officers and firefighters to live in the city.


DIAGNOSTIC VENTURES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAGNOSTIC VENTURES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,793,190
316,329
Net inc
164,792
b127,949
6mo rev
5,799,896
562,147
Net inc
72,107
b91,622
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss  The 1986 results are restated for an accounting change.


CAGLE'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAGLE'S INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
32,321,000
29,422,000
Net loss
b1,280,000
c1,256,000
Share earns
-
.54
9mo rev
97,486,000
93,414,000
Net loss
b2,815,000
c5,044,000
Share earns
-
2.17


FORMER MINISTER RESPONDS TO SUIT
LEAD: A former Methodist minister accused in a civil suit of trying to strangle his wife says he is innocent and has been staying away from his California apartment to dodge reporters, not court officials.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Feb. 6 about a threatened cutoff of Federal aid to some college students misstated the circumstances of those at risk of losing such aid.
The Department of Education said 53,000 students were at risk; all are eligible for grants of more than $100.


PROVENA FOODS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROVENA FOODS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,595,194
6,866,321
Net inc
92,395
218,398
Share earns
.04
.12
Shares outst
2,617,040
1,888,870
Yr sales
31,168,305
24,773,950
Net inc
779,640
766,398
Share earns
.36
.40
Shares outst
2,150,808
1,911,140


VAC-TEC SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VAC-TEC SYSTEMS INC
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
6,421,323
2,032,700
Net loss
1,346,377
317,537
Yr rev
13,497,001
8,487,704
Net loss
2,244,801
b695,223
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Dalai Lama Also Wants Tibet Modernized
LEAD: To the Editor:


West Is Easing Policy on Sales To Soviet Bloc
LEAD: The United States and allied governments are trying to make it easier for companies to sell nonmilitary goods to the Soviet bloc, reflecting the inexorable demand of industries for new markets and the swift global diffusion of technology.


Essay; The Shultz Shuttle
LEAD: Fact No. 1: Our Secretary of State is headed to Moscow next week, and after returning home to brief the President, will make his way to the Middle East.


Nkomo Sees Beginning of Zimbabwean Unity
LEAD: Joshua Nkomo, the patriarch of Zimbabwean black nationalism, stood before an attentive crowd at a political rally and said he had a story to tell.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The state refuses to recognize most Monday holidays.
We celebrate presidential birthdays the old-fashioned way -inconveniently.''  - Howard Mansfield of Hancock, N.H., on his state's contrariness.  [ A13:5. ]


Washington Talk: Briefing; C.I.A. Secrets
LEAD: There is no shortage of memoirs and books by former intelligence officials.
But when Graham Fuller retired from the Central Intelligence Agency, leaving his post as national intelligence officer for the Near East and South Asia, his first publication had nothing to do with cloaks, daggers or nasty deeds in back alleys.


New Capital Gains Rule Raises Rates for Some
LEAD: Taxpayers who cashed in their winnings from stocks or other investments last year face a bigger tax bite on their long-term profits.


I.B.M. EXHIBIT HONORS COLUMBUS ANNIVERSARY
LEAD: The IBM Gallery of Science and Art is making an early start on the quincentenary of Christopher Columbus's voyage to the New World.
Instead of waiting until 1992, the gallery will begin celebrating with an exhibition of rare documents, prints, maps and illustrated books from the John Carter Brown Library at Brown University in Providence, R.I., starting tomorrow and running through


CXR TELCOM reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CXR TELCOM
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,800,000
2,500,000
Net inc
461,000
167,000
Share earns
.12
.04
6mo sales
7,300,000
5,300,000
Net inc
762,000
349,000
Share earns
.20
.09
Share earnings reflect a 1-for-25 reverse stock split which is effective Feb.


Question Box; By Ray Corio
LEAD: QUESTION: Has a major league pitcher ever hit a home run in a game in which he pitched a no-hitter?


P.S.A.L. Tourney Spread Across City
LEAD: The Public Schools Athletic League basketball tournament this year will be played in high school gyms across the city and a good subway and bus map will come in handy.


JANE CAROL ABRAMS WEDS JOHN CHALIF
LEAD: The marriage of Janet Carol Abrams, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Abrams of Huntington, W.Va., to John Lewis Chalif, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour H. Chalif of New York and Garrison, N.Y., took place yesterday at the Vizcaya Museum in Miami.
Justice Rosemary Barkett of the Supreme Court of Florida performed the ceremony.


TV Review; 'TANNER 88,' A SATIRE ON PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGNS
LEAD: Call it imaginative; call it satire; call it a mixed result. ''Tanner '88: the Dark Horse'' is too real to be funny, but it's also not real enough.
How can a film make fun of politics when politics makes fun of itself?
The Home Box Office presentation does not find the answer, although it may make the year's most interesting try.


SPORTS OF THE TIMES: PASSING UP THE PARADE
LEAD: SCOTT FUSCO told his hockey teammates not to worry about not marching in the opening parade for the Olympics on Saturday.
He'd marched in one and didn't enjoy it all that much.


Lisa Rosenzweig Married
LEAD: Lisa Rosenzweig, a lawyer who is a law assistant in New York City Criminal Court, was married yesterday to Mitchell Benus, a managing director of Summit Myco Capital Management in New York and Chicago.
Rabbi Amnon Haramati officiated at the Kingsway Jewish Center in Brooklyn.
The bride, who will keep her name, is a daughter of Mr.


The Stage: 'Elephant Man'
LEAD: ''THE ELEPHANT MAN'' is back.
A young actor named Jonathan Courie brings to the Equity Library Theater a sensitive and witty portrayal of John Merrick, the deformed figure at the center of Bernard Pomerance's admirable 1979 play.
There really was a Merrick, and from his last years in a London hospital between 1884 and 1890, when he achieved considerable celebrity, Mr.


Outdoors: Help Far From Home
LEAD: ANYONE who has ever gone hunting or fishing far from his usual haunts knows that such expeditions are sometimes fruitless or even impossible without the services of a guide or outfitter.


WESTERN WASTE INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTERN WASTE INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
27,243,000
24,292,000
Net inc
1,513,000
1,038,000
Share earns
.30
.21
6mo rev
53,831,000
47,379,000
Net inc
2,890,000
2,143,000
Share earns
.58
.43


SYSTEMS &amp; COMPUTER TECHOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYSTEMS &amp; COMPUTER TECHOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,663,000
10,110,000
Net loss
586,000
467,000


POSEIDON POOLS reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POSEIDON POOLS
Year to Aug 31
1987
1986
Sales
24,801,013
16,259,088
Net inc
b1,124,441
958,795
Share earns
.90
.77
Shares outst
1,255,700
1,242,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $49,500.
The company completed its initial public offering on Aug.


EX-CBS NEWSMAN STARTS OWN COMPANY
LEAD: When Ike Pappas was laid off from his job as a newsman at CBS it gave him an opportunity to forge a career in an area he has long wanted to pursue: running a television production company.


Leon Goossens, Gifted English Oboist, Dies at 90
LEAD: Leon Goossens, the English oboist who took an ancient instrument and gave it modern refinement and flexibility, died in Tunbridge Wells, Kent, England, on Friday.
He was 90 years old.


Ohio's Law On Takeovers
LEAD: Gov.
Richard Celeste signed into law Friday emergency legislation that enables the state to assess the economic impact of takeover bids by foreign corporations.


Walt Whitman Sings Anew, But Now With a Chinese Lilt
LEAD: Her desk is small, a table really, its grainy rosewood polished by her palms, the frayed bindings of dictionaries, the tissue-thin paper she fills with tiny ideograms.


Music: Composers Orchestra and Kronos Quartet
LEAD: THE American Composers Orchestra at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon reminded us how much we in this country have to choose from and, in terms of quality, how precarious the choices can be.
Sunday's program came in every size, shape and level of competence - from Matthias Kriesberg's complex and crowded ''Chronosymphonies'' to the unintentional Minimalism of Gordon Getty's ''Plump Jack.


Nation's Biggest Banks Had Worst Year in 1987 Since the Depression
LEAD: Not since the Depression of the 1930's did the nation's biggest banks perform as poorly as they did in 1987, a survey of their financial results indicates.


We Are Losing The War on Drugs
LEAD: After a brief absence, illegal drugs are back in the news.
Honduran Army officers are setting up drug operations in their country.
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the military leader of Panama, has been indicted in Florida for trafficking in drugs.
The Attorney General of Colombia was murdered for his opposition to the Medellin drug cartel.


A Serious Scrape, but Still a Scrape
LEAD: When Soviet frigates bump U.S. warships, they set off public alarm.
Yet if Friday's incident in the Black Sea is unsettling, it is also predictable, one episode in a longtime policy disagreement.
More, it's manageable, a small piece of a complex relationship.


Report Lists Threats at National Parks
LEAD: From gypsy moths in the Shenandoah to wild pigs in the Great Smokies to creeping kudzu in the West, an invasion of exotic animal and plant species is threating the nation's national parks.


Fair Share for City Schools
LEAD: More than a third of New York State's public-school children live in New York City.
Yet the city receives less than a third of state aid to local schools.
Fairness and necessity cry out for the gap to be closed.


2 Officers Shot By Robber With Hostage
LEAD: Two police officers responding to a report of a robbery were wounded on the Upper West Side yesterday afternoon when a gunman holding a hostage forced the officers into an elevator and opened fire, the authorities said.


Arizona Senate Urged To Hold an Open Trial
LEAD: The majority leader of the State Senate called urged his colleagues today to scrap a plan to meet privately in the impeachment trial of Gov.
Evan Mecham.


Yonkers Group Plans Protest in Washington
LEAD: Opponents of a desegregation plan here will go to Washington to ''lay this open before the nation,'' an organizer said today.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. I was told as a child that you can tell how far away a thunderstorm is by counting the seconds between a lightning flash and the sound of thunder.
Is this correct?
If it is, why?
A.
Counting can be used as a roughly accurate guide, said Tom Ross, a meteorologist at the National Climatic Data Center in Asheville, N.C.


Coach's Controversial Tactics Divide U.S. Speed Skaters
LEAD: The United States speed-skating team, which was expected to produce the most American medals in the XV Olympic Winter Games, is in disarray.


New Studies Link Exercise to Delays In Menstruation - and Less Cancer
LEAD: EXERCISING hard may delay the onset of menstruation, but it does not affect the ability to have children later and it reduces susceptibility to cancers of the breast and reproductive system, new studies show.


10 Injured as Wall Collapses
LEAD: Wind blew over a wall 30 feet high at a condominium complex under construction today, trapping 18 workers for about five minutes, the authorities said.
Ten workers were injured, three of them seriously.
Lieut.
James Hagerty of the Franklin Fire Department said the workers were using long poles to raise the sheetrock-and-plywood wall when the wind caught it and if fell on top of them.


Georgia Tech Closes Its Reactor, Citing Continued Safety Concerns
LEAD: The Georgia Institute of Technology shut down its nuclear reactor today and the school's president said it would remain idle at least until safety concerns were resolved and, indeed, might never be restarted.


Infected Boy Shows Signs of AIDS
LEAD: One of three brothers who were banned from school because they were infected with the AIDS virus has developed AIDS-related complex, but his doctor says he can remain active.


Robertson Comes Under Fire for Asserting That Cuba Holds Soviet Missiles
LEAD: Pat Robertson's assertion that Soviet missiles are pointed at the United States from Cuba was emphatically denied by the White House today and denounced by his rivals for the Republican Presidential nomination.


Savings Unit Breakup Off
LEAD: Federal regulators are unlikely to pursue a plan to break up the savings and loan branch network of the Financial Corporation of America because of tax complications, a spokesman for the Federal Home Loan Bank Board said today.


Georgetown Edges Villanova
LEAD: Charles Smith scored 17 of his 22 points in the second half tonight to lead Georgetown to its third straight Big East Conference victory, a 56-54 triumph over Villanova.


Talking Business with Mirante of Cushman &amp; Wakefield; Commercial Side Of Real Estate
LEAD: Commercial real estate, a business ordinarily fraught with uncertainties, now seems even more risky.
In New York, the collapse of the stock market on Oct. 19 has increased vacancies, lowered rents and raised fears of a local real estate recession.
Elsewhere, a rapid pace of building from 1980 to 1985 has created cases of oversupply, particularly in the


Russians Claim Computer Knowledge
LEAD: Senior Soviet scientists asserted today that they have no need to steal computer secrets for military applications because the level of computer science in their country is already high.


A Treaty's Words Stand on Their Own
LEAD: To the Editor:


Federated Seeks Offers From Suitors
LEAD: Federated Department Stores Inc. said yesterday that it was negotiating with several parties, including the Campeau Corporation, that are interested in buying all or part of it.


COMMERCIALS BLOCK VIEW
LEAD: Television viewers who watched the Olympic hockey game between the United States and Czecholslovakia last night didn't see two of the first three goals live because ABC was showiing commercials.


Upbeat 'Head Hunter' for a Lame Duck President
LEAD: As Administration veterans return to private life in the twilight of the Reagan years, the task of recruiting fresh replacements for a lame duck Presidency has fallen upon Robert H. Tuttle, the White House personnel director.


Taxi Test: Where's Columbia?
LEAD: Following are some questions from the New York City Taxi Driver Institute test.
They were taken from the student workbook used in the course.  1.
It's a slow summer night in New York and you haven't had many fares.
Two men hail your taxi in front of the Port Authority Bus Terminal and tell you they need to be at Kennedy Airport in 30 minutes.


Sell the Post Office? Lease the Capitol Next
LEAD: To the Editor:


Depression: Studies Bring New Drugs And Insights
LEAD: A NEW generation of drugs to treat depression is giving medical scientists a fresh view of the best strategies for coping with this severe and widespread mental disorder and important clues to its nature.


Hockey Notebook; League Leader Has Not Emerged
LEAD: The league champion has been decided in three of the four Division I leagues.
In the fourth, the E.C.A.C., the race will continue until the final game between Harvard and St.
Lawrence on Feb. 27.


Paradox of Reagan Budgets: Austere Talk vs. Record Debt
LEAD: The paradoxes of President Reagan's budget policies have left a seven-year record that has puzzled some fiscal experts and upset liberal critics and conservative supporters alike.


Britons Buy U.S. Book Publisher
LEAD: Pearson P.L.C., the British conglomerate that owns The Financial Times, announced today that it had agreed to buy the Addison-Wesley Publishing Company for $283 million.


Austin Briggs-Hall, 73, Actor and a Historian
LEAD: Austin Briggs-Hall, an actor who was a founder of the American Negro Theater and an authority on African history, died of heart failure Jan. 13 in Kings County Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Theater: 'Crystal Night'
LEAD: THERE are laughs sprinkled through John Herman Shaner's ''After Crystal Night,'' but the play is not funny.
Essentially it is a long harangue spoken in nine voices about the necessity of Jews' becoming aggressive, even violent, in the battle against anti-Semitism.
In the production at the New Federal Theater the cast members make the most of the humor in the play, but the message overwhelms them.


Sales of U.S. Vehicles Rose 2.8% for Feb. 1-10
LEAD: Early-February sales of new American-made cars and light trucks were up 2.8 percent from the comparable period a year ago, the eight domestic manufacturers reported today.


Cordiality and Racial Anger Mix in Massachusetts U. Protest
LEAD: When the minority students occupying a University of Massachusetts building here discovered that the brother of the chancellor was ill, they sent the chancellor a card this morning expressing their best wishes.


Bush Wins in Dixville Notch
LEAD: Thirty-four registered voters in this mountain hamlet cast their ballots in the New Hampshire primary at midnight, six hours before voting booths open in the rest of the state, and gave Vice President Bush and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri winning votes.
In the Republican field, Mr.


Our Towns; From Meat Truck To Pulsing Stages Of Rock-and-Roll
LEAD: When Ed Feldt's daughter Veronica announced she wanted to be a rock-and-roll star, Mr.
Feldt had strong feelings.
Veronica already had a good job driving a wholesale meat truck.
Mr.
Feldt, a meat man himself, had broken her in and helped her build her own route.
She loved driving so much that she had taken a double course load at Smithtown High School West to graduate early and start on the truck.


Audience Has Found 'Sarafina!'
LEAD: The line Saturday began forming outside the Cort Theater just before the box office opened for the matinee.
It was sunny but cold, below freezing, with the wind gusting across 48th street making it feel like the mercury was stuck at zero.


Cyprus to Hold Runoff Presidential Election
LEAD: A runoff election is to be held next week between a conservative and a Communist-backed businessman to determine who will succeed President Spyros Kyprianou, who lost his bid for a third five-year term.


Latest Japanese Import Goes on Patrol
LEAD: Some people mistake Officer Wayne Sato's koban for an instant photo-processing booth.
At Officer Herman Jones's koban, tourists try to buy tickets for a cable car ride.


Man Sought in Fatal Stabbings
LEAD: A man who raped his 12-year-old stepdaughter yesterday and then fatally stabbed his wife and his 19-year-old stepson in their Brooklyn apartment, was being sought early today, the police said.


TV SPORTS: SHARING A CLOSE-UB ON GRIEF
LEAD: VIEWERS in 18 million homes shared a family tragedy Sunday.
What set it apart from the gratuitous violence often seen on television was that it involved an American Olympian and became the major theme of Sunday night's ABC telecast of the Winter Games.


Europe Talks: Pragmatism and Fury
LEAD: Facing the press in Brussels at 2 A.M. on Saturday, an exhausted-looking Margaret Thatcher permitted herself the kind of nationalistic outburst that is supposed to have gone out of fashion since the members of the European Community vowed to tighten their political and economic links.


Koch Says Agreement on Pensions Will Cause Severe Cuts in Services
LEAD: Mayor Koch says the compromise agreement on pensions for municipal workers will force the city to make cuts in essential services.
But whether those cuts will occur, or occur with the severity the Mayor has forecast, is, to a certain extent, unpredictable.


Forty Niner Shows His Determination
LEAD: Forty Niner and Notebook slugged it out for the length of the stretch at Gulfstream Park today before Forty Niner thrust out his nose at the wire to score the most courageous and important victory of his career.


Holmes a Court Reports $750 Million Loss in Stock Plunge
LEAD: Robert Holmes a Court, the Australian investor, said today that his Bell Group conglomerate had lost more than $750 million in the October stock market collapse, more than experts had estimated.


Three Candidates in 2 Parties Bracing for the Battle of Their Political Lives; George Bush: The Vice President Tries to Cope With a Troubled Campaign
LEAD: Vice President Bush smiled and smiled as Barry Goldwater, once Mr.
Republican, endorsed him and said Mr.
Bush was a better leader than his chief rival, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas.


Bond Traders Show Uncertainty
LEAD: The bond market rally ran out of steam last week as more signs emerged that the economy was not as weak as some expected and that the Federal Reserve was not trying to push short-term rates lower.


TV Review; 'Frontline' Looks at Flight Problems
LEAD: WHY is your flight delayed or canceled, and why is an airport so often a mess? ''Frontline'' provides some reasonable answers tonight: too many planes in too little airspace, a surfeit of passengers and not enough technology to control things.
The PBS documentary, on Channel 13 at 10 P.M. and Channel 49 at 9 P


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-8, A22


Choices For Writers
LEAD: SHOPPING for word-processing software?
The choices are more numerous and more complicated than ever.
It used to be simple to choose a package back when Wordstar was the only program available.
Today there are dozens of programs on the market.


FROESE RETURNS TO WIN
LEAD: All afternoon, there was something going on in front of Bob Froese.
Rangers and Canadiens were swinging sticks, trading punches, exchanging insults.


Science Can't Keep Up With Flood of New Journals
LEAD: THE number of scientific articles and journals being published around the world has grown so large that it is starting to confuse researchers, overwhelm the quality-control systems of science, encourage fraud and distort the dissemination of important findings.


Milky Way Is 'Warped', New Study Reveals
LEAD: The disk-shaped Milky Way galaxy is not flat, but instead resembles a warped phonograph record and is adorned with a delicate scalloped edge, new observations show.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''You can judge for yourselves whether your President is the young lieutenant - or even the distorted picture of this officer of the Wehrmacht - or whether your President is a man who, for decades of his life, worked for justice, tolerance and peace.
I ask you to form your own judgment.''


commercial Tenants Offered Equity Stakes
LEAD: Major real estate developers, facing wary lenders and intensifying competition for prime tenants, are giving away the store.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: ANTHILLS OF THE SAVANNAH.
By Chinua Achebe. 216 pages.
Anchor Press/Doubleday. $16.95.


Swiss 8Skiers Are 1st and 2d In Downhill
LEAD: Only 13 minutes passed, but it felt like forever for a pair of Swiss skiing teammates and bitter rivals at opposite ends of the downhill course.
Peter Mueller stood impassively at the bottom of Mount Allan, having charged down the hill, the reluctant rabbit, establishing the standard the others would have to beat.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Security Council


The Political Clean Air Act of 1988
LEAD: The smell of pervasive privilege and manipulation rises over Washington as one influence-peddling conviction follows another.
In the next day or two, there'll be a chance to do something about it -if Senate Republicans will finally abandon their adamant opposition.


BUSH IN STRUGGLE WITH SURGING DOLE IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
LEAD: The New Hampshire Presidential primary campaign, characterized by dazzling shifts in voter loyalties, ended today with personal invective, muddled forecasts and advice to Republicans from a venerable conservative hero.


For-Profit Radio in Gabon Offers Snapshot of Africa
LEAD: The young man in wraparound sunglasses leaned toward a sponge ball microphone and intoned: ''Bonjour Afrique - bonjour africains.''


At School, Cabbies Learn Courtesy and How to Find S.I.
LEAD: Paul Schlichtman gazed at the 25 prospective taxicab drivers in a classroom in midtown Manhattan and opened the floor to questions.
The drivers appeared suspicious.  ''O.K., suppose you pick up a passenger,'' one said, finally, ''and he dies in the car?'' (''Call the morgue,'' said Mr. Schlichtman.) ''While you're looking at your map before the trip,'' asked another, ''can you turn the meter on?


INSIDE
LEAD:  For-Profit Radio in Africa


Israel Detains 2 In Burial Alive Of Palestinians
LEAD: The Israeli Army said today that it had opened an investigation into reports that its troops had buried four young Palestinians alive.
It said that it had detained two soldiers and that it expected to detain others.


Home for Veterans Is Urged
LEAD: City Councilman Abraham G. Gerges said yesterday that Governor Cuomo should take advantage of available Federal funds and create a state-run veterans' home in New York City.


Advertising; Meredith's Conservative Approach
LEAD: WHEN Jack Rehm was named president of the Meredith Corporation recently, many in the publishing industry thought that the 55-year-old executive was ideal for the job.
He has been at Meredith for 26 years, nearly all his professional life, and if there is such a thing as the quintessential Meredith man, Mr.


City Ballet: La Fosse As Frantz in 'Coppelia'
LEAD: IN the earliest versions of ''Coppelia,'' the role of Frantz, the young male lead, was danced by a woman in men's clothes.
Swanilda, the pertly willful young heroine, was the center of the ballet despite the dramatic potential inherent in the character of Coppelius, the mad old toymaker who mistakes Swanilda for a suddenly living doll.


Tax Shelters Hit Hard By New Filing Rules
LEAD: Real estate and tax shelter investors will soon see close up the heavy toll that the new tax law inflicted on their investments, be it an oceanfront vacation home rental on Long Island or an oil-drilling partnership in Texas.


Washington's Words Echo Through Senate
LEAD: Senator Terry Sanford of North Carolina gave the traditional reading of George Washington's farewell address to a nearly empty Senate chamber today.


Tyson Sets Up Fund
LEAD: Mike Tyson, the heavyweight champion, announced yesterday that he was contributing $50,000 to help form a foundation to aid young victims of violent incidents.
On Saturday, Tyson said he, his wife, the actress Robin Givens, and the promoter Don King visited Tawana Brawley, the student from Wappinger Falls, N.Y., who was the victim of a purported racial attack.


Family's Autopsy Finds Evidence of Beating
LEAD: The family of a Brooklyn man, who died of an apparent heart attack in an ambulance while in police custody Jan. 30, says a private autopsy shows he suffered injuries consistent with a beating.


Unions and The Post Hold Tense Talks
LEAD: The New York Post and its unions yesterday held tense talks on ways for the newspaper to save $24 million over the next three years, but agreed only to meet around the clock starting tomorrow in a last effort to avert a shutdown of the paper on Friday.


U.S. and Florida Fight Texas and California Over Citrus Shipments
LEAD: State and Federal officials are fighting efforts by Texas and California to keep out Florida citrus fruit after the lifting of a Federal ban imposed to keep a plant disease from spreading.


Bartlett H. Hayes Jr., an Educator And Art Historian, Is Dead at 83
LEAD: Bartlett H. Hayes Jr., an educator and art historian who was director for many years of the Addison Gallery of American Art at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., died of congestive heart failure on Sunday in Peterboro, N.H.
He was 83 years old and had lived in Peterboro since 1985.


National Arts Club Honors Carlos Fuentes
LEAD: Carlos Fuentes, the Mexican novelist and critic, is to receive the Medal of Honor for Literature from the National Arts Club, at 15 Gramercy Park South, at its 20th annual literary award dinner on Feb. 24.


Stage: Buscemi and Boone
LEAD: STEVE BUSCEMI and Mark Boone Jr., two performance artists and writers who have been working together for the last five years, make ideal comic foils.
Skinny and quiveringly sensitive with eyes so expressive that they seem to bulge out of their sockets, Mr.
Buscemi is a thin-skinned ectomorph continually menaced by Mr.


If Willis Gets $5 Million, How Much for Redford?
LEAD: 20th Century-Fox has paid Bruce Willis $5 million to star in a movie.
For Hollywood, the result is equivalent to an earthquake.
The map of movie-star salaries must now be redrawn.


Chess: A Dazzling Dzindzichashvili Wins the Continental Open
LEAD: The 19th annual Continental Open Tournament, held at the Hilton Hotel in Rye, N.Y., was won by Roman Dzindzichashvili.
The New York grandmaster, who originally hailed from the Soviet Union, scored 5-1 to capture the $2,000 first prize in the six-round Swiss-system event.


Concert: Ukrainian Choral Music
LEAD: IT is not every day that one celebrates an important millennium.
It was in A.D. 988 that the Ukrainians formally accepted the church into their lives, and this 1,000 years of Christianity was marked by a festive, grandly scaled evening of music at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday.
A big mixed chorus from Georgia - the Choral Guild of Atlanta - sang; members of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra played, and there were five singers from the international opera scene.


Turbine on Jetliner Shatters, But No Injuries Are Reported
LEAD: A turbine blade from an Eastern Air Lines A-300 Airbus shattered on takeoff today and started a brush fire just outside the airport, but the twin-engine plane returned safely and no one was injured, officials said.


YESTERDAY'S MEDAL WINNERS
LEAD:  Alpine Skiing  Men's Downhill  Gold: Pirmin Zurbriggen, Switzerland  Silver: Peter Meuller, Switzerland  Bronze: Franck Piccard, France  Cross- Country  Men's 30 km  Gold: Aleksei Prokourorov, Soviet Union  Silver: Vladimir Smirnov, Soviet Union  Bronze: Vegard Ulvang, Norway


Recent Setbacks Stirring Doubts About Search for AIDS Vaccine
LEAD: Bleak results from recent experiments indicate that the quest for a vaccine against AIDS will be even more difficult than many experts had imagined.
The results also raise the possibility that current lines of vaccine research may be fruitless.


Olympia &amp; York Adding To Its Stake in Santa Fe
LEAD: Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the big Canadian real estate company, announced yesterday that it would pay $17.50 a share for up to 14 million additional shares, or 9.1 percent, of the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation.


Close Sweatshops but Don't Restore Homework
LEAD: To the Editor:


With Halley's Help, Sun's Size Is Found to Be Constant
LEAD: IT was the era of a peculiar and now-vanishing species, the English gentleman scientist.


Hippocratic Oath
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chevron Buys PPG Unit
LEAD: PPG Industries said Friday it had agreed to sell its commercial biochemical business to the Chevron Chemical Company, a subsidiary of the Chevron Corporation.
The terms were not disclosed.


WALDHEIM ASSAILS 'SLANDERS,' VOWS NOT TO STEP DOWN
LEAD: Despite the deepening divisions in Austria and growing calls for his resignation, President Kurt Waldheim told his nation today that he would ''not retreat in the face of slanders, hateful demonstrations and wholesale condemnations.''


Three Candidates in 2 Parties Bracing for the Battle of Their Political Lives; Paul Simon: The Illinois Senator Pins His Hopes on Finishing Second
LEAD: After a week that would have tested any candidate, Senator Paul Simon of Illinois took a serene leap of faith today over polls and pundits, and landed on the side of optimism.


FATAL CAR FIRE NEAR 10 DOWNING
LEAD: A car burst into flames early this morning at the entrance to Downing Street where Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher lives, killing an unidentified man who was in the car, the police said.


Older People Aided by Gifts To Neediest
LEAD: The plight of lonely older people is among the main concerns of donors responding to the 76th annual appeal of the New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Foreign Stocks Rise Slightly
LEAD: Stocks edged higher in most overseas markets today.
The financial markets in the United States were closed to observe Washington's Birthday.


Tugboat Workers Begin Strike
LEAD: The union representing 2,500 tugboatmen and barge workers in New York Harbor struck nine towing companies at 12:01 A.M. this morning following a breakdown of negotiations yesterday.


Bid for Belgian Insurer
LEAD: Belgium's largest insurer, Groupe AG S.A., said today that it had raised its offer for a rival insurer, Assubel-Vie S.A. by 20 percent, to about $205.71 a share.
Groupe AG announced the new bid, its second for Assubel-Vie, to offset a counter-offer for Assubel-Vie's stock by a group of investors backed by Assubel-Vie.


Stage: 'Taming of Shrew'
LEAD: WHAT makes Katherina, in ''The Taming of the Shrew'' tick?
And what mutual chemistry ultimately unites her with Petruchio, her unflappable suitor who turns her into an obedient and loving spouse?
Although these questions are not precisely addressed in a workmanlike new production of the Shakespeare play, directed by Julie Taymor, for Theater for a New Audience, at the Triplex Theater, Ms.


Banker Seen as a Contender For Vacancy on Fed Board
LEAD: Wendell Wilkie Gunn, a banking consultant and a former special assistant to President Reagan, is a leading candidate to fill a vacant seat on the Federal Reserve Board, Administration and Congressional officials said today.


KNICKS ROAR BACK ON JACKSON SCORING
LEAD: Trent Tucker played only 12 minutes and scored 2 points last night.
But he explained better than most could how the Knicks defeated the Nets, 97-96, to run their Madison Square Garden winning streak to eight games, the longest since the 1983-84 season.


MINNESOTA STORM CLOSES HIGHWAYS
LEAD: Hundreds of snowbound motorists spent the night in their cars, on farms and in National Guard armories as a blizzard clogged major roads for nearly 24 hours in southwestern Minnesota, the authorities said today.


Drug Combination Gains Support As Alternative to Surgical Abortion
LEAD: DRUGS that induce miscarriages may eventually replace traditional surgical abortions in the first three months of pregnancy, according to a World Health Organization official.
In particular, a panel that recently evaluated international drug tests determined that a specific two-drug combination was safe and effective when used early in pregnancy.


Stage: U.S. Dramas In London
LEAD: Even as the English stand accused of hijacking the modern Broadway musical, they have mounted a sneak attack on the vintage American drama.
Last year's shattering National Theater production of Arthur Miller's ''View From the Bridge,'' as acted by Michael Gambon and directed by Alan Ayckbourn, was no fluke.


Rangers Defeat Canadiens, 3-1
LEAD: Don Maloney of the Rangers celebrating after scoring against the Canadiens yesterday in the third period at the Garden.
It was the Rangers' third goal in their first victory in over a week.
Page A19. (NYT/Barton Silverman)


Dollar Down And Gold Up
LEAD: The dollar fell and gold prices rose today in Europe, where trading was quiet.


Sex and the O.E.C.D.
LEAD: The Washington office of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the 24-member forum of industrialized countries that is based in Paris, has received a bit of a surprise in the mail from the District of Columbia's Zoning Division.


Sensory Stimulation Helps Rats Stay Smart
LEAD: Rats given additional sensory stimulation in infancy were able to think and learn better in their old age, according to a group of researchers studying the effects of aging on the brain.


More Mexican Prices 'Dollarized'
LEAD: People here have long been fond of saying that ''no one in Mexico has ever lost money betting on the dollar.'' But the latest downturn in this nation's six-year economic crisis has given a new and added cogency to that adage.


A Book That Grew Up
LEAD: BACK in 1974, what has been called the first cult computer book was published.


A Mockery of Rights
LEAD: To the Editor:


Margaret Parker Isaac, Art Gallery Manager
LEAD: Margaret Parker Isaac, the manager of the Fourcade Gallery in Manhattan for 14 years until last October, died in an automobile accident on Dec. 19, just outside of Winchester, Va.
She was 35 years old.
Her 14 month-old daughter, Marina, survived the crash unharmed.


No Headline
LEAD: President Mauno Koivisto was re-elected to a second six-year term today, winning a second-round victory in the electoral college.


G.M. Eases Dealer Policy
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation is easing its long-held opposition to publicly traded automobile dealers, a key executive said today.
The development could spur stock offerings by some of the large multifranchise dealers that are beginning to dominate the retail car market.


76ers Will Retire No. 6
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers said yesterday they would retire Julius Erving's number before an April 19 game against the Milwaukee Bucks.
Wearing the number 6, Erving scored 18,364 points with the 76ers over 11 seasons before he retired at the end of last season. ''If there was ever an athlete, or a man, deserving of this honor, it's certainly Julius Erving,'' said the 76ers' owner, Harold Katz.


Pirelli Is Silent On Firestone
LEAD: Several Italian newspapers said over the weekend that Pirelli S.p.A. was negotiating to acquire the tire division of the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company for $1 billion.
But Pirelli, the world's fifth-largest tire maker with sales of $3.65 billion last year, declined today to confirm or deny the reports.


Ethics and Abortion of Multiple Fetuses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Merrill Pollack, Editor, 63
LEAD: Merrill Pollack, a sculptor, writer and former editor of The Saturday Evening Post, died Sunday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Parkersburg, W.Va., after a short illness.
He was 63 years old and lived in Grantsville.
His family did not disclose the cause of death.


MUELLER GLIDES TO GOLD IN LUGE
LEAD: Jens Mueller of East Germany rode his luge down the 4,104-foot course at Canada Olympic Park in 46.367 seconds yesterday in the fourth and final heat for a two-day total of 3 minutes 5.548 seconds, nearly four-tenths of a second faster than Georg Hackl of West Germany at 3:05.916.


Translation of Ancient Tao Text Brings $130,000
LEAD: After a spirited auction involving eight publishers, Harper &amp; Row has agreed to pay $130,000 for a new translation of a Chinese book of philosophy and religion written more than 2,000 years ago.
The amount is one of the highest ever paid to a translator, and it is certainly the most for a work in the public domain that has already been translated into English dozens of times.


Careers; Employees, Benefits and Computers
LEAD: TRADITIONALLY employees have relied on year-end reports from the company for timely information about their benefits and how some, like 401(k) savings plans, have grown through the year.
Or a worker may visit or phone the company's benefits office for answers.


Music: Feltsman Plays At Philharmonic Benefit
LEAD: IT has been a long time since musicians competed against other musicians in the Olympics.
And a good thing, too.
The Greeks, who were wise in many ways, probably went wrong in putting musical performance in the same category as discus throwing.
It is a waste of time to try to rank artists, grading them as if they were prime, choice or utility cuts of athletic meat.


PATTERNS
LEAD: Focus on Newcomers


Opera: Mascagni's Rare 'Iris' by Jersey Troupe
LEAD: Usually, it is nothing more than a nostalgic pastime, but occasionally a peek through the attic yields some forgotten heirloom.
Mascagni's ''Iris'' may not quite be the priceless gem one dreams of finding tucked away among the dusty boxes of old and forgotten musical scores, but it is a far more satisfying discovery than most of the curios unearthed during recent years by operatic scavengers.


Treasury's Bill Auctions Set Today
LEAD: The only Treasury auctions scheduled this week are today's sale of three-month and six-month bills.


A Sneak Preview of Fall Designs
LEAD: For two weeks, most major European designers have been presenting their new collections quietly in their showrooms in New York.
There are no dazzling theatrical presentations with elaborate choreography and special effects, as there will be next month in the high-tech spaces in Milan's Fiera or the tents in the courtyard of the Louvre in


I.B.M.'s New System For Huge Computers
LEAD: Seeking to outmaneuver several Japanese competitors, the International Business Machines Corporation introduced an improved operating system for its largest computers yesterday.
It said the system would be provided without charge to current owners of its most advanced mainframes.


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 1988
LEAD: COMPANIES  Pearson agreed to buy Addison-Wesley for $105 a share, or $283 million.
Pearson, which owns The Financial Times, Madame Tussaud's wax museum and other properties, will become an international force in book publishing with this deal. [ Page D1. ] Federated Department Stores said it was negotiating with several parties that are interested in buying all or part of it.


Just a TV Evangelist
LEAD: John Glenn, the astronaut, earned his political credentials as a Senator from Ohio before his try for the Presidency in 1984.
Jack Kemp, the quarterback, paid his political dues as a member of the House from New York before offering himself for the Republican Presidential nomination this year.


On Trade: Wrong, Long Arm of the Law
LEAD: The Senate voted stiff penalties last spring against Toshiba Corporation of Japan and Kongsberg Vaapenfabrik of Norway for selling advanced submarine technology to Moscow.
The Senate's anger was just.
Its remedy is wrong.
Senate and House conferees, who today start negotiating the final trade bill, would do well to let this part die.


Gotti's Brother Called Rising Star in Gambino Mob
LEAD: Aided by nepotism and courtroom victories, Gene Gotti, a younger brother of John Gotti, is carving a niche for himself as an imposing figure in the Gambino organized-crime family, law-enforcement officials say.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of a transcription error, a dance review yesterday of the appearance of two Bolshoi Ballet dancers with the New York City Ballet misstated a characterization of their performance on Saturday afternoon.


Crisis Over Dropouts: A Look at Two Youths
LEAD: James Diggs and Anthony Colon come from troubled and impoverished families, from neighborhoods where drugs offer the constant temptation of escape and quick money, and both have poor academic skills.
It is easier to find the similarities in their lives than the differences that led James to return to school and Anthony to remain a dropout.


A Helpful Oncogene
LEAD: A GREAT deal of research has focused on oncogenes and the changes in their DNA that makes them either dangerous or useful, but now a scientist has discovered a potentially important property of the much studied oncogene called ras.
When activated in cells growing in laboratory cultures, ras makes those cells resistant to radiation.


Fryar Is Arrested
LEAD: Irving Fryar, the New England Patriots' wide receiver, was arrested Sunday on weapons charges in Pemberton, N.J., after a state trooper found a loaded shotgun and handgun and a hunting knife in Fryar's car, the police said.
Fryar, 25 years old, had been stopped for speeding.
He was charged with four counts of illegal weapons possession and released on $100 bail.


DEFENDER PACES DOWNHILL PRACTICE
LEAD: Michela Figini, the defending Olympic champion, and Karen Percy of Canada paced two Olympic women's downhill training runs yesterday on Mount Allan, Alberta.


Murky Danger: L.I. Brown Tide Thrives
LEAD: The frigid winter waters off Simons Point, a flicker of land in Flanders Bay, are not particularly friendly to marine life.
Scientists, though, have found one tiny organism thriving unexpectedly: the algae that make up the ''brown tide.''


Winter Repairs Bolstering L.I. Parks
LEAD: On a typical winter day, gulls outnumber the hardy visitors who brave icy Atlantic winds to walk here at Jones Beach.


Syracuse Player Quits
LEAD: Keith Hughes, a 6-foot-7-inch sophomore forward from Carteret, N.J., has quit the Syracuse basketball team and left school, according to Syracuse officials.
Hughes sat out five of Syracuse's last six games after averaging 16 minutes a game during the Orangemen's first 17 contests.
He was averaging 5.4 points and 2.7 rebounds per game.


Tackling the Taj Mahal
LEAD: The National Park Service is going international.
It has agreed to help India develop the Taj Mahal as a national cultural park.


Missile Cuts Are Just a First Step
LEAD: To the Editor:


With So Much Known, Exploration Evolves
LEAD: WHEN dreams drifted off to the Indies and Antipodes, when the source of the Nile beckoned from beyond every cataract, no one entertained any doubt about the meaning of exploration.
To explore was to follow human curiosity to the ends of the earth.
To explore - the word, in one version of its etymology, comes from the Latin to cry out - was to search out and exclaim discovery.


C.I.A. Cover-Up?
LEAD: Stamp collectors visiting the Smithsonian's National Philatelic Collection might suspect a Government cover-up after reading the description of the $1 Rush Lamp Stamp with Inverted Candleholder.


Reagan Budget Proposes Increase In U.S.-Subsidized Housing Units
LEAD: As part of an effort to accommodate the homeless, President Reagan proposes adding 135,500 units to the nation's pool of Government-subsidized housing, a White House official said today.


Simple Tests Developed To Diagnose Dyslexia
LEAD: Neurologists and psychiatrists reported here today that about one-third of all children suffering from acute reading problems have brain abnormalities that can be diagnosed by simple drawing or tapping tests.


Italian Begins Bid in Belgium
LEAD: Carlo De Benedetti, the Italian financier, formally began his bid today to take control of Societe Generale de Belgique, Belgium's largest company.
But the company's shares climbed well above the offering price.


McReynolds, Mets Settle at $975,000
LEAD: Kevin McReynolds, who had a good chance to become only the second three-time loser in baseball salary arbitration, capitulated yesterday in his bid for a $1,150,000 salary by accepting the Mets' new offer of $975,000.


Unknown Spanish Bird
LEAD: The fossil of a small bird has brought to light a previously unknown branch of the family tree of birds, paleontologists report.


Tendency to Get Ear Infections Is Inherited, New Study Shows
LEAD: MIDDLE-EAR infections, which plague millions of young children, are an inherited trait and have nothing to do with environment or access to medical care, a new study indicates.


Market Place; Investing Now For a Recession
LEAD: BEFORE last week, Donald H. Straszheim, the chief economist at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, was predicting a period of uneven economic growth.
But he now believes that a ''garden-variety recession'' will begin within the next 6 to 18 months, and he picks early 1989 as the likeliest starting point.


The Long Fortnight of George Bush
LEAD: Harold Wilson, the former British Prime Minister, used to say that two weeks is a lifetime in politics.
He might have been talking about George Bush.


Bridge: 2 Careful Leopards Showed How to Disguise Their Spots
LEAD: It was the prophet Jeremiah who asked, rhetorically, this question: ''Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots?''


NO END TO ORDEAL FOR A PARAGUAYAN
LEAD: Two months after completing a 25-year jail sentence, Paraguay's longest-serving political prisoner remains under house arrest, with armed policemen stationed at his front gate to prevent him from receiving visitors.


Smoking Ban Leads To Arrest on L.I.R.R.
LEAD: On the first day of a smoking ban on commuter railroads in the New York metropolitan region, a Long Island Rail Road passenger was arrested on charges of kicking and slapping two conductors after they told him to put out his cigarette.


Nuclear Carrier Launched
LEAD: The $2.7 billion nuclear aircraft carrier Abraham Lincoln was christened and launched here Saturday.
The 1,092-foot ship is the Navy's fifth Nimitz class nuclear-powered carrier.
All have been built at the Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company, where a sixth Nimitz carrier, the George Washington, is scheduled for completion in 1991.


Judge Medina's 100th Birthday: Time for Tributes
LEAD: When Amanda Medina Murray meets history professors at Cornell University, where she is a freshman, they ask if she is related to Harold Raymond Medina, the Federal judge who presided over a landmark trial of Communists in the United States.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Horse Racing  King's Swan Wins Stymie Handicap: King's Swan stalked pacesetting Wind Chill to the stretch yesterday, took the lead and went on to carry highweight of 126 pounds to a 4 1/2-length victory in the $169,200 Stymie Handicap for 3-year-olds and up.
Wind Chill finished second in the five-horse field ahead of Feeling Gallant, Mr.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
CRI Inc., Rockville, Md., a worldwide financial services and investment company, appointed Yvonne S. Distenfeld senior vice president, general counsel.


Bush Wins Poll in Puerto Rico
LEAD: Puerto Rico Republicans today gave Vice President Bush overwhelming support in a straw poll boycotted and denounced as illegal by supporters of Senator Bob Dole.


26 States Now Running Lotteries to Ease Budgetary Burdens
LEAD: Twenty-six states are now collecting extra dollars from their taxpayers with lottery games, which in turn are helping the elderly in Pennsylvania, schools in Ohio and economic development in Iowa and Oregon.


Japan's U.S. Surplus at 2-Year Low
LEAD: Japan's trade surplus with the United States fell in January to $2.97 billion, the lowest level in two years, the Ministry of Finance reported today.


U.S. Aide Calls Soviet 'Brutal'
LEAD: Edward L. Rowny, special adviser to President Reagan on arms control, told a meeting of American scientists today that the Soviet Union was ''squandering time'' in its current disarmament negotiations with the United States and ''remains a brutal adversary.''


China's Account of Riot in Tibet Is Disputed
LEAD: The most senior Tibetan religious figure in China has disputed official assertions that Chinese policemen did not shoot at demonstrating monks during a riot in Lhasa last October.


A Trimmer Bethlehem Is Breathing Easier
LEAD: In a dimly lit control room overlooking the Bethlehem Steel Corporation's rolling mill here, Joseph L. Voye pointed proudly to the bright computer screens, whose colorful charts and graphs detailed the thickness, smoothness and temperature of the steel sheets being molded below.


Farewell Voyage
LEAD: Capt.
Larry Rounds at the wheel of the Coast Guard cutter Raritan on its final icebreaking mission, last week on the Hudson River.
Among the jobs performed by the cutter, which will be decommissioned next month, were the freeing of a Texaco barge that got bogged down in ice near Albany, and the repair of a flashing light on top of a buoy.


Packers Draw Fire


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a computer programming error in the tabulation of a New York Times/CBS News Poll on the Iowa caucuses, a news analysis on Feb. 10 incorrectly stated the percentages of Republican voters who listed ''moral values'' as a central concern.
Sixty-eight percent of Pat Robertson's backers did so, not 70, and so did 19 percent of other Republicans, not 18.


Blast Disables P.L.O.'s 'Exodus' Ferry in Port
LEAD: An explosion today crippled a ferry that was expected to carry Palestinian deportees on a symbolic voyage to Israel, port officials and the Palestine Liberation Organization said.


Advertising; Scali, McCabe Awarded Greek Tourist Account
LEAD: After a 10-way review, the Greek National Tourist Organization has tapped Scali, McCabe Sloves, a unit of the Ogilvy Group, as its new agency.
The budget is $2 million.
The review, which began at the end of last year, came down to five finalists, including the former agency, Lois Pitts Gershon Pon/GGK, which was behind the ''I'm Going Back to


BORN TO SKI 'TO THE LIMIT'
LEAD: FIFTY-ONE HUNDREDTHS of a second.
The blink of an eye.
The slip of a ski in the snow.
Too much time in the air after soaring off a bump.
Not crouched low enough in a glide.


Paper Mill to Be Watched Closely After a 3d Leak
LEAD: State officials plan to remain at a strikebound International Paper Company mill indefinitely following a chlorine gas leak that sent seven workers to a hospital.


Doctor vs. Doctor
LEAD: The doctor at the dinner party, a surgeon of renown, was in a state of controlled irritation about all the attention being paid to AIDS.


U.S. SUFFERS HOCKEY SETBACK
LEAD: Coach Dave Peterson wore a long face after the United States hockey team wasted a 3-0 lead and suffered a 7-5 loss tonight to Czechoslovakia.
But his first encounter with unhappiness at Calgary did not sway him from his strategy for the young Americans, whose enthusiasm for scoring goals often leaves them wanting on defense.


Actress's Complaint Negotiated
LEAD: Lincoln Center Theater and the Actors' Equity Association are negotiating a settlement in a dispute between the director of ''Sarafina!'' and an American actress who joined the Broadway cast.


Algeciras Journal; Many Fish in Morocco's Sea, but None for Spain
LEAD: Normally, the dock bars and eateries here are packed with the men who sail the fishing boats.


By Design; Fashion Fallacies
LEAD: Some undeniably chic fashions are also expected to be functional.
But let's face it: they often aren't.
Take jump suits.
Forever being touted as the most contemporary, streamlined attire, they are, in fact, often a hindrance.
Just try dealing with one in a jumbo jet's minuscule bathroom.
Also, since a jump suit is cut in one piece, unless it is fitted perfectly, it tends to ride up.


A SPECIAL SCHOOL OPENS IN CHICAGO
LEAD: South Loop Elementary School opened its doors today to 335 youngsters from a range of racial and economic backgrounds after two years of disputes over the makeup of its student body.


Three Candidates in 2 Parties Bracing for the Battle of Their Political Lives; Jack F. Kemp: The Congressman Has to Finish Third to Remain Credible
LEAD: In shopping malls and burger joints, a bowling alley and a general store, Jack F. Kemp passed the dwindling hours of the New Hampshire campaign fighting for his political life.


Lehman Routs York, 87-62
LEAD: Lehman, the defending champion, trounced York, 87-62, last night as the 23d annual City University of New York tournament began.


Chinese Official Lists 6 Grievances Against U.S.
LEAD: In the strongest language to date, China has described its relations with the United States as potentially unstable and attacked what it said was interference in its internal affairs.


Music: Elodie Lauten
LEAD: ELODIE LAUTEN, a composer and keyboardist, brought her homemade amplified lyre, the cellist Arthur Russell, some prerecorded tapes and gallons of pretension to her show at La Galleria at La Mama on Saturday.
Standing with her ''trine,'' as she calls the instrument, head back as if in artistic ecstasy, with Mr.


Sunset Limited Journal; There's Something About a Train. . .
LEAD: Thrice weekly the Amtrak sleeper train clacks across the desert Southwest with its human cargo, a rolling collection of the neurotic, the phobic, the curious and the adventurous.


Texas Town Awaits Navy With Hope and a Case of Nerves
LEAD: Extraordinary changes are facing this town, with its empty houses and idle plants, when the Navy breaks ground this week for a $140 million home port for the battleship Wisconsin.


Martin K. Speckter, 73, Creator of Interrobang
LEAD: Martin K. Speckter, a retired advertising executive known to lexicographers as the creator of the interrobang, a punctuation mark used to convey disbelief, died of bone cancer Sunday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Nation's History Comes to Life at Holiday Parade
LEAD: Some participants at the President's Day parade yesterday in Old Town in Alexandria, Va., dressed as World War II soldiers, while others performed a drill of the First Virginia Regiment of Revolutionary War days. (NYT/Paul Hosefros)


The Expanding Microwave Galaxy
LEAD: Move over, microwave popcorn.
The 30-second hot fudge sundae and many other new microwave food offerings are landing in supermarkets.


LIMITED INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIMITED INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,010,559,000
982,103,000
Net inc
63,316,000
87,537,000
Share earns
.35
.46
Yr sales
3,527,941,000
3,142,696,000
Net inc
235,188,000
227,780,000
Share earns
1.25
1.21


Albert J. Sica, Fordham Dean, 71
LEAD: Albert J. Sica, former dean of the Fordham University School of Pharmacy, died of melanoma Monday at his home in Delmar, N.Y.
He was 71 years old.


A Trailer-Town Play That Was Born in the News
LEAD: The germ of an idea for a play or a book can originate anywhere: in personal experience in a mundane job (the real-estate office in David Mamet's ''Glengarry Glen Ross''), in something that's in the public consciousness (the Vietnam dramas of David Rabe) or even in a short newspaper report.


CONCURRENT COMPUTER reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONCURRENT COMPUTER (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
65,664,000
60,817,000
Net inc
3,789,000
1,150,000
Share earns
.33
.10
6mo sales
132,613,000
115,041,000
Net inc
7,289,000
2,258,000
Share earns
.64
.20


Seven Reportedly Killed as Ex-Employee Seizes Plant
LEAD: A disgruntled former employee took over a top-secret military plant for several hours here today and shot at least 12 people, according to the authorities, with seven of those reported to be fatally wounded.


Biltmore Theater Is Sold
LEAD: The Biltmore Theater, at 261 West 47th Street, was sold at auction yesterday for $5.35 million.
The purchaser, Morris Gluck, said through a spokesman that he intended ''to preserve the theater function'' of the 948-seat house.
Lawyers for Mr.
Gluck and for the seller, Sam Pfeiffer, were still negotiating the details of a contract last night, according to Gary Waskow, a spokesman for Properties at





LUBRIZOL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LUBRIZOL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
241,692,000
212,567,000
Net inc
12,668,000
13,453,000
Share earns
.33
.34
Yr sales
1,013,430,000
976,776,000
Net inc
81,335,000
78,185,000
Share earns
2.06
1.97


A REFLECTIVE REAGAN BEGINS A YEAR OF FAREWELLS
LEAD: SANTA BARBARA, Calif., Feb. 16


COCA-COLA ENTERPISES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COCA-COLA ENTERPISES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
778,461,000
784,439,000
Net inc
14,344,000
b1,118,000
Share earns
.10
-
Yr rev
3,329,134,000
1,951,008,000
Net inc
88,372,000
27,792,000
Share earns
.62
.36
Shares outst
140,036,000
76,705,000


ADVANCES: REPLACING AN ANCIENT PHONE NET
LEAD: EACH time employees place a call on the Federal Government's telephone system, they use technology put together a quarter-century ago and that has now become so outmoded and expensive to operate that it would be cheaper to place the calls on the public telephone system.
Federal officials say that getting a sophisticated new telephone network into place as soon as possible is essential to cut costs and deal with the growing volume of information associated with the typical bureaucrat's job.


Military 4 1/2, Civilians 2
LEAD: James C. Miller 3d, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, told a group of Republican members of the House of Representatives yesterday that the budget President Reagan is to submit on Thursday will call for wage increases of 4.5 percent for those in the military but less than half of that, 2 percent, in wage increases for civilians employed by the


Withholding Snag for Some
LEAD: Many Americans may have had too little tax withheld from their paychecks last year, so they will owe money when they file their tax returns, the Internal Revenue Service said today.


One Marketplace, Indivisible
LEAD: The financial markets in New York and Chicago today stand at a crossroads.
They can fight turf battles or they can take the bold steps needed to stabilize the markets.
One thing is certain, though: Without proper safeguards, there remains the long-term potential for a stock market break of the severity and speed of last


CANDELA LASER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANDELA LASER
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,092,158
793,791
Net loss
163,972
603,795
6mo rev
5,914,869
1,636,735
Net loss
5,850
811,919


Al Cohn, 62, a Jazz Saxophonist, Arranger and Partner of Zoot Sims
LEAD: Al Cohn, a tenor saxophonist and arranger who worked with the Artie Shaw, Buddy Rich and Woody Herman orchestras, died of liver cancer Monday in Poconos Hospital in East Stroudsburg, Pa.
He was 62 years old and lived in Canadensis, Pa.


SAVANNAH ELECTRIC &amp; POWER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAVANNAH ELECTRIC &amp; POWER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
37,381,000
38,745,000
Net inc
3,409,000
2,943,000
Share earns
.28
.24
Yr rev
176,092,000
175,585,000
Net inc
23,421,000
21,853,000
Share earns
2.05
1.91


What Meese Achieved In Iran-Contra Inquiry
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-9


VARI-CARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VARI-CARE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,688,000
8,501,000
Net loss
149,000
b157,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


ASTROTECH INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ASTROTECH INTERNATIONAL (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,490,000
1,326,000
Net inc
1,657,000
b703,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss  The company said the latest quarter includes a net gain of $2.6 million pre- tax on the sale of substantially all the assets of the company's Astrotech Space Operations Inc.


Report by New York Agency Finds Rent Office Inefficient
LEAD: Almost a year after the Governor's housing commissioner defended his agency's record in administering New York City's rent laws against a blistering attack by legislators, the Cuomo administration now says that the basic activities of the Office of Rent Administration are ''not functioning.''


ARYT OPTRONICS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ARYT OPTRONICS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,294,000
2,154,000
Net inc
268,000
335,000
Share earns
.05
.07
9mo sales
6,703,000
5,523,000
Net inc
735,000
762,000
Share earns
.15
.15


Cruel, and Needless, Choice of Refugees
LEAD: Thailand's patience has snapped.
After years of receiving refugees from Communist neighbors, it is now experiencing an unexpectedly large new flow from Vietnam.
Officials and deputized fishermen are pushing the boats full of newcomers back to sea.
More than 100 refugees have died - and now the U.S.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Feb. 9 about the Scandinavian Airlines System misstated the basis for the airline's ranking among European carriers.
It ranked eighth in revenue passenger miles - the number of paying passengers multiplied by the distance they are flown.


Wider Use of Experimental Drug For AIDS Ailment Is Approved
LEAD: Federal health officials today announced approval for wider use of an experimental drug to treat AIDS patients who suffer from a life-threatening form of pneumonia.


A King's Fall: Tax Changes Reverse Rise Of Developer
LEAD: The fortunes of one of New York City's most flamboyant real-estate executives, Gerald Guterman, have taken a precipitous fall.


BUSH OVERCOMES DOLE'S BID AND DUKAKIS IS EASY WINNER IN NEW HAMPSHIRE PRIMARIES
LEAD: Vice President Bush soundly defeated Senator Bob Dole in the New Hampshire Republican primary today, keeping his Presidential candidacy alive after one of the most difficult weeks in his political life.


For California Chardonnays, A Graceful 12-YeaR Evolution
LEAD: CALIFORNIA chardonnay is the Cinderella of American wines.
Largely klutzy, over-oaked and superalcoholic 12 years ago, it is today often seductively complex and smoother.


RAGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAGEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,179,000
6,143,000
Net loss
b97,000
b40,000
b-Includes a loss of $30,000 and $183,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively, from discontinued operations.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: DEAR DIARY:


Soviet Pairs 1-2; Bronze to U.S.
LEAD: In the pairs figure skating competition at the XV Olympic Winter Games, the Soviet Union, led by Yekaterina Gordeyeva and Sergei Grinkov, won the gold and silver medals.


US HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*US HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
163,593,000
133,124,000
Net inc
5,467,000
b47,234,000
Share earns
.12
.94
Yr rev
627,124,000
525,281,000
Net inc
1,048,000
b75,819,000
Share earns
.02
1.48


Firestone to Sell 75% of Tire Unit In $1 Billion Deal With Japanese
LEAD: In what analysts describe as the largest investment by a Japanese company in an American manufacturing concern, the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company said yesterday that it had preliminarily agreed to sell 75 percent of its tire operations to the Bridgestone Corporation of Japan for $1 billion.


P.L.O. 'Exodus' Ferry Faces a Sea of Trouble
LEAD: The Sol Phryne lay at rest today, a ship of a certain age and an opaque past.
A sign on the gaping mouth of the ferry's car deck announced, belatedly, ''No visitors.''


SOONER FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOONER FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
9,532,000
b234,000
Per share
-
.12
6mo net loss
10,280,000
b346,000
Per share
-
.17
b-Net income  The latest quarter includes a $7.8 million addition to loan loss provision and real-estate related reserves.


American Given Life in I.R.A. Case in London
LEAD: An American, the first member of the Irish Republican Army to be extradited from the United States, was convicted today of killing a London policeman in 1975 and sentenced to life in prison.


Canada Sputters to Victory
LEAD: The tighter the game, and the less predictable their grip on its outcome, the more familiar it seems to feel to Canada's Olympic hockey team.


Charlotte Rosen Musician, 95
LEAD: Charlotte Rosen, a musician and teacher, died of Alzheimer's disease Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 95 years old.
Born in Berlin, she was trained as a violinist.
After immigrating to New York in 1939, she switched to the viola, and performed at New York Public Library branches and the New-York Historical Society.


Downing St. Car-Fire Death Called Suicide
LEAD: British news organizations reported today that a man killed when his car exploded in flames about 120 feet from Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's official residence had left a suicide note protesting unemployment.


Leader Faults Bid by Cuomo On Residency
LEAD: The Senate majority leader, Warren M. Anderson, said today that he was against requiring newly hired New York City police officers and firefighters to live in the city.


Biden Out of Intensive Care; Condition Called Satisfactory
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. has been moved out of intensive care, and his condition continues to improve after surgery to correct an aneurysm in an artery supplying blood to his brain, a spokesman for Walter Reed Army Medical Center said today.


Home Sales Steady in '87
LEAD: Sales of existing homes held steady in 1987 at close to four million units despite volatile mortgage rates and the October stock market collapse, a national real estate trade group reported today.


SAZTEC INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAZTEC INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,569,988
1,062,217
Net loss
678,286
126,126
6mo rev
3,132,923
2,238,395
Net loss
1,040,634
124,121


G.M. Cancels Insert After Article on Perot
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation has pulled from Fortune magazine an eight-page advertising insert after Fortune ran a cover article about H. Ross Perot, entitled ''How I Would Turn Around G.M.''


WENDT-BRISTOL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WENDT-BRISTOL CO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,559,041
5,761,567
Net inc
138,710
84,195
Share earns
.12
.07
9mo rev
18,742,729
17,533,873
Net inc
459,190
328,963
Share earns
.41
.29
Share earnings for the year-ago periods were restated to reflect an increase in the average shares outstanding.


Sports People; Tibbs Traded to Orioles
LEAD: The Baltimore Orioles have acquired Jay Tibbs, a right-handed pitcher, and Alfredo Cardwood, a minor league pitcher, from the Montreal Expos for three minor league pitchers - John Hoover, Doug Cinnella and Rick Carriger.
Tibbs, 26 years old, was 4-5, with a 4.99 earned run average in 19 games and 12 starts with Montreal last year.


GAF Shuns Takeover Law
LEAD: The GAF Corporation said yesterday that it had decided to exempt itself from the recently enacted Delaware law that limits hostile takeovers.


WMS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WMS INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
25,509,000
27,469,000
Net loss
b1,469,000
b1,118,000
b-Includes a charge of $560,000 from restructuring of work force at the company's amusement game facilities for the latest quarter; the year- ago quarter includes a loss from discontinued telephone business of $320,000.


Pacers Defeat Knicks
LEAD: Chuck Person scored 23 points and Vern Fleming's 6 points in the third quarter helped Indiana take the lead for good tonight as the Pacers defeated the Knicks, 117-104, for their fifth straight victory.


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Kriek Downs Purcell: Johan Kriek overcame a slow start to beat Mel Purcell, 6-7, 6-1, 6-2, yesterday in the second round of the $415,000 United States Indoor championships in Memphis.
Kriek, seeded 15th, from Naples, Fla., had trouble with Purcell's variety of soft shots in the first set, but found his serve midway through the second set and dominated the rest of the match.(AP)  Becker Wins Despite Erratic Play: Despite some sloppy and erratic play and a late lapse, Boris Becker defeated Guy Forget of France, 6-4, 1-6, 6-4, in the opening round of the


Navy Promotes Its Ex-Chief
LEAD: John F. Lehman Jr., who was Secretary of the Navy in the first six years of the Reagan Administration, has been chosen for promotion to captain in the Naval Reserve, the service said today.
Mr.
Lehman, a naval flight officer who left the Government last April to pursue a career in investment banking, was selected for a captaincy along with more than 450 other commanders.


Dollar Posts Losses in U.S.; Gold Has Modest Decline
LEAD: The dollar fell against most major currencies in United States trading yesterday after turning in a mixed performance overseas.


Having a Vested Interest in the New Budget
LEAD: James C. Miller 3d, Director of the Office of Management and Budget, examining a copy of the proposed budget as it came off the press.
Mr.
Miller said the agreement last year between the White House and Congress has given members of the Legislature a larger stake in the outcome of the budget plan, which is due tomorrow.


COOPER TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COOPER TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
176,822,257
144,963,543
Net inc
8,783,818
6,771,988
Share earns
.86
.67
Yr sales
665,774,644
577,516,812
Net inc
30,679,747
23,017,759
Share earns
3.02
2.28


ENRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENRON CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,442,700,000
1,480,600,000
Net inc
b7,000,000
c3,800,000
Yr rev
5,915,800,000
7,453,300,000
Net inc
b5,600,000
c77,600,000
Share earns
-
.66
b-Includes net of $2,000,000 and a loss of $65,000,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, both from discontinued operations.


Soviet Students Now Asking 'Why?'
LEAD: The 15- and 16-year-olds filed into Lev Sobolev's sparely furnished classroom in Moscow's school No. 67, some with the sprightly step of the well-prepared, some with bored looks, some full of gossipy whispers.
From under their arms peeked ''War and Peace.''


Oil Discovery in England
LEAD: Oil has been found beneath a wheat field in eastern England.
Enterprise Oil Investments said its test well at West Firsby in Lincolnshire flowed at 864 barrels of oil a day.
Analysts said it might be Britain's third-largest onshore deposit.
Most British oil comes from the North Sea.


Dance: Monte Company Opens at the Joyce
LEAD: OOZE and anvil are alternately suggested as the motor pulse behind Elisa Monte's choreography and her splendid dancers flow like molasses or strike with pistonlike force.


The Discreet Charms of Paris Bistros and Brasseries
LEAD: These are trying times for American gourmands in Paris, what with the dollar as deflated as a punctured souffle and local prices steadily climbing.
A three-course meal with wine in an average Parisian restaurant easily tops $40 a person; it's considerably more if you are picky about wine.
A bottle of decent Beaujolais, for example, can run $20 or more, and the price of a better Bordeaux is downright scary, often 25 percent or more over New


ERIE LACKAWANNA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ERIE LACKAWANNA INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,761,345
2,360,532
Net inc
1,927,082
1,720,004
Share earns
2.18
1.94
Yr rev
9,679,611
10,494,845
Net inc
6,480,462
6,699,630
Share earns
7.32
7.56


Cradle-to-College Plans For Tuition Payment
LEAD: Education officials in Massachusetts have devised a plan to encourage parents to start saving money early for their children's college education.
They say it will serve as a model for other states.


GREY ADVERTISING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREY ADVERTISING INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
98,109,000
77,791,000
Net inc
2,736,000
2,315,000
Share earns
2.06
1.66
Yr rev
320,630,000
265,480,000
Net inc
10,339,000
9,109,000
Share earns
7.43
6.60


Ashton-Tate Products Due
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Corporation, the dominant force in software programs to help microcomputers manage large data bases, will introduce its dBASE IV system today.


FRANKLIN HOLDING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FRANKLIN HOLDING (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b228,018
d76,052
9mo net loss
b301,841
cd686,723
Share earns
-
.68
b-Includes net realized losses on investments of $327,419 for the quarter and $247,129 for the 9 months.


Tandem Computers To Buy Ungermann
LEAD: Tandem Computers Inc. said today that it had agreed to acquire Ungermann-Bass Inc., a leading maker of local area networks, for approximately $260 million.


Film: 'Frida,' Tribute To Mexican Artist
LEAD: FRIDA KAHLO'S death in 1954 at the age of 47 caused no great stir in the United States.
In her native Mexico, however, she had been a celebrity, at least within radical political and artistic circles.
About a year before, the first major exhibit of her paintings had been shown at Mexico City's Gallery of Contemporary Art.


Ash Wednesday: Faithful Decide on Going Public
LEAD: Millions of Americans who normally give little public sign of religious allegiance will walk around today with one smudged on the forehead.


SABINE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SABINE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,904,000
13,241,000
Net loss
2,626,000
3,809,000
Yr rev
68,780,000
64,113,000
Net loss
7,521,000
b35,453,000
b-Includes a charge of $25,237,000 from the writedown of properties.


Financial Woes Threaten Survival Of the Historical Society in Jersey
LEAD: The New Jersey Historical Society has told state officials that the society is in a financial crisis and that it must decide within a few weeks whether to begin laying off its staff and curtailing its operations.


Cloning Brings Factory Precision to the Farm
LEAD: A new and powerful biological technology that enables livestock breeders to clone large numbers of identical animals from a single embryo is nearing commercial application in the United States and Canada.


For Arabs, a Quiet 'Day of Anger' on West Bank
LEAD: A Palestinian call for a ''day of anger'' today produced almost total observance of a commercial strike in the occupied territories but only scattered clashes between protesters and the Israeli Army.


A Woman Wins Her 14-Year Fight To Be Scoutmaster
LEAD: Catherine N. Pollard got out her old Boy Scout uniform with the Troop 13 patch on the shoulder last weekend and announced proudly, ''I can still get in it.''


U.S. Confronting AIDS With Sense of Realism
LEAD: America is confronting AIDS in 1988 with a new sense of realism and a surge of activity by a broad range of public and private groups, according to health policy experts who only a year ago were lamenting the nation's complacency.


Ramadi Journal; For Prisoners of War, Boys' Summer Camp?
LEAD: Mohammed Rova Rahimi hesitated and offered a sly smile when asked whether, when he was 14 years old, he really wanted to be a hero, let alone a martyr.


POLAROID CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POLAROID CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
508,700,000
510,600,000
Net inc
39,800,000
39,400,000
Share earns
.65
.63
Yr sales
1,760,000,000
1,630,000,000
Net inc
116,100,000
103,500,000
Share earns
1.88
1.67


Corrections
LEAD: A news analysis article on Friday about an appeals court ruling on homosexuality in the Army misstated the number of Supreme Court mem bers who have retired since the Court's June 1986 decision upholding laws against homosexual sodomy.
In addition to Associate Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr., who retired last June, Chief Justice Warren E.


APA OPTICS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APA OPTICS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
443,447
217,979
Net inc
73,290
b63,208
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
959,408
563,048
Net loss
17,938
58,063
b-Net loss


Census Undercounts Too Imprecise to Adjust
LEAD: To the Editor:


Life in the 30's
LEAD: IF hospitals truly wanted to perform a valuable service for new parents, they would put an Enforcer on staff.
The Enforcer would enter your room just after the baby arrived for the 2 o'clock feeding, and would stand at your bedside surrounded by smoke.
He would look a little like the Grim Reaper, only shorter, and he would say in a hollow voice:


F.A.A. Says Eastern Has Improved Maintenance
LEAD: Eastern Airlines has significantly improved maintenance deficiencies that led to a record $9.5 million fine two years ago, but more changes are still needed, the Federal Aviation Administration said today.


ARABS REJECT BID TO USE CAMP DAVID AS BASIS FOR PEACE
LEAD: Many Arab countries, led by Egypt and Jordan, have told the United States that they firmly reject any further interim Middle East negotiations based on the Camp David accords.


Census Undercounts Too Imprecise to Adjust; Use Political Process
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Tonight, I somehow feel that I have a lot in common with Mark Twain.
Reports of my death were greatly exaggerated.''  - Vice President Bush.  [ A1:6. ]


3 Children Die in Fire In Jersey City Building
LEAD: Three brothers, aged 1, 2 and 3 years old, were killed today in an apartment fire.


ATHLONE INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATHLONE INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
207,775,000
195,010,000
Net loss
b2,717,000
c1,559,000
Share earns
-
.43
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $300,000 and a credit of $1,703,000 from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting.


Pathologist Says Levin Wasn't Drunk
LEAD: Jennifer Levin was not drunk when she died, a pathologist testified yesterday, but the alcohol level in her bloodstream was equivalent to at least three drinks consumed an hour earlier.


Campeau Lifts Federated Bid by $5 a Share, to $66
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation again sweetened its bid for Federated Department Stores Inc. yesterday.
The offer was raised by $5 a share, to $66 in cash, or a total of $5.7 billion.


Will Reagan Imperil Public Lands?
LEAD: Tucked away in President Reagan's budget message to Congress is the germ of an idea that could lead to a destructive assault on the environmental integrity of America's public lands.


CALGENE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALGENE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,877,300
3,901,000
Net loss
902,000
24,000


William U. Gardner, Professor, 80
LEAD: William U. Gardner, professor emeritus of anatomy at the Yale University School of Medicine, died of Parkinson's disease Sunday at the Yale New Haven Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Orange, Conn.


COMPUTER FACTORY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER FACTORY INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
76,501,000
53,168,000
Net inc
4,678,000
2,964,000
Share earns
.58
.48
Shares outst
8,115,000
6,184,000


A NEW ART FORM: DESIGNING STORE SHELVES BY COMPUTER
LEAD: It's no secret in the supermarket business that how items are placed on shelves and how often the inventory turns over can be crucial factors when it comes time to tote up the profit-loss statement.
As supermarkets have gathered more and more data about which items sell best and which make the most money, the computer has moved center stage, dictating not only what appears on the shelves, but also how merchandise is positioned.


The Bald Truth
LEAD: There is a man here who knows a terrible secret about a lot of important people, and he is making a great deal of money off it.
He is a physician who has restored forelocks and cowlicks to the heads of a Senator, two members of the House of Representatives, a general and a former member of the Reagan Cabinet and many others.


CONSOLIDATED NATUARL GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONSOLIDATED NATUARL GAS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
680,069,000
674,019,000
Net inc
69,215,000
55,478,000
Share earns
.83
.67
Yr rev
2,321,584,000
2,622,821,000
Net inc
186,047,000
178,660,000
Share earns
2.24
2.16


U.S. WON'T REOPEN PLUTONIUM PLANT
LEAD: The United States Department of Energy said yesterday that it would not reopen the nation's largest plant for making plutonium for nuclear weapons, which has been shut for safety improvements for 13 months.


TV Review; Tales of Discontent, on 13
LEAD: AMERICAN PLAYHOUSE offers a 90-minute double feature, two tales of rural life and its discontents, tonight on Channel 13 at 9 o'clock.
First comes ''Revolt of Mother,'' based on a short story by Mary E. Wilkins Freeman, who wrote around the turn of the century.
The mother is played by Amy Madigan and her revolt consists of turning the new barn, which her husband had meant to use for some cows, into a new home for the family, which has been squeezed into the old house for years.





MORRISON KNUDSEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORRISON KNUDSEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
448,020,000
498,460,000
Net loss
3,300,000
c10,900,000
Share earns
-
.99
Yr rev
1,860,000,000
2,040,000,000
Net loss
b59,500,000
c39,400,000
Share earns
-
3.60


NEXT AMBASSADOR
LEAD: The United States is planning to change ambassadors to Israel next summer.
According to State Department officials, William A. Brown, currently ambassador to Thailand, will replace Thomas R. Pickering, who has served in Tel Aviv since 1985.


Greenspan Implies Fed Won't Cut Rates Soon
LEAD: Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said today that important features of the economy seemed stable, if not particularly strong.
Economists said his remarks implied that the Fed wanted interest rates and the dollar to stay where they are.


LAWSON MARDON GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAWSON MARDON GROUP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
288,921,000
227,923,000
Net inc
b8,478,000
4,462,000
Share earns
.28
.29
Shares outst
28,995,000
15,295,000
Yr sales
1,034,699,000
890,974,000
Net inc
b27,661,000
14,441,000
Share earns
1.20
.94
Shares outst
22,978,000
15,295,000


A. Daniel Fusaro, Court Clerk
LEAD: A. Daniel Fusaro, a retired chief clerk for the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, died of cardiac arrest Feb. 8 at his home in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.


Music: A Barker Tribute
LEAD: WHILE many other composers have abandoned in recent years the paths carved out by Schoenberg, Webern and their heirs, Thomas E. Barker held the line.
Last month Mr.
Barker died of bone cancer at the age of 33.
As a memorial, several of the works he composed since 1980 were performed Monday evening at Symphony


FUQUA INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FUQUA INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
193,829,000
171,436,000
Net inc
b12,618,000
cd3,603,000
Share earns
.59
-
Yr sales
772,343,000
701,194,000
Net inc
b62,950,000
d39,575,000
Share earns
2.92
1.86


Japan's Output Rises
LEAD: Japan's industrial production in December rose a revised 2 percent from the previous month and a revised 9.2 percent from a year earlier, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry said today.


Election by Ailey Group
LEAD: Harold Levine has been elected president of the board of the Dance Theater Foundation, the parent organization of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater and its subsidiary companies and school.
Mr.
Levine, co-founder of the advertising agency of Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver, succeeded Betty Cott Ruder as board president.


Tempe Journal; A Place in the Sun Finds an N.F.L. Team
LEAD: For as long as anyone can remember in this overgrown river crossing, where a native is somebody who bought a house last year, Tempe has coveted a National Football League team.


THE POP LIFE
LEAD: Time Is On Her Side


Independence Day Passes Like Shadow In Lithuania Capital
LEAD: The 70th anniversary of Lithuania's independence passed over the Lithuanian capital like a shadow today, marked only by the police and security forces who kept a daylong vigil at the city's national and religious shrines.


ENSERCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENSERCH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
732,894,000
695,092,000
Net inc
6,967,000
11,424,000
Share earns
.05
.13
Yr rev
2,770,332,000
2,722,821,000
Net inc
b27,762,000
c26,878,000
Share earns
.23
.17


Colleges Seek Ways to Keep Blacks in School
LEAD: As colleges and universities struggle to stem the decline in blacks entering college, a major new concern has emerged: how to keep those who are already there.


GENERAL AUTOMATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL AUTOMATION INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
13,285,000
9,079,000
Net loss
b645,000
d10,000
6mo sales
23,459,000
18,867,000
Net loss
b1,568,000
cd366,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-After extraordinary income of $338,000 and $490,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Compaq's OS/2
LEAD: The Compaq Computer Corporation on Wednesday will begin shipping its version of OS/2, the new operating system used on the PS/2 line of personal computers from the International Business Machines Corporation.
Compaq, the leading vendor of I.B.M.-compatible machines, also said it would offer a 3.25-inch disk drive as an option for its portable computers, which until now have come with 5.25-inch drives.


ELSCINT LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELSCINT LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
42,087,000
36,933,000
Net inc
305,000
c74,224,000
Share earns
.01
3.73
9mo rev
113,258,000
101,031,000
Net inc
b32,826,000
c54,977,000
Share earns
1.23
3.10


EDUCATION: LESSONS
LEAD: Not long ago, the President offered a lesson. ''Money,'' Mr.
Reagan said, ''can never take the place of basics like . . . homework.'' Pedagogical poverty aside, a number of teachers here thought he did not go far enough.
Homework is much more than old-fashioned drill, one of the basics; it is education's essence.


Bear Stearns Profit Drops
LEAD: Reflecting the difficult operating environment that has enveloped the securities industry since the stock market plunge on Oct. 19, the Bear Stearns Companies yesterday reported third-quarter net income of $36.8 million, or 40 cents a share, for the three months ended Jan. 29, a drop of 38.3 percent from the $59.6 million, or 70 cents a share, earned in the corresponding period a year ago.


Plan for Reagan Library Faces Local Resistance
LEAD: Planners of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, forced to abandon a site at Stanford University after widespread protests, have proposed to build the library near this Southern California city, but they are running into resistance from local municipal officials.


Orange Juice Contracts Fall As Fear of Freeze Abates
LEAD: Frozen concentrated orange juice futures prices fell sharply yesterday as warmer weather moved into Florida's orange-grove country and eased fears of a freeze.


NASA to Test 2 Escape Systems for Shuttle
LEAD: Two systems designed to help astronauts escape a disabled space shuttle will undergo extensive tests in coming weeks to determine if one will be used when flights resume this summer, space officials said today.


CUCOS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CUCOS INC
Qtr to Jan 10
1988
1987
Revenue
2,515,208
2,289,335
Net inc
1,535
b291,594
6mo rev
6,304,933
5,624,447
Net inc
39,247
b493,072
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Citicorp Rates Up
LEAD: Interest rates rose about one-fifth of a percentage point at Citicorp's weekly auction of commercial paper.
The bank holding company sold $50 million of 91-day paper at an average rate of 6.625 percent, up from 6.431 percent last week.
Another $50 million of 182-day paper sold at an average rate of 6.667 percent, up from 6.4306 percent.


WESSEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESSEX CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,547,000
12,330,000
Net loss
b2,345,000
c488,300
Share earns
-
.08
9mo rev
29,570,000
34,986,000
Net loss
4,373,000
c747,000
Share earns
-
.12
b-Includes a provision for a loss of $865,000 related to the termination of its contract to acquire two nursing homes in Bristol and Kingsport, Tenn.


Trump Interested In Buying Patriots
LEAD: Donald Trump, the New York real estate magnate and one of the principal voices in the defunct United States Football League, was added today to the roster of potential buyers for the New England Patriots.


SOUTHWESTERN ENERGY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWESTERN ENERGY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
23,357,000
24,476,000
Net inc
3,977,000
4,691,000
Share earns
.48
.57
Yr rev
74,246,000
78,892,000
Net inc
9,810,000
b15,422,000
Share earns
1.18
1.85


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Sebastian Coe of Britain, a two-time Olympic gold medalist in the 1,500 meters, has a heavy cold and fever and will not be able to run in a 3,000-meter race Friday night in the Los Angeles Times/GTE Indoor Games. ''It's disappointing, but I wouldn't be giving myself a fair chance to redeem myself,'' Coe said.


Paramount Pictures Hires D'Arcy Masius
LEAD: Gulf and Western's Paramount Pictures has assigned its media and marketing business, worth more than $70 million, to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Los Angeles.
The creative side is being handled by smaller agencies, as is typical in the movie business.
Other Los Angeles shops in the race, which began at the end of the year, were the incumbent, AC&amp;R/ DHB &amp; Bess, a Saatchi &amp; Saatchi unit; BBDO West, a division of BBDO Worldwide, and Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide's unit.


WENDY'S INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WENDY'S INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Revenue
259,231,000
271,377,000
Net inc
b4,375,000
1,843,000
Share earns
.05
.02
Shares outsd
96,032,000
96,403,000
Yr rev
1,058,557,000
1,139,852,000
Net inc
b4,505,000
c4,926,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
95,783,000
95,879,000


Sports People; Team on the Rise
LEAD: The irony is inescapable.
Using a wide-open offense that averages 109 points a game, Loyola Marymount of California, with a 20-3 record, ranked 20th this week in making its first appearance ever in The Associated Press college basketball poll.
The head coach is Paul Westhead, the same coach who was dismissed by the Los Angeles Lakers 11 games into the 1981-82 season after Earvin (Magic) Johnson complained publicly that Westhead's offense was slow and stodgy.


U.S. Ability to Monitor Strategic Pact Is Doubted
LEAD: Members of the Senate Intelligence Committee have warned the Reagan Administration that current surveillance systems, unless modernized, will not be adequate to monitor Soviet compliance with a proposed treaty to reduce long-range nuclear missiles.


SYRACUSE HONORS COLUMNIST
LEAD: Syracuse University has established an endowed faculty chair in honor of William Safire, the Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist for The New York Times, the university's Chancellor, Melvin A. Eggers, announced last week.
The William Safire Chair in Modern Letters was proposed by Robert B. Menschel, a trustee of the university and a roommate of Mr.


Report Clearing Judge Ginsburg Is Released
LEAD: The Justice Department looked into 16 instances in which Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, then the department's antitrust chief, dealt with cable television industry matters while holding cable stock, but found either his participation or chance of gain was too small to violate Government conflict-of-interest laws, it was reported today.


Real Estate; New York Is Not at Top Of Cost List
LEAD: NEW YORK companies often complain about the high cost of doing business in the city, but a recent international survey shows not only that Manhattan office rents are a comparative bargain but also that costs are rising much faster in many other cities worldwide.


The Big Prize: Credibility; The Republicans
LEAD: Vice President Bush saved his political skin by winning the New Hampshire primary today and set up what seems likely to be a prolonged struggle with Senator Bob Dole of Kansas for the 1988 Republican Presidential nomination.


SIMPSON INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SIMPSON INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
37,431,000
33,557,000
Net inc
1,725,000
bc1,336,000
Share earns
.28
-
Yr sales
146,769,000
150,179,000
Net inc
5,303,000
b5,704,000
Share earns
.84
.90


Castro Foe, Freed by Venezuela, Accused in U.S.
LEAD: Orlando Bosch, a symbol of anti-Castro militancy among Cuban exiles in the 1960's and 70's, returned from Venezuela today after his third acquittal on charges of planning an explosion aboard a Cuban jetliner in 1976 that killed 73 people.


Sports of The Times; Here Come the Old Champs
LEAD: HERE come the Soviet players, firing the puck furiously in practice, skating backwards in unison, heads snapping vigilantly from side to side, under the intense watch of their coach.


5 Unions Back Newspapers' Joint Pact
LEAD: Five newspaper unions today dropped their their opposition to the proposed partial merger of two Detroit newspapers, saying joint operation was the ''only way to assure the survival'' of The Detroit Free Press.


Music: Muti Conducts Philadelphia Orchestra
LEAD: EVEN more than most glamorous conductors of big-time symphony orchestras that regularly visit New York, Riccardo Muti has made the highlights of his Philadelphia Orchestra concerts at Carnegie Hall his periodic presentations of complete operas in concert form.


Have Bicycle, Will Travel (Stylishly)
LEAD: NEITHER rain, nor slush, nor fumes from cars, nor numbing cold can keep hardy New Yorkers off their bicycles.
With gritty determination, they stylishly pedal out to meet the elements, often with an amusing originality.
A messenger battles midtown traffic like a Phantom of the Street, his face covered with a hockey mask to protect him from churned-up mud and sleet.


ITT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ITT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,200,000,000
4,700,000,000
Net inc
b447,000,000
1,020,000
Share earns
3.01
.66
Yr rev
19,500,000,000
17,400,000,000
Net inc
b1,020,000,000
494,000,000
Share earns
6.76
3.23


Nortek-Mohasco
LEAD: Nortek Inc. has purchased a 7 percent stake in the Mohasco Corporation and said it might seek control of the carpet and furniture manufacturer, which is based in Fairfax, Va.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Nortek said that its efforts last week to discuss a friendly transaction with Mohasco had been rebuffed by the company's management.


New York Agency Offering Long Island Hospital Bonds
LEAD: The New York State Dormitory Authority is tentatively offering $102 million of tax-exempt bonds for the Long Island Jewish Medical Center with a maximum yield of about 7.79 percent for an issue maturing in 2027 through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.


ESSELTE BUSINESS SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ESSELTE BUSINESS SYSTEMS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
362,802,000
276,576,000
Net inc
b18,586,000
c13,886,000
Share earns
.91
.68
Yr sales
1,242,408,000
972,832,000
Net inc
b57,310,000
c45,854,000
Share earns
2.79
2.24


JAPANESE-HELD U.S. BANK PLANS ACQUISITION
LEAD: In a bid to bolster its position as a business lender, the California First Bank said today that it had agreed to acquire the much larger Union Bank, a subsidiary of Standard Chartered P.L.C., for $750 million.


Feltsman in Talk
LEAD: The Soviet pianist Vladimir Feltsman will discuss his life and career, at 4:30 P.M. tomorrow at Minor Latham Playhouse, Barnard College, Broadway and 119th Street.


Engineer in Amtrak Crash Guilty Of Manslaughter in Plea Bargain
LEAD: An engineer accused of running a stop signal and driving three freight locomotives into the path of a speeding passenger train pleaded guilty today to one count of manslaughter in the deadliest crash in Amtrak's history.


Three Announce Candidacies for the Senate
LEAD: Candidacies for the United States Senate were announced yesterday by a long shot in Florida and a familiar name in Minnesota, and Senator John Heinz of Pennsylvania began his campaign for a third term at a Pittsburgh subway stop.


Bond Prices Continue to Decline
LEAD: Bond prices declined for the second consecutive trading session yesterday as the sharp rally of the previous five weeks seemed to have been defused by a spate of stronger-than-expected economic statistics.


DATASOUTH COMPUTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATASOUTH COMPUTER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,098,000
5,337,000
Net inc
42,000
323,000
Share earns
-
.06
Yr rev
16,284,000
19,212,000
Net loss
503,000
b858,000
Share earns
-
.15
b


UGI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UGI CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
117,570,000
118,201,000
Net inc
b11,296,000
c6,051,000
Share earns
1.07
.57
Yr rev
419,350,000
443,143,000
Net inc
b30,599,000
c24,936,000
Share earns
2.84
2.34


DYNAMICS RESERACH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYNAMICS RESERACH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Revenue
30,615,000
22,410,000
Net inc
1,401,000
806,000
Share earns
.28
.16
Yr rev
91,501,000
75,192,000
Net inc
3,728,000
2,456,000
Share earns
.74
.49


Runoff Set in Milwaukee
LEAD: Martin J. Schreiber, a former Acting Governor of Wisconsin, and State Senator John O. Norquist led a field of seven candidates today in an election to succeed Mayor Henry W. Maier.
They will meet in a runoff April 5.
Mayor Maier, who is 70 years old, announced last year he was retiring after 28 years in office.


Korea Trade Investigation
LEAD: The United States trade representative, Clayton K. Yeutter, and a private industry group took actions today against what they consider unfair trade practices by the Government of Korea in barring imports of American cigarettes and beef.


LAMSON &amp; SESSIONS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAMSON &amp; SESSIONS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
88,709,000
42,066,000
Net inc
b2,765,000
c9,832,000
Share earns
.28
-
Yr sales
340,359,000
129,453,000
Net inc
b9,775,000
c7,303,000
Share earns
1.14
-


Kodak Film in Test
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company said its professional photography division was trade-testing what will prove to be the world's fastest black-and-white film, intended for professional use.
Kodak said the film was designed to produce optimum results at an index of EI 3,200, but acceptable prints had been obtained at speeds up to EI 50,000.


Food Notes
LEAD:  Hawaiian Touch


U.S. Slider Doesn't Let Her Spirits Slip
LEAD: The words came tumbling out almost as fast as Bonny Warner had slid down the icy chute on her high-tech sled.
Even an eighth-place standing after today's first two runs of the luge singles competition - which included a brush with a wall on her second run -did not dampen her enthusiasm or hopes of eventually placing among the top five or six women when the event is completed on Wednesday.


WASHINGTON HOMES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON HOMES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,843,998
18,757,848
Net inc
1,761,700
2,232,000
Share earns
.36
.46
6mo sales
42,060,064
36,264,123
Net inc
4,446,700
4,032,000
Share earns
.91
.83


Burger King's New Campaign
LEAD: In its first important ad campaign since dumping Herb the nerd and the agency that created him, the Burger King Corporation has brought back a trusted old theme: that flame-cooked burgers are better than its rivals' fried patties.


Sports People; Arbitration for Gooden
LEAD: Barring a last-minute settlement, the Mets and Dwight Gooden will meet in salary arbitration today.
Al Harazin, the Mets' senior vice president, said he had not heard from Gooden's agent, Jim Neader, yesterday and had no reason to think they would not debate their differences in a hearing.
Gooden, who earned $1.5 million last year, submitted a $1.65 million figure, the Mets $1.4 million.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


College Basketball; Temple Tops Penn State, 50-49
LEAD: Mark Macon's 3-point play with 42 seconds left helped Temple survive a scare from Penn State for a 50-49 victory in an Atlantic 10 Conference game tonight.


Boxing Notebook; Mike Tyson's Soft Spot
LEAD: Mike Tyson, the heavyweight champion, and his new wife, the actress Robin Givens, were discussing their courtship earlier this week at their apartment on the East Side.


SEIBELS BRUCE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEIBELS BRUCE GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b754,677
c3,691,418
Per share
.10
.52
Yr net inc
b10,856,332
c1,271,988
Per share
1.50
.18
b-Includes a capital gain of $8,000 and $3,415 for the quarter and year, respectively.


With a Civilian in Charge, Guatemala Still Can't Fully Rein In the Brutality
LEAD: Set providentially beside one of the world's most beautiful volcanic lakes, yet shaken by unending cycles of terror and death, the village of Santiago Atitlan is an apt metaphor for Guatemala.


James Molinski, Host At Sardi's, Dies at 74
LEAD: James Molinski, the host and dining-room manager at Sardi's restaurant for more than 30 years, died of a stroke Feb. 6 after gall stone surgery at Community Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 74 years old and lived in Bayville, L.I.


Devils Closer To Soviet Deal
LEAD: The Devils are on the verge of signing Vyacheslav Fetislov of the Soviet Olympic team, according to a source involved in the negotiations.


Soviet Says Pakistan Is Blocking A Settlement to the Afghan War
LEAD: The Soviet Union said today that Pakistan was obstructing an end to the war in Afghanistan by insisting that a change of government in Kabul precede the signing of a peace agreement.


Judge Denies Approving Huge Fee To Lawyer With White House Tie
LEAD: A Federal district judge denied today that he had improperly approved payment of $1 million in attorneys' fees to the firm of a lawyer with White House connections.
The judge, Eugene Lynch, who at the time was on the bench of the San Francisco Superior Court, had been seeking the lawyer's help to gain White House backing in his bid for the


ABC's Unenviable Choices
LEAD: IF you're an average American fan, about every four years you generate enough interest to watch a hockey game in prime time.
Then the network puts on a commercial and -wouldn't you know it? - someone goes and scores while you're looking at Spuds MacKenzie.


The Big Prize: Credibility; The Democrats
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis won where he had to win today, in his own backyard, but the result proved little about the ability of the Governor of Massachusetts to win outside New England.


Zurbriggen Takes Lead in Combined
LEAD: Pirmin Zurbriggen of Switzerland took a major step today toward his second gold medal of the Winter Olympics by winning the downhill portion of the men's combined by nearly half a second.


Graduation Ceremony for New York City's Canine Teams
LEAD: Members of the city's Transit Police Department with their German Shepherd partners during the graduation ceremony yesterday at the academy in Manhattan.
The 16 police canine teams have completed 14 weeks of training. (NYT/Don Hogan Charles)


Wine Talk
LEAD: ONE of Philippe de Rothschild's more significant contributions to French wine was his success in 1973, after almost half a century of demanding, wheedling and politicking, in making his beloved Chateau Mouton-Rothschild a first growth.


REECE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REECE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,677,000
15,330,000
Net inc
645,000
477,000
Share earns
.25
.19
Yr rev
56,978,000
55,281,000
Net inc
1,625,000
1,011,000
Share earns
.64
.40
The prior quarter and full-year adjusted for changes in corporate income tax rate accounting.


ROGERS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROGERS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
40,898,000
32,861,000
Net inc
1,197,000
796,000
Share earns
.40
.27
Yr sales
145,314,000
128,777,000
Net inc
3,377,000
2,327,000
Share earns
1.13
.78


Lust and Unnatural Acts
LEAD: Bruce Babbitt was by far the most attractive candidate in the whole herd, probably because he never had a chance.
Being an attractive candidate ought to be easy when you're under no temptation to do something dreadful or asinine, which is the fate of people who do have a chance.


VICTORIA CREATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VICTORIA CREATIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
18,006,000
17,000,000
Net inc
453,000
1,243,000
Share earns
.06
.17
6mo sales
34,215,000
32,193,000
Net inc
1,345,000
3,051,000
Share earns
.18
.41


BRITTON LEE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRITTON LEE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,031,000
9,027,000
Net loss
7,100,000
b75,000
Share earns
-
.01
Yr sales
25,739,000
31,495,000
Net loss
13,648,000
b135,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


Richard Feynman Dead at 69; Leading Theoretical Physicist
LEAD: Richard P. Feynman, arguably the most brilliant, iconoclastic and influential of the postwar generation of theoretical physicists, died Monday night in Los Angeles of abdominal cancer.
He was 69 years old.


Prosecutor Accuses Westies of a 'Reign of Terror'
LEAD: Summations in a Federal racketeering trial ended yesterday as a prosecutor told the jury that a Manhattan gang called the Westies had carried out a ''reign of terror.''


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: BREAD crumbs or bread crumbs blended with cheese are probably the most widely used and appetizing coatings for food.
If you want to surprise your guests with a spectacular variation on the breading theme, you might try coating fish fillets with sesame seeds, which give the outside a crunchy texture.


Pursuit of Civil Rights Isn't a 'Special Interest'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Collection by 10-Year-Olds Benefits the Neediest Cases
LEAD: A group of 10-year-olds from the Gimel Class of Temple Israel in Ridgewood, N.J., shoveled snow, took out garbage bags and did other chores to raise money for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
In two weeks' time, they collected $100 in tzedaka (charitable funds), which they designated for helping homeless people.


An Impasse For Austrian
LEAD: It was by common consent the bitterest week to date of the two-year-old Waldheim affair.
But after all the recriminations, accusations, speeches and threats, the sense here was that an impasse had been reached.


BARRY BLAU &amp; PARTNERS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARRY BLAU &amp; PARTNERS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,653,096
10,774,394
Net inc
106,774
52,461
Share earns
.06
.03
6mo rev
22,162,497
22,943,676
Net inc
351,334
238,207
Share earns
.18
.12
Revenue represent fees and production revenue.


AMERICAN MEDICAL BUILDINGS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MEDICAL BUILDINGS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
10,167,000
9,028,000
Net loss
4,695,000
1,002,000
Yr rev
46,954,000
28,592,000
Net loss
3,309,000
2,290,000
The company said the latest year includes a gain on redemption of Series A preferred of $193,000.


THRIFTY RENT-A-CAR SYSTEM reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THRIFTY RENT-A-CAR SYSTEM (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,900,000
14,500,000
Net inc
2,700,000
900,000
Share earns
.43
.17
6mo rev
36,900,000
28,800,000
Net inc
4,600,000
2,300,000
Share earns
.77
.45


Greece Won't Extradite Italian
LEAD: The Greek Gov ernment today overruled a Supreme Court decision to extradite to Italy a member of the Red Brigades who was sought by the Italian authorities for terrorist attacks.


Is This Icy Strip Worth $32 Billion?
LEAD: The frozen Arctic coastal plain of northeast Alaska may hide the largest untapped oilfield in America.
Should Congress let the oil companies search for it?


ABOUT EDUCATION
LEAD: State-mandated school reforms are on a collision course with demands to give teachers and school administrators greater powers to decide how and what to teach.
A classic war is shaping up between political and professional power.
The battle is between those who believe schools can be improved through legislation and those who insist that the search for better schools must be led by teachers who know what students need.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a brief report on Monday about Senator Joseph R. Biden's surgery misstated his medical problem.
An aneurysm in an artery supplying blood to his brain leaked but did not burst.
The Associated Press, which distributed the report, later sent a corrected version, which The Times omitted through an oversight.


CINCINNATI MILACRON INC reports earnings for 12wks to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CINCINNATI MILACRON INC (NYSE)
12wks to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
231,876,000
230,880,000
Net loss
b85,288,000
c7,384,000
Share earns
-
.31
52wk sales
827,989,000
849,994,000
Net loss
b79,973,000
c23,328,000
Share earns
-
.98


Life After Shanker: Leader Mends Fences
LEAD: In the two years since she became president of the United Federation of Teachers, Sandra Feldman has carved a broad role for herself, aiming not only to better the lot of teachers but also to be a major force in turning the New York City school system around.


WNEW-AM May Be Sold
LEAD: The Metropolitan Broadcasting Corporation said yesterday that it was talking to several parties who have expressed interest in buying WNEW-AM, its New York station that for more than 50 years has been known as the home of ''Make Believe Ballroom.''


NORTHROP CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHROP CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,770,000,000
1,660,000,000
Net inc
34,900,000
9,300,000
Share earns
.74
.20
Yr sales
6,050,000,000
5,600,000,000
Net inc
94,200,000
41,200,000
Share earns
2.01
.89


CIGNA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CIGNA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b134,700,000
c317,100,000
Share earns
1.60
3.80
Yr net inc
b728,300,000
c817,300,000
Share earns
8.64
9.92
b-Includes income of $19.7 million and $64.8 million for the quarter and year, respectively, from discontinued operations; realized investment loss of $32.5 million for the quarter and a realized investment gain of $33.5 million for the year, both from continuing operations; realized investment loss of $2.7 million and a realized investment gain o


STV ENGINEERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STV ENGINEERS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,247,000
15,203,000
Net inc
b19,000
141,000
Share earns
.01
.09
b-After a charge of $66,000 from amortization of contract rights.


2 Sea Films at Museum
LEAD: Two films by the independent film maker Peter Gimbel - ''Andrea Doria: The Final Chapter'' and ''Blue Water, White Death'' - will be shown tomorrow at the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street.
The screening is part of a series devoted to films about social and political issues. ''Andrea Doria'' will be shown at 3 P.M.


SUPERIOR SURGICAL MANUFACURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUPERIOR SURGICAL MANUFACURING CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
26,376,069
24,533,298
Net inc
1,459,043
979,003
Share earns
.59
.40
Yr sales
103,754,711
96,199,750
Net inc
4,920,200
3,645,120
Share earns
2.00
1.50


UNITED INNS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED INNS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
38,293,864
40,721,586
Net loss
b56,024
1,103,910
b-Includes an after-tax gain of $2.5 million from the sale of land and the sale of a 208-room motel in Houston.


Andrew Young Makes Apology for Remark
LEAD: Mayor Andrew Young apologized today to local ministers for remarks last week about Pat Robertson and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson that were interpreted as being critical of preachers.


Chrysler Plans Fund In Layoffs
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation, which has been accused of misleading workers at its plant in Kenosha, Wis., annnounced today that it would establish a trust fund of about $20 million to assist workers after the plant is largely closed later this year.


Tug and Barge Workers Go on Strike in New York
LEAD: A union of 2,500 tugboat and barge crew members went on strike yesterday morning after negotiations collapsed on a three-year labor contract with nine towing companies.


Capital Rise Expected To Gain in World Bank
LEAD: The 151 member governments of the World Bank are expected to agree this week to a $75 billion increase in capital, but Congressional leaders warned that it would be unusually difficult to persuade Congress to approve United States participation in this election year.


PERKIN-ELMER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PERKIN-ELMER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
357,100,000
321,300,000
Net inc
17,400,000
12,100,000
Share earns
.40
.27
6mo sales
676,900,000
632,800,000
Net inc
31,700,000
23,100,000
Share earns
.71
.51


Instead of Jail: 'Welcome, Reptile!'
LEAD: At first glance it sounds outrageous, like too much crime and too little punishment.
Two startling sentencing decisions, in Florida and New York, have resulted in white-collar criminals getting off without any jail time.
No jail at all is too little.
Still, by fashioning creative sentences, the judges in these cases have tailored the punishment to the crime and the criminal.


STANDARDIZED TEST SCORES: VOODOO STATISTICS?
LEAD: Garrison Keillor, the folk humorist, has provoked many a smile by his description of the mythical town of Lake Wobegon as a place where the women are strong, the men good looking and ''all the children are above average.''


VF CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VF CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b43,000,000
c36,000,000
Share earns
.65
.55
Yr sales
2,574,000,000
1,544,000,000
Net inc
b180,000,000
c136,000,000
Share earns
2.65
2.16
b-Includes a charge for reorganization of European operations of $2.3 million and a $4.7 million benefit from adoption of accounting changes.


Rent Control Has Made Apartments Into Endangered Species
LEAD: To the Editor:


MOSELEY HOLDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOSELEY HOLDING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
20,763,000
33,894,000
Net loss
10,744,000
b114,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
77,310,000
104,438,000
Net loss
25,898,000
b1,123,000
Share earns
-
.07


INSIDE
LEAD:  Shooting at Defense Plant  An ex-employee of a top-secret plant in Sunnyvale, Calif., shot 12 people before surrendering.
As many as seven died, authorities said.
Page A11.
Cultural Rapprochement  Arts exchanges between the United States and the Soviet Union are surging, delighting some in the field but worrying others.


Max L. Heine, 77, Founder and Head Of Securities Firms
LEAD: Max L. Heine, a founder and chairman of leading mutual funds and president of the Heine Securities Corporation, died Friday after being struck by an automobile in Tucson, Ariz., where he was vacationing.
He was 77 years old and lived in Roslyn, L.I.


WOLOHAN LUMBER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WOLOHAN LUMBER CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
56,810,000
52,447,000
Net inc
2,700,000
1,699,000
Share earns
.46
.29
Yr sales
228,614,000
194,351,000
Net inc
9,010,000
5,278,000
Share earns
1.53
.90


American Cooks Win Prizes In England
LEAD: A team of student chefs from Johnson and Wales College, a cooking school in Providence, R.I., won 23 prizes in the British Open Cookery Championship in London.
They were the first American team to enter the contest.


Soviet Skaters Prevail in Pairs
LEAD: The Soviet Union maintained its dominance of the pairs event in figure skating tonight, winning the gold and silver medals at the XV Olympic Winter Games.
The third Russian pair finished in fourth place.


Stage: One-Act Comedies In Punch Line Festival
LEAD: IN David Ives's ''Sure Thing,'' a young man sees an attractive young woman sitting by herself in a cafe.
Planning his maneuvers, he wonders if he should be cool, forward or flattering.
She is reading ''The Sound and the Fury,'' and, furrowing his brow, he tries to remember what he knows about Faulkner.


Aid Is Asked on Recreation in Forests
LEAD: The Agriculture Department today announced a major new program for encouraging private business to develop recreational facilities in national forests.


A MERCHANT BANKER STARTS OWN FIRM
LEAD: It has been a long and winding road from the 1960's to the late 1980's for Ken Miller, a route that has taken him from social activism to the hottest money-making realm of Wall Street, merchant banking.


Metromedia-Orion
LEAD: John W. Kluge, chairman of the Metromedia Company, has increased his stake in the Orion Pictures Corporation to 28.3 percent from 26.7 percent.
Orion, which is traded on the New York Stock Exchange, closed today at $17.75 a share, up 50 cents.
Mr.
Kluge, who has been steadily purchasing shares of the motion picture and television production company since October, has not altered his original statement that the shares have been purchased for investment purposes.


Steel Output Falls 0.4%
LEAD: Steel production fell to 1.867 million tons in the week ended Saturday, a decrease of four-tenths of a percent from the previous week's 1.875 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute reported yesterday.
The industry's production amounted to 86.9 percent of capacity for the week, compared with 87.3 percent in the previous week.


'Attack' Remains Strategy For U.S.
LEAD: Just as soon as they had absorbed the disappointment of their 7-5 loss to Czechoslovakia Monday night, a glum group of United States Olympic hockey players began plotting their strategy against the Soviet Union for what has become a must-win game on Wednesday.


Douglas Provides Spark for Syracuse
LEAD: There comes a time in every basketball game when an alarm goes off inside a coach's head.
It warns the coach who is ahead to brace for a final assault and implores the coach who is behind to launch a last-gasp attack.


Sports People; McPherson Honored
LEAD: Saying that his only preference for playing professional football was ''to play in this country,'' Don McPherson, the all-America from Syracuse, became the first black player to receive the Davey O'Brien National Quarterback Award when he was honored Monday night in Fort Worth.
But, he pointed out, although he appreciated the honor, the award would not erase the stereotype that black quarterbacks operate best out of an option offense similar to that at Oklahoma and out of the country, notably Canada.


INTERPUBLIC GROUP OF COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERPUBLIC GROUP OF COMPANIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
300,998,000
240,442,000
Net inc
b18,684,000
c14,640,000
Share earns
.86
.67
Yr rev
970,710,000
814,427,000
Net inc
b49,297,000
c41,051,000
Share earns
2.25
1.87
Shares outst
21,931,873
21,950,950


FARMERS GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FARMERS GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
302,346,000
267,438,000
Net inc
b86,880,000
c55,513,000
Share earns
1.26
.80
Yr rev
1,132,919,000
1,013,708,000
Net inc
b268,332,000
c213,470,000
Share earns
3.88
3.09


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Feb. 12
Feb. 5
Feb. 13
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.4
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.8
2.8
Gasoline stocks
236.2
240.7
255.3
Distillate stocks
118.1
123.3
135.7
Crude imports, daily
4.4
4.8
3.8
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.1
2.0
Crude stocks
336.9
338.1
326.5
Crude production, daily
8.2
8.1
8.3
Refinery utilization (%)
81.6
83.1
80.0


Executive Role for Clavell in TV Series
LEAD: On ''Noble House,'' the eight-hour mini-series that begins Sunday on NBC, James Clavell is not credited merely as the author of the original novel.
He also acted as executive producer of the mini-series, and he was closely involved at every stage of production. ''Noble House,'' a tale of intrigue in the business community of contemporary Hong Kong, stars Pierce Brosnan, Deborah Raffin, John Rhys-Davies, Khigh Dhiegh and Denholm


About New York; Trying to Give Cupid an Assist On His Shots
LEAD: People in the love game are feeling pretty good here in the middle of the week after Valentine's Day, just as caterers in other trades are happy to have got the biggest day of their year behind them.
In Abby Hirsch's case the market was particularly strong in gift certificates.
Ms.
Hirsch runs a dating service.


UPPER PENINSULA POWER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UPPER PENINSULA POWER CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
13,530,000
14,206,000
Net inc
b2,444,000
820,000
Share earns
1.63
.50
Yr rev
57,256,000
54,860,000
Net inc
b6,019,000
3,630,000
Share earns
3.93
2.29


ROPER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROPER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
132,315,000
131,337,000
Net inc
2,022,000
2,946,000
Share earns
.23
.31
6mo sales
248,710,000
239,047,000
Net inc
4,011,000
4,572,000
Share earns
.44
.49


BROKERS SECURITIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROKERS SECURITIES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
430,695
302,745
Net loss
254,341
97,386
Yr rev
1,534,826
1,610,286
Net loss
494,973
b36,400
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income


Smith Helps Guide Islander Fortunes
LEAD: The Islanders were effective in every phase of their play tonight and posted a resounding triumph against the best team in the National Hockey League.


Notebook; Vanishing Act Is Explained
LEAD: The mystery over why a Rumanian speed skating coach and three female skaters disappeared Saturday, more than a week before they were scheduled to compete, was solved today.


SCHOOL CONTROL FOR THE MAYOR IS ABANDONED
LEAD: Cuomo administration officials said today that they had abandoned for now their efforts to give the New York City Mayor more direct control over the city's Board of Education.


Banks File $83 Million Suit Charging Finley, Kumble
LEAD: Four major United States banks filed suit in Manhattan Supreme Court yesterday seeking more than $83 million from the law firm of Finley, Kumble, which dissolved Jan. 4.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Bear Stearns Cos.
$36,800,000
-38.3
Coca-Cola Co.
193,000,000
-38.6
Coca-Cola Enterprises
14,300,000
*-
Fuqua Industries
12,600,000
*-
Limited Inc.


Panel to Weigh A $10 Deposit For Taxi Rides
LEAD: The New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission is to consider two rules today intended to enhance driver safety.


SECURITY FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (CLEVEAND)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SECURITY FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (CLEVEAND)(O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,903,000
646,000
9mo net inc
1,903,000
b2,610,000
b-Includes a tax benefit of $564,000.
Share earnings are not available; the thrift went public Jan.


DOMINION FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOMINION FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
1,600,000
b6,100,000
Share earns
-
1.21
9mo net inc
3,100,000
15,400,000
Share earns
.62
3.05
b-Net income


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Florida Power and Light Company offered $125 million of 9 5/8 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2018 at a price of 99.75 to yield 9.649 percent through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


Accord Seen in Protest At U. of Massachusetts
LEAD: A tentative understanding that could end the five-day takeover of a University of Massachusetts black studies center by nearly 200 students was reached today, school officials said.


Economic Scene; Putting the Brakes On Easy Trading
LEAD: IS Wall Street drowning in a tide of trading?
Complaints about the Street's casino mentality are treated as public relations headaches by the exchanges and the big brokerage houses.
Nor are they taken seriously by most free market economists, who see rapid turnover as the welcome consequence of increased competition and computerization.


NASH FINCH CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NASH FINCH CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
460,011,821
460,856,910
Net inc
6,321,886
3,872,857
Share earns
.58
.38
Yr sales
1,943,347,934
1,577,356,682
Net inc
18,502,281
13,833,792
Share earns
1.75
1.35


LANCASTER COLONY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANCASTER COLONY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
108,272,000
105,479,000
Net inc
4,527,000
4,572,000
Share earns
.36
.35
Shares outst
12,738,177
12,959,231
6mo sales
222,813,000
219,261,000
Net inc
10,926,000
9,339,000
Share earns
.85
.72


Walesa Plans Australia Trip; First Time Abroad Since '81
LEAD: The Polish Solidarity leader, Lech Walesa, has accepted an invitation to an international trade union congress in Australia next month - his first trip abroad since his union was banned under martial law in December 1981.


Ammunition for Critics of Gandhi's Wife
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Feb. 10 about a court ruling in a New York City zoning case incompletely described the error in a map at the center of the dispute.
The developer, Parkview Associates, relied upon a map published by the city in putting up a 31-story building.


REALTY REFUND TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REALTY REFUND TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b61,000
383,854
Per share
.06
.38
Yr net inc
b1,282,413
c1,222,559
Per share
1.26
1.10
b-Includes an extraordinary loss of $380,350 on redemption of debentures.


Smokers Protest Ban on Commuter Trains
LEAD: A police officer from the Metro-North Commuter Railroad entering a Poughkeepsie-bound car yesterday evening at Grand Central Terminal to inform passengers that a smoking ban was in effect.
Doug Jones, right, was one of seven people to receive summonses from the Metro-North police because he refused to comply with the smoking ban.


New Zealand Ponders a 'Nuclear Survival Kit'
LEAD: Isolated in the distant South Pacific and stubbornly free of nuclear weapons and nuclear power, New Zealand has begun examining ways to survive a nuclear war.


Engine Failure Halts Flight
LEAD: An engine on a USAir jetliner bound for Newark failed Monday morning, forcing the plane to return to Pittsburgh.
The Boeing 737, carrying 80 people on Flight 264, was about 45 miles east of Pittsburgh when its right engine compressor stalled and oil pressure dropped.
No one was injured in the incident, which the authorities were investigating today.


Angola Terms on Cuban Troops Seen as Major Sticking Point
LEAD: Angola is willing to send home all the Cuban troops stationed there, according to a senior Angolan official, but only under conditions that few diplomats and other experts expect South Africa to accept.


Huge Warhol Catalogue
LEAD: The auction catalogue of the Andy Warhol collection, which goes on sale today at Sotheby's, is the costliest at $95, weightiest at 8 1/4 pounds and one of the largest ever published.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: FAMILY ATTRACTIONS. By Judith Freeman. 227 pages. Viking. $16.95.


Rule on Abortion Counseling Is Blocked
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Colorado has temporarily blocked enforcement of a new rule that prevents many of the nation's family planning clinics from helping women to obtain abortions.


Dr. John Meng, 81, Ex-President At Hunter and Marymount, Dies
LEAD: Dr.
John J. Meng, the president of Hunter College from 1960 to 1966 and later executive vice president of Fordham University and president of Marymount College,, died of heart failure on Monday at his home in Jackson, Miss.
He was 81 years old.
Dr.
Meng, a historian and an authority on French-American relations in the period of the American and French Revolutions, retired in 1973 as president of Marymount but remained active in educational affairs.


COCA-COLA CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COCA-COLA CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,991,747,000
1,721,005,000
Net inc
b192,955,000
314,535,000
Share earns
.52
.82
Yr rev
7,658,341,000
6,976,558,000
Net inc
916,136,000
934,347,000
Share earns
2.43
2.42


U.S. Disputes Waldheim Assertions
LEAD: Reagan Administration officials today disputed assertions by President Kurt Waldheim of Austria about the Justice Department's investigation of his war record.


VISHAY INTERTECHNOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VISHAY INTERTECHNOLOGY INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
25,479,000
14,349,000
Net inc
3,576,000
2,199,000
Share earns
.45
.30
6mo sales
40,397,000
28,513,000
Net inc
6,486,000
4,620,000
Share earns
.82
.64


Marcos Property Sold at Auction
LEAD: A pair of shoes being sold yesterday at Christie's East at an auction of items that belonged to the former Philippine President Ferdinand E. Marcos and his wife, Imelda.
Many of the people had come out of curiosity; others came to buy something belonging to the Marcoses.
The items were recovered from a luxury apartment and auctioned on behalf of the Philippine Government.


Ortega Mutes His Tone
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra still wants talks with the U.S., although his Sandinista regime is committed now to direct cease-fire negotiations with the contras.


I.R.A.'s, Not as Useful Now, Still a Good Idea for Many
LEAD: With new restrictions on Individual Retirement Account deductions, millions of Americans have to decide whether to continue what has been the annual tradition of contributing to an I.R.A. - but now without the lure of a $2,000 deduction.


LANCE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANCE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
116,546,000
113,718,000
Net inc
10,870,000
11,389,000
Share earns
.34
.34
Yr sales
380,020,000
366,912,000
Net inc
37,979,000
35,605,000
Share earns
1.17
1.07


U S Sprint Is Said to Plan Its Own Bid for Phone Contract
LEAD: The U S Sprint Communications Company, after what was apparently a dispute with the Electronic Data Systems Corporation, has decided to form a bidding team to compete on its own for contracts to build a new Government telecommunications system, people close to both companies said today.


I.R.S. Is Urged to Investigate Jackson's Church Collections
LEAD: A Washington-based lobbying group has asked the Internal Revenue Service to investigate the Presidential campaign of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson for the possibility of Federal tax law violations.


Advertising; A Growing Legitimacy For Cable
LEAD: ADVERTISER spending on the 16 advertiser-supported cable television services is expected to rise 30 percent, to about $246 million in the first quarter of 1988, according to the Cable Advertising Bureau.


DYATRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYATRON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,683,000
10,295,000
Net inc
1,483,000
b1,358,000
Share earns
.49
.45
Yr rev
36,618,000
33,103,000
Net inc
3,549,000
b1,919,000
Share earns
1.11
.56


New Sears Store
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company will open its first home fashions store in midtown Manhattan late this spring.
The new store, a 20,000-square-foot unit aimed primarily at apartment dwellers, will be in the Windsor Court apartment development between 31st and 32d Streets from Lexington to Third Avenue.
The store will ''feature a highly focused, market-driven assortment of bed and bath fashions, bedding, window coverings, floor coverings, lifestyle furniture and other selected products,'' said W.


HORIZON GOLD SHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORIZON GOLD SHARES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
988,728
986,922
Net loss
b1,285,617
c336,454
Share earns
-
.03
9mo rev
3,306,339
2,361,056
Net loss
b443,118
c796,091
Share earns
-
.08
b-Includes a charge from the reversal of tax loss carryforwards of $104,600 for the quarter, and the 9 months includes a gain of $23,588 on the early extinguishment of debt and a $15,600 tax credit.


Bridge: Famed Convention's Author Is Still an Active Journalist
LEAD: Few of those enthusiasts around the world who regularly employ the world's most famous bridge convention know that its originator is alive and well and living in Indianapolis.


Market Place; Book Publishers In the Spotlight
LEAD: TAKEOVER fever struck the dwindling band of independent book publishers after Monday's announcement that Pearson P.L.C., a British conglomerate, would acquire the Addison-Wesley Publishing Company for $283 million.


CAPITAL HOLDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAPITAL HOLDING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b11,086,000
c100,187,000
Share earns
.21
1.94
Yr net inc
b172,066,000
c186,244,000
Share earns
3.35
3.53
Shares outst
49,205,000
50,749,000
b-After a captial loss of $34,514,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary gain of $1,409,000 for the year.


I.B.M. Names Unit Head
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation has named C. Michael Armstrong, a senior vice president, to be chairman of the IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/ Africa Corporation.
He will continue as president of the corporation, which is responsible for operations in 85 countries.
Mr.
Armstrong succeeds Kaspar V.


AMC ENTERTAINMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMC ENTERTAINMENT (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
105,545,000
79,233,000
Net loss
2,892,000
b273,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
325,804,000
224,361,000
Net loss
4,652,000
b594,000
Share earns
-
.04


BEAR STEARNS COS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BEAR STEARNS COS (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 29
1988
1987
Revenue
447,200,000
520,200,000
Net inc
36,800,000
59,600,000
Share earns
.40
.70
9mo rev
1,371,800,000
1,308,400,000
Net inc
85,100,000
b128,400,000
Share earns
.91
1.51


John G. de Roos, 61, Former Chief Of New York City Transit Agency
LEAD: John G. de Roos, a lawyer who spent a sometimes bumpy four years running the Transit Authority at the height of New York City's fiscal crisis, died Monday, apparently of a heart attack, at his home in Irvington, N.Y.
He was 61 years old.


Burning It Up As a Flame
LEAD: If April is the cruelest month, March in Ithaca, N.Y., more than prepares you for what's coming.
The snow levels are high, and the wind off Lake Cayuga is brutal.
Perhaps most discomforting for much of the college town's population, however, is that funds for pizza and beer have by then evaporated.


Trade Move In Deadlock
LEAD: House conferees on the trade bill insist that their Senate counterparts accept a House-passed measure that would require foreign investors to disclose their holdings in the United States.
In exchange, the House conferees would accept a Senate-passed revision of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, according to Senate and


Dow Tops 2,000, but Trading Is Slow
LEAD: Stock prices rose broadly yesterday in subdued post-holiday trading.


Key Rates
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.88
n.a.
6.59
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
n.a.
5.69
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.04
n.a.
5.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.08
n.a.
7.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.46
n.a.


A U.S.-Soviet Cultural Rapprochement
LEAD: A little more than two years after Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union signed the General Exchanges Agreement at Geneva, a remarkable number of cultural exchanges are bursting out between the two nations and prompting a mixture of awe, delight and occasional doubt and scorn.


Grown-Ups Dine Out, Too
LEAD: AFTER enduring Excedrin headache music, waiters' amateur hour, backbreaking chairs and food so current that it lasted only a week on the menu, I can't tell you how nice it is to see that grown-up restaurants are coming back into fashion.


U.S. to Consult Iraqis on Preventing Attacks
LEAD: The United States is sending a team of military officials to Iraq to review steps to prevent accidental attacks by Iraqi jets on American forces in the Persian Gulf, a Pentagon official said today.


Bush Camp Plans to Attack Dole Sharply in South
LEAD: A buoyant Vice President Bush won the 1988 New Hampshire primary, his aides feel, by avoiding the mistake that cost him the same event in 1980.


800 in Tel Aviv Hear Appeals for Talks
LEAD: A dozen Israeli playwrights, poets and other intellectuals made an urgent appeal to the Government tonight to ''talk peace with the Palestinians.''


Washington Talk: Congress; How They Like to Spell Frustration: B U D G E T
LEAD: The arrival of President Reagan's 1989 spending blueprint on Capitol Hill Thursday marks the beginning of what has come to be an annual exercise in frustration and futility otherwise known as the Congressional budget process.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Susan Irwin has joined McCann-Erickson Worldwide as senior vice president, director of communications.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption with the Sports of The Times column on Tuesday misidentified a skier.
He was Christophe Ple of France.


Study Finds Most Health Insurers Screen Applicants for AIDS Virus
LEAD: Most health insurance companies screen applicants for signs of the AIDS virus, and some consider sexual orientation a factor in deciding on eligibility, according to a Congressional study issued today.


Alternative Minimum Tax Likely to Affect More People
LEAD: The alternative minimum tax, long the bane of the upper-income set, will pose an even bigger threat this year to the pocketbooks of the rich and the not-so-rich who try to take too much advantage of tax breaks that were not swept away by the new tax law.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.73
6.90
6.59
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.76
5.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.98
6.04
5.61
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.10
8.08
7.07
30-YR.


Merrill Man Will Head Paine Webber Division
LEAD: After struggling for a year to find within its ranks an executive to head its retail division, Paine Webber Inc. went outside for Joseph Grano Jr., it was announced yesterday.


Creating Cataclysm In Six Easy Steps
LEAD: A soap opera, by one definition, is a dramatic device to prevent a story from ending properly.
The Senate debate over ratifying the treaty on intermediate range nuclear forces is beginning to look like a soap opera.
This is because in diplomacy the United States has carefully devised an obstacle course that too often stands in the way of even simple agreements.


Health; New Approach Draws From Diverse Schools Of Psychotherapy
LEAD: The rigid lines between psychotherapies - between behavior therapy and psychoanalysis, for example - are blurring as part of a movement to unite under a single integrated approach what often have been warring factions.


Love That Turned to Hate Is Linked to the Killing of 7
LEAD: A man's obsession for a woman who spurned his love ignited a violent spasm of gunfire that left seven people dead and four others wounded at a high-security military plant here Tuesday, police investigators said today.


Dow Declines 4.98 Points, to Just Over 2,000
LEAD: Stock prices retreated yesterday as the Dow Jones industrial average barely remained above the 2,000-point level it had penetrated on Tuesday.


COURT AUTHORIZES FORCING STERILITY
LEAD: The Iowa Supreme Court said today that lower courts could authorize the sterilization of mentally retarded people but refused to say when the procedure was appropriate.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Moses Malone of the Washington Bullets has been fined $3,500 by the National Basketball Association for his part in a fight during a game against the Milwaukee Bucks on Monday.
Jack Sikma of the Bucks drew a $1,000 fine.
Five players were fined for an altercation during a game between the Indiana Pacers and the Phoenix Suns last Saturday.


Sudan Makes Debt Plea
LEAD: The Sudan, crippled by drought and war, appealed to its creditors today to give it 40 years to repay its foreign debt of about $12 billion.


IN NEW WEST, A MUSEUM TO CAPTURE THE OLD WEST
LEAD: A HUNDRED years ago the West was still ''the West of the Indian and the buffalo-hunter, the soldier and the cowpuncher,'' as Theodore Roosevelt described it.


Liquidation Is Studied For Ticor
LEAD: California's Commissioner of Insurance said late yesterday that she would seek to liquidate the TMIC Mortgage Company, the deeply troubled insurer of home mortgages, if a plan to save the company was not found soon.


China Studies Subsidies
LEAD: Acting Prime Minister Li Peng said today that the Chinese Government might expand its subsidies of important commodities to cut the inflation rate, which hit 7.5 percent last year.
In a speech marking the Lunar New Year, Mr.
Li said the rapid rise in prices, especially for food, was China's most pressing economic problem, the official New China News Agency reported.


MEDCO CONTAINMENT SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDCO CONTAINMENT SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
116,804,000
55,227,000
Net inc
5,485,000
3,647,000
Share earns
.13
.08
Shares outst
43,586,000
44,316,000
Yr sales
223,612,000
106,555,000
Net inc
10,498,000
7,226,000
Share earns
.24
.16


Goodrich to Sell Complex in Akron
LEAD: The B. F. Goodrich Company announced plans to sell its vacant 27-building downtown complex to the Covington Capital Corporation, a group of New York developers.
Terms were not disclosed, but Goodrich's treasurer, Robert A. McMillan, described the price as nominal.


Dollar Ends Broadly Lower In a Thin Trading Session
LEAD: The dollar finished lower against all major currencies in dull, thin trading yesterday.


REPUBLIC AMERICAN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REPUBLIC AMERICAN (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,778,000
c6,354,000
Per share
.31
.28
Shares outst
18,848,000
22,553,000
Yr net inc
b27,123,000
c44,191,000
Per share
1.34
2.07
b-Includes realized losses of $47,000 for the quarter; the year includes realized gains of $17,000.


Assembly Minority Opposes Giving Addicts Free Needles
LEAD: The State Assembly's Republican minority went on record unanimously today as opposing the Cuomo administration's decision to give hypodermic needles to some drug addicts as a possible way to halt the spread of AIDS.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article last Thursday about refunds to options investors misidentified a group that said it had received 356 complaints from investors about options trading.
It is the North American Securities Administrators Association.


Dole Must Now Face Hard Battles in South
LEAD: The history of Presidential politics is replete with the stories of candidates who are given an opportunity to clinch a nomination early - and just miss.
The candidates who just miss are usually forced into exhausting and dispiriting marathons that, as often as not, end in failure.


SHARED MEDICAL SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHARED MEDICAL SYSTEMS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
99,083,000
98,687,000
Net inc
10,948,000
14,254,000
Share earns
.44
.56
Yr rev
390,730,000
374,880,000
Net inc
45,318,000
31,968,000
Share earns
1.80
1.26


Court Refuses to Give Opinion on Shoreham
LEAD: New York State's highest court declined to take a stand today regarding the Cuomo administration's efforts to block the opening of the Shoreham nuclear power plant.


Advertising; Elle Is Opening In China in July
LEAD: Elle magazine will make its debut in China on July 14, as a result of an agreement between Hachette Publications, its parent company, and the Shanghai Translation Publishing House in Shanghai.


ITT's Profit Up Sharply
LEAD: The ITT Corporation's net income soared in the fourth quarter of last year to $447 million, from $102 million a year earlier.
Revenue in the period rose by 10.6 percent, to $5.2 billion from $4.7 billion.


INTERNATIONAL TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL TECHNOLOGY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
52,540,000
41,435,000
Net loss
b112,033,000
c2,465,000
Share earns
-
.08
9mo sales
149,998,000
117,275,000
Net loss
b109,769,000
c13,629,000
Share earns
-
.47


Ford Pact Is Reached In Britain
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company and unions representing its 32,500 workers reached a compromise Tuesday night intended to end a damaging 10-day strike.
The tentative agreement, which workers will vote on Thursday, limits Ford's ability to introduce sweeping changes in work practices.


INTERNATIONAL RECTIFIER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL RECTIFIER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
37,850,000
38,597,000
Net loss
b6,438,000
c1,467,000
Yr sales
75,623,000
76,475,000
Net loss
b9,339,000
c2,868,000
b-After tax credits of $66,000 for the quarter and $85,000 for the year.


FURNITURE YOU WON'T FIND IN CONRAN'S
LEAD: IT is not your ordinary clock: a larger-than-life bust of a man with pointed ears and a leering grin, holding an orb with a simple clock on its face.
Sculptured in papier-mache by Adam Kurtzman of New York, the piece is gilded and lacquered and looks like a surreal cartoon in three dimensions.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Whalers 4, Jets 3: Carey Wilson scored twice last night to help end a seven-game unbeaten streak by visiting Winnipeg.
Wilson, who has 17 goals for the season, including 8 in 14 games since being acquired last Jan. 3, scored both his goals on deflections.
His game-winner came at 7 minutes 46 seconds of the third period as Wilson, in the slot, tipped in a low shot from the left circle by Ron Francis.


CENTURY TELEPHONE ENTERRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTURY TELEPHONE ENTERRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
42,003,000
40,021,000
Net inc
6,649,000
4,952,000
Share earns
.56
.43
Yr rev
156,917,000
147,639,000
Net inc
23,078,000
16,850,000
Share earns
1.96
1.49


Drugs and Honduras: U.S. Concerned
LEAD: The State Department expressed concern today that some officials in Honduras might be involved in drug trafficking, adding that the situation should improve when the Drug Enforcement Administration opens an office in that country in a few weeks.


'Uptight' Devils Fall Closer to Cellar
LEAD: The Devils are in danger of falling into last place for the first time this season.


Gladys G. Calkins, 90; Y.W.C.A.'s President
LEAD: Gladys Gilkey Calkins, a former president of the Y.W.C.A.'s of the United States, died of a respiratory ailment Tuesday at Goodwin House, a retirement home in Alexandria, Va., where she lived.
She was 90 years old.


Jazz: Luis Resto Show At Dance Workshop
LEAD: BITS of cabaret parody, Tom Waits's Americana, jazz-rock fusion, Charles Bukowski's poetry, theater and humor collided Monday for Luis Resto's show at the Dance Theater Workshop, 219 West 19th Street.


Sums Revised in Case Against Meese Adviser
LEAD: Federal prosecutors have reduced their estimate of the amount of money that is unaccounted for that the investment adviser to Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d transferred to Hong Kong from 1985 to 1987.


UNION VALLEY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION VALLEY (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
31,348,000
22,210,000
Net inc
b363,000
797,000
Share earns
.09
.20
Yr rev
112,935,000
69,473,000
Net inc
b4,394,000
c2,625,000
Share earns
1.11
.73
Shares outst
3,967,000
3,584,000


Everybody in the Act
LEAD: ''Whatta catastrastroke,''


YESTERDAY'S MEDAL WINNERS
LEAD:  CROSS- COUNTRY  Women's 5 km  Gold: Marjo Matikainen, Finland  Silver: Tamara Tikhonova, Soviet Union  Bronze: Vida Ventsene, Soviet Union  SPEED SKATING  Men's 5,000 M  Gold: Tomas Gustafson, Sweden  Silver: Leo Visser, the Netherlands  Bronze: Gerard Kemkers, the Netherlands


Whole-House Automation To Raise the I.Q. of the Home
LEAD: FORGET about waiting in your bathrobe for the tub to fill or padding around at night to lock the doors and turn off the lights.


Gretzky Ties Howe Mark
LEAD: Wayne Gretzky tied the National Hockey League career record for assists tonight, setting up Mark Messier's goal as the Edmonton Oilers tied the Toronto Maple Leafs, 4-4.


TRUS JOIST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRUS JOIST CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
61,837,000
47,302,000
Net inc
2,388,000
1,428,000
Share earns
.34
.20
Yr sales
256,905,000
179,860,000
Net inc
13,253,000
8,939,000
Share earns
1.90
1.17


Cotton Rises by Daily Limit; Technical Factors End Lull
LEAD: Prices of cotton futures soared yesterday by the limit allowed for one day's trading in a technically based rally that lifted the market out of several weeks in the doldrums.


Rochester Asks Teachers for 'Extra Mile'
LEAD: This city, determined to end the failure of its schools to educate poor inner-city children, is preparing to push the teacher-student relationship beyond the classroom, into the community.


Market Place; Trump and MCA: Doubts Arise
LEAD: SOME investors have begun to have doubts about the plans of the developer Donald J. Trump to take a large stake in MCA Inc.
After rising nearly $8 in the previous two days of trading, MCA's shares fell $2.25, to $45.25, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.


Pop: Jack Jones Returns To Sing in Manhattan
LEAD: JACK JONES is a crafty saloon singer with a deeper feel for jazz and a more sophisticated sense of humor than such signature songs as ''The Impossible Dream'' and ''The Love Boat'' might lead one to believe.
In the history of pop crooning, he stands as the stylistic link between Frank Sinatra and Barry Manilow, with stronger leanings toward the former.


ST JUDE MEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ST JUDE MEDICAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
15,257,000
13,735,000
Net inc
4,134,000
2,836,000
Share earns
.35
.28
Yr sales
71,806,000
60,473,000
Net inc
17,307,000
12,031,000
Share earns
1.62
1.20


Surprises in the Academy Award Nominations
LEAD: It was a year when Hollywood insiders despaired of accurately predicting the Academy Award nominations.
And when the nominations were announced, they were even more surprising than expected.


BRITISH AIRWAYS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRITISH AIRWAYS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,612,000,000
1,177,000,000
Net inc
42,000,000
53,000,000
Share earns
.59
.74
9mo rev
5,199,000,000
3,671,000,000
Net inc
318,000,000
254,000,000
Share earns
4.43
3.53


Swede Wins in 5,000 Meters
LEAD: Tomas Gustafson of Sweden, the 1984 gold medalist who nearly gave up his sport two years ago, won another gold medal in 5,000-meter speed skating today.


Fragmented Health Care Hurts the Homeless
LEAD: To the Editor:


Presser Trial Delayed Again
LEAD: Federal District Judge George W. White said Tuesday that he was rescheduling the start of the trial of Jackie Presser, president of the teamsters' union, to July 12 because of the 60-year-old labor leader's health problems.
It was the second time the case has been delayed.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. The cedar shingles on our 60-year-old home were originally stained, then painted several times.
The paint is peeling, and I would like to go back to stain.
Can the shingles be sandblasted professionally and then stained?
A.
The paint can be removed by sandblasting, but this could damage the shingles if not done carefully.


11-Year-Old in College Dreams of M.D. Degree
LEAD: The desks are far too big, but other than that, Kristen Banerjee, an 11-year-old premedical student, said she felt perfectly at ease on the Lee College campus.


Ski Jumping, Luge Put Off
LEAD: High winds forced the postponement of two events today and officials feared that the disruptive weather pattern would continue.


Circle K Studies Charter Store Deal
LEAD: The Circle K Corporation, in a bid to increase its market share in the South and Northeast, said it was considering buying 538 gasoline and convenience stores from the Charter Company for $120 million.
Circle K, based in Phoenix, already operates 3,562 stores, mostly in Western states, and is the nation's second-largest convenience store operator after the Southland Corporation's 7


'Welcome, Reptile,' Cont'd.
LEAD: For failing to correct 400 code violations, Morris Gross, a 77-year-old Brooklyn slumlord, was ordered by a judge to pay $137,900 and to serve 15 days of house arrest in his sorely neglected building.
Civil Court Judge Ira Harkavy meant to deter other slumlords as well as to give Mr.
Morris a taste of the dreary conditions his tenants have to endure.


2 Former Executives Of Beech-Nut Guilty In Phony Juice Case
LEAD: A former chief executive of the Beech-Nut Nutrition Corporation and another former executive were found guilty yesterday of violating Federal laws by intentionally distributing phony apple juice intended for babies.


Football Awards
LEAD: Walt Hameline of Wagner, whose football team won a national title, has been named Division III coach of the year.
Receiving Lambert/Meadowlands Cups as the best Eastern teams in their divisions were Syracuse (Division I-A), Holy Cross (Division I-AA), Indiana, Pa. (Division II) and Wagner (Division III).


Wright Preparing Aid Package for Contras
LEAD: Jim Wright, the Speaker of the House, said today that he was preparing a new package of aid for the Nicaraguan rebels that would continue supplying them at current rates of about $1.8 million a month.


Super (for Republicans) Tuesday
LEAD: The realization settled in yesterday that New Hampshire wasn't going to anoint the Presidential nominees any more than Iowa did.
The public may thirst for clarity but there's still none of that famous momentum to sweep this Republican or that Democrat on to victory.
How inconvenient; how undramatic.


Leaner Japanese Manufacturers
LEAD: After capturing big shares of markets around the world, Japanese manufacturers are now showing that they can hold on to them and still make money in spite of the strong yen.


Health; Personal Health
LEAD: As the serious and possibly life-threatening effects of body-building steroids become better known, specialists are increasingly alarmed about the growing use of these drugs by college and high school athletes and by teen-age boys who want an athlete's body without the work.


Law and Ideology
LEAD: Compare two Federal investigations.


Gardiner C. Means, 91, Is Dead; Pricing Theory Aided U.S. Policy
LEAD: Gardiner C. Means, an economist whose theory regarding pricing practices in some industries was influential in setting national policy in the New Deal and later when inflation struck after World War II, died of complications from a stroke Monday.
Dr.
Means, who was 91 years old, suffered the stroke six months ago at his home in Vienna,


Top New York Court Backs Tas Break for Developers
LEAD: New York State's highest court yesterday unanimously upheld a state law that granted tax abatements to both commercial and residential space in new, mixed-use apartment buildings.


CAMPAIGNS FOCUS ON RAISING FUNDS
LEAD: With the first two electoral contests out of the way, most Presidential campaigns today began a frantic race for money.


HORMEL, GEORGE A &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HORMEL, GEORGE A &amp; CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
554,887,000
440,480,000
Net inc
12,177,000
4,453,000
Share earns
.32
.12
Share earnings results are adjusted to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split effective June 1.


Calendar: For Gardeners and Explorers
LEAD:  Senior Gardeners


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-12, A17


SONY CORP OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SONY CORP OF AMERICA (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,322,114,000
3,090,821,000
Net inc
168,512,000
55,382,000
Share earns
.66
.24
9mo sales
8,556,837,000
8,118,545,000
Net inc
230,797,000
151,114,000
Share earns
.94
.65


New York Through The Eyes Of Children
LEAD: CROWDS and zoos, parks, drugs and dirty swimming pools: that's what New York City is made of, a panel of some of its youngest residents said Tuesday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD:  ''Jackson, Hart and I were sort of the skunks at the garden party, always saying 'This debate is supposed to be about something' and raking our fingers down the chalkboard.''  - Bruce Babbitt.  [ A18:6. ]


Employers Adopt AIDS Code
LEAD: Thirty leading companies and organizations endorsed a 10-point ''bill of rights'' on AIDS issues in the workplace.
Page B11.


ITT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ITT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,200,000,000
4,700,000,000
Net inc
b447,000,000
102,000,000
Share earns
3.01
.66
Yr rev
19,500,000,000
17,400,000,000
Net inc
b1,020,000,000
494,000,000
Share earns
6.76
3.23


Missing in Lebanon: Who the Captives Are
LEAD:  AMERICAN  TERRY A. ANDERSON, chief Middle East correspondent of The Associated Press, missing since March 16, 1985.
THOMAS M. SUTHERLAND, dean of agriculture at the American University of Beirut, June 9, 1985.
FRANK HERBERT REED, director of the Lebanon International School in Beirut, Sept.


ROBERT HALF INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROBERT HALF INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
40,160,000
5,790,000
Net inc
2,223,000
c43,000
Share earns
.29
.01
Yr rev
105,685,000
7,320,000
Net inc
bd7,625,000
cd3,950,000
Share earns
1.00
.51


Home Loan Banks In Big Offering
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Banks yesterday offered $2.32 billion of new bonds divided into one-, three- and five-year maturities.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A report in the Business People column on Friday misstated new responsibilities of the broker/dealer division of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.


Faster Than the Elevator?
LEAD: Craig Logan, a pastry chef from Melbourne, Australia, breaking the tape yesterday after winning the 11th annual race up the stairs of the Empire State Building.
Janine Aiello of San Francisco won the women's division for the third time in three attempts. (NYT/John Sotomayor)


Amoco Wins Big Judgment
LEAD: The Amoco Corporation said yesterday that it had won a $383 million arbitration judgment against the Emirates General Petroleum Corporation, an agency of the United Arab Emirates, in a dispute over the nonpayment for natural gas.


French Jet Venture For Westinghouse
LEAD: Electronique Serge Dassault said it had agreed with the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, based in Pittsburgh, to develop on-board data transmission systems for new-generation military aircraft.
A spokeswoman for the French concern gave no financial details but said the two companies had been holding talks since mid-1987.


LUCKY STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LUCKY STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,652,412,000
1,763,144,000
Net inc
b38,309,000
c177,964,000
Share earns
.99
3.82
Shares outst
38,630,000
46,610,000
Yr rev
6,924,783,000
6,440,871,000
Net inc
b151,687,000
c225,940,000
Share earns
3.93
4.47
Shares outst
38,584,000
50,221,000


Mardi Gras Accidents Kill 2
LEAD: Two people were killed in separate Mardi Gras accidents Tuesday.
One of the victims was an 11-year-old boy, Michael W. Dupree, who, watching a parade in suburban Gretna, reached for a trinket under the wheels of a truck that was pulling a float, and was crushed.
About two hours later an unidentified man in his early 20's was killed when he ran up to a truck float in city traffic, leaped between the cab and the float, lost his grip and slipped beneath the tires.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Recession Forecast
LEAD: Rudolph G. Penner, former director of the Congressional Budget Office, is predicting a recession next year.
But until then he foresees nothing worse than a ''slowdown, and not a very severe one.''


Red Barber Honored
LEAD: Red Barber, the baseball Hall of Fame announcer, was saluted on his 80th birthday at a ceremony yesterday in Tallahassee, Fla.
Barber's career included 33 years with the Brooklyn Dodgers, the Yankees and the Cincinnati Reds.
The Florida Cabinet declared yesterday ''Red Barber Day'' in Florida, and a birthday party was held in the state capitol building.


Metro Matters; Applying Logic And Equity To Welfare
LEAD: New York State is spending $7.4 billion on aid to local schools this year and the State Education Commissioner says that if only he had three or four million dollars more he might be able to figure out where the money is going.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Truce in Border Fight By Thais and Laotians
LEAD: Thailand and Laos agreed today to a truce and disengagement in a disputed, sparsely populated border area where hundreds of their soldiers have been killed since November.


GARDEN DESIGNS FOR ALL AGES
LEAD: ''IF you're not careful, a sandbox can be disgusting - a huge kitty-litter bin,'' said Dudley Mason.
Ms.
Mason and her partner, Signe Nielsen, are landscape designers who specialize in city gardens.
But coping with a sandbox is only one of the myriad concerns in planning a garden for a family with children.


Film Board Names 2 Critics
LEAD: David Sterritt, the film critic of the Christian Science Monitor, and Phillip Lopate, a freelance film critic, novelist and programmer for the Houston Museum of Fine Arts, were named to the five-member program committee of the New York Film Festival yesterday.
Their appointments apparently end the troubles of the Festival, troubles that began last October when Richard Roud, long the


Jay Leyda, Film Historian, Writer And a Student of Sergei Eisenstein
LEAD: Jay Leyda, a film historian and professor of cinema studies at New York University, died of heart failure Monday at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 78 years old.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, a maker of hospital, laboratory and diagnostic products, elected as a director H. Laurance Fuller, president of Amoco Corp., Chicago,


Safety Board Executive Moves to US Air Group
LEAD: Patricia A. Goldman, who spent much of the last eight years investigating airplane, boat and car crashes for the Federal Government, has crossed the Potomac River to become a senior vice president at USAir Group Inc.


Switzerland Extradites Fugitive Italian Financier
LEAD: A financier accused of masterminding a web of criminal and political conspiracies involving many of the most powerful men in Italy was extradited from Switzerland today in a predawn police operation, officials said.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Housing Supervisors Seized


Drinking Themselves to Death
LEAD: Rutgers University has now banned fraternity and sorority parties indefinitely, too late to save James Callahan but maybe soon enough to keep other young people from drinking themselves to death.
That's what Mr.
Callahan, an 18-year-old freshman, apparently did at an initiation party.


What Do You Do After a Drubbing at the Polls? Claim Victory!
LEAD: In the face of defeat, candidates in a Presidential primary can generally be counted on to do the obvious: claim victory.


Emotional Defense in Israel Nazi Trial
LEAD: The time of trial is dwindling as the son sits in the front row of the theater audience watching his father on stage, the older man all pink pate and owlish stare as he absorbs the accusation that he is the Nazi killer nicknamed Ivan the Terrible, the gas chamber operator of the Treblinka death camp.


Jogger in Park Testifies He Saw Man and a Body
LEAD: A doctor who was jogging in Central Park in the predawn darkness of Aug. 26, 1986, testified yesterday that he saw a man shaking an apparently lifeless body in woods behind the Metropolitan Museum of Art but did not stop to help.


AMERICAN MAIZE-PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MAIZE-PRODUCTS CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
128,517,000
121,421,000
Net inc
b3,484,000
3,680,000
Share earns
.53
.68
Yr sales
506,754,000
509,544,000
Net inc
b12,661,000
c9,732,000
Share earns
2.10
1.82


BENEFICIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BENEFICIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
325,800,000
262,100,000
Net inc
b35,000,000
c103,700,000
Share earns
1.42
-
Yr rev
1,241,500,000
1,135,400,000
Net inc
b174,600,000
c171,600,000
Share earns
7.09
-


Advertising; Ad Clutter: Even in Restrooms Now
LEAD: Studies show that the typical consumer is bombarded by 5,000 advertising messages a day, and the number of ads is expected to increase steadily.
That trend has many executives in the industry worried about the growing advertising clutter.


Irving Bank Snubs $1.08 Billion Bid
LEAD: The Irving Bank Corporation rejected the current $1.08 billion buyout offer from the Bank of New York Company and unleashed another sharp verbal attack against its unwanted suitor.
Irving's board rejected as ''significantly inadequate'' Bank of New York's offer to pay $15 in cash and 1.575 shares of its own stock for each of


With New Hampshire Now History, Campaign Enters a Different Phase
LEAD: After New Hampshire primaries that anointed no new leaders, the two parties' squads of Presidential candidates headed south and west today as the campaign emphasis shifted from small-state glamour events to the pursuit of larger blocks of national convention delegates.


Road Team Announced
LEAD: The five-man team that will represent the United States in a 50-kilometer (31-mile) relay road race against eight other national teams on April 9 in Manhattan was announced yesterday at the weekly luncheon of track and field writers at Madison Square Garden.
The race, called the Asics Cup America's Ekiden, will be held in New York City, the first time an Ekiden race will be held outside of Japan.


A Settlement In Silver Case
LEAD: A company accused of cornering the silver market with the Hunt brothers of Texas in 1980 has agreed to pay a Peruvian company $3.65 million in an out-of-court settlement, a lawyer for Minpeco S.A. said today.


Budget Fantasies, Deficit Realities
LEAD: The budget that President Reagan submits to Congress today is effectively his last.
But he need not fret about his waning power.
He has already left his mark: a monumental legacy of deficits and debt.
Mr.
Reagan can claim to have rebuilt the nation's defenses, slowed the spread of government and cut taxes.


Suspended Policeman Denies Role In Beating of a Marijuana Dealer
LEAD: A suspended New York City police lieutenant denied in court yesterday that he had abetted the beating of a marijuana dealer by other officers, and asserted that the beating never took place.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: BANISTERS, or balustrades as they are also called, consist of a handrail supported by posts and spindles (called balusters).
Like staircases, banisters usually reflect the most sophisticated carpentry in a home.
As a result, their construction may be mysterious to some homeowners because care is taken to hide all signs of fasteners.


Calton Investor Plans Takeover
LEAD: Michael S. Weinstein, the chairman of Coated Sales Inc., has purchased a 5 percent stake in Calton Inc. class A common stock and said he plans to acquire control of the company through a tender offer.


Fire Forces Evacuation of U.S. Embassy in Moscow
LEAD: A Soviet fire truck leaving the embassy compound after firefighters extinguished a brief but intense blaze that swept through several floors of the main building.
Staff members left the building.
Officials said that damage was not serious and that Soviet fire crews had not entered any sensitive areas.


Ulster Police Order New Inquiry
LEAD: The Northern Ireland police announced a disciplinary inquiry today against officers involved in the killing of six unarmed men in the province in three incidents in late 1982.


Crack Use Pervades Life in a Shelter
LEAD: At the Fort Washington Armory in upper Manhattan, where 850 men sleep in one huge room, drug use, particularly crack, pervades every aspect of life and gives the shelter a mood of perpetual danger.


The Child Will Suffer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviet Skater First After Compulsories
LEAD: In the arcana of competitive figure skating, the operative words today were ''outside rocker,'' ''paragraph double three'' and ''back change loop.''


Breaking Stalemate in Demjanjuk's Trial
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Studying Injuries Linked to Child Car Seat
LEAD: The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration is investigating injuries linked to a children's automobile seat made by Fisher-Price to decide whether they merit a Federal recall action.


Manila Says At Least 33 Die In Ambush and Voter Clash
LEAD: The Government said today that at least 33 people were killed Tuesday as political groups clashed during regional elections in Sulu Province and rebels ambushed a police patrol in Luzon.


Joffrey Plans New Ballet For Its 1988 Season
LEAD: The Joffrey Ballet will present a new ballet, ''Concerto Grosso'' by James Kudelka, as the highlight of its 1988 season.
Set to music by Jean Papineau-Couture, a Canadian composer, ''Concerto Grosso'' was commissioned for the 1988 Winter Olympic Festival in Calgary, Alberta.


SMITHFIELD FOODS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SMITHFIELD FOODS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
234,466,000
291,367,000
Net inc
9,190,000
4,321,000
Share earns
2.09
.95
9mo sales
723,505,000
816,946,000
Net inc
13,625,000
b6,692,000
Share earns
3.01
1.50


Publishing: Editor Going to New Yorker
LEAD: Pat Strachan, who started as an editorial assistant at Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux and rose to associate publisher, will leave the independent house on March 10 to become a fiction editor at The New Yorker.


'Prison Program' Lets Families Do the Talking
LEAD: THE young boy talks too loudly into the telephone, his mouth too close. ''Hello Daddy,'' he says. ''It is nice outside here.
My birthday is soon.
I will be 6.
When will you come home?
I love you.'' He is not sure his father is listening, but he can be fairly certain that thousands of other people are.


Tennessee Upsets Kentucky
LEAD: Greg Bell made a 5-foot shot with one second remaining to give Tennessee a 72-70 upset over Kentucky tonight in a Southeastern Conference game.


TRANSCO EXPLORATION PARTERS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSCO EXPLORATION PARTERS LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
74,030,000
66,603,000
Net loss
169,000
8,808,000
Yr rev
272,373,000
258,656,000
Net loss
13,579,000
b336,949,000
b-Includes a non-cash charge of $284.7 million to reduce the book value of the company's oil and gas properties.


Health; Study Finds Shock Waves Useful in Treating Gallstones
LEAD: A study from Europe has provided new evidence that shock wave machines, which have already proved effective in treating kidney stones, can also safely smash gallstones and replace surgery for many patients.


Shultz Said to Back Pakistan On Afghan Coalition Regime
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz assured Pakistan today that he would convey its demand for a coalition government in Afghanistan to the Soviet Foreign Minister, according to State Department and Pakistani officials.


Rock: Bodeans at Ritz
LEAD: THE Bodeans' sold-out show at the Ritz on Saturday was one more example that the best American popular music involves the audience - making music becomes the act of reinforcing, or inventing temporarily, a community.


Pact to Protect Ozone Layer Goes to Senate for Approval
LEAD: An international agreement intended to help protect the ability of the upper atmosphere to filter out harmful radiation was sent to the Senate today with a recommendation by the Foreign Relations Committee for approval.


TYCO TOYS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TYCO TOYS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
54,820,000
34,675,000
Net inc
1,588,000
b1,553,000
Share earns
.28
.49
Shares outst
5,645,000
3,200,000
Yr sales
163,256,000
87,709,000
Net inc
6,877,000
b3,037,000
Share earns
1.58
.97
Shares outst
4,354,000
3,310,000


CNA FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CNA FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,857,406,000
1,864,497,000
Net inc
b113,547,000
c62,694,000
Share earns
1.76
.95
Yr net inc
b393,464,000
c403,526,000
Share earns
6.06
6.25
b-After realized investment losses of $9,248,000 and $27,762,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Alain Savary, 69, French Official Who Set Off Protests Over Schools
LEAD: Alain Savary, whose policies as Education Minister in 1984 provoked street protests, died today.
He was 69 years old.


Suspect in Murders and Rape In Brooklyn Arrested on L.I.
LEAD: A Brooklyn man wanted in connection with the fatal stabbing of his wife and stepson and with the rape of his stepdaughter was arrested today. the police said.


Peerless Pair
LEAD: Every once in a while an athlete comes along who so outclasses the competition that he, or she, seems to be performing in a different event.
That person has no real peer but himself; his only real contest is with his last performance.
Torvill and Dean, who won an Olympic gold medal for ice dancing in 1984, are that kind of athlete.


Talks Collapse in a Racial Attack Case
LEAD: After two days of talks, lawyers for a black Dutchess County teen-ager who says she was abducted and raped by six white men indicated yesterday that they would not for now permit their client to cooperate with a state investigation.
Although both sides said that they were at an impasse, they indicated that they were open to further discussion.


ESTIMATE ON DAWN OF HUMANS REVISED
LEAD: Fossils from an Israeli cave show that anatomically modern humans were living about 92,000 years ago, more than twice as long ago as scientists had been able to establish reliably before, researchers say.


Cause of Bissell's Death Ruled a Drug Overdose
LEAD: The American Ballet Theater star Patrick Bissell died of an overdose of cocaine, codeine, methadone and other drugs, according to an autopsy report released today.


APPLIED MATERIALS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APPLIED MATERIALS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
64,019,000
36,114,000
Net inc
5,692,000
b1,521,000
Share earns
.36
-
b-Net loss


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
James River Corp.
$49,200,000
+18.0
Johnson &amp; Johnson
163,000,000
+68.0
Lucky Stores Inc.
38,300,000
-78.5
Navistar International Corp.
44,900,000
*-
Smithfield Foods Inc.
9,200,000
+114.0
See accompanying notes for special items.(Loss)  * Loss in year-earlier period.


BABBIT WON'T 'OVERSTAY WELCOME'
LEAD: On the 618th day of his campaign, Bruce Babbitt stopped campaigning.
Instead, he drank a chocolate milkshake, read telegrams urging him to stay in the Presidential race and took his sons to the Lincoln Memorial so they could read the Gettysburg Address etched in bronze there.


Washington Talk: Briefing; East Meets West
LEAD: There is a circle in Washington for whom every week is German Week -an unending stream of visiting politicians and military officers, most from West Germany, including Chancellor Helmut Kohl this week.


Black &amp; Decker Discloses Proposal
LEAD: The Black &amp; Decker Corporation disclosed that it had offered American Standard Inc. ''major concessions,'' including a possible higher price than its current bid of $65 a share, if the big plumbing supplier would agree to a friendly business combination.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Black &amp; Decker said that Nolan D.


Divided Labor Leaders Forgo Picking Presidential Favorite
LEAD: When it comes to Presidential politics, the mood of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s executive council these days is one of indecision.
But that is not necessarily regarded by many as a bad thing.


VISIONARY'S DREAM CITY ON PAPER
LEAD: SMALL and scruffy and held together, it seems, only by the strong will of a dedicated few, the Storefront for Art and Architecture, in SoHo, occupies a critical place in New York's artistic ecology.
The gallery specializes in idealistic work done by artists who choose not to show in commercial galleries.


Zurbriggen Falls Near Finish
LEAD: This was to be his second gold medal in a collection that some thought would equal the five rings on the Olympic flag.
Sometimes, though, even the mighty fall hard on the mountain, and today Pirmin Zurbriggen of Switzerland had his first taste of snow when he least expected it -approximately halfway through the second slalom run in the


A REMODELED ROOM COMFORTS AIDS PATIENTS
LEAD: THE 44 residents of Bailey House, an AIDS hospice in the former River Hotel on Christopher Street, already had rooms of their own.
What they wanted was rooms together: lounges in which to socialize, read and prepare food.
A room on each of the four floors was designated as a lounge, but the spaces needed work.


Critic's Notebook; Transcending Distractions in the Opera Audience
LEAD: ONE of the signs of King Ludwig of Bavaria's supposed madness was his penchant for having Wagner's operas staged for himself alone, as he sat serenely and presumably undistracted in his Royal Box at what is now the Bavarian State Opera in Munich.
Such waste! cried his critics, several of whom were politically motivated bureaucrats overseeing the Bavarian budget.


VISIONTECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VISIONTECH INC
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
143,000
325,000
Net loss
b2,723,000
c238,000
Share earns
-
.01
Yr sales
1,148,000
1,273,000
Net loss
b2,521,000
1,618,000
b-Includes a charge of about $2,279,000 to write down the carrying value of certain production equipment, a charge of about $437,000 to write off certain license agreements, a charge of about $1,088,000 relating to the writeoff of goodwill acquired as part of the Softsite acquisition in


TV Review; Fireworks, Not Issues, In the News
LEAD: IT peaked early, a minute or so before 7 P.M. on Tuesday.
Vice President Bush, Peter Jennings reported, had ''pulled it out just by that.'' He gestured to indicate the size of the victory.
How big was that?
The ABC anchor wouldn't say; technically, the New Hampshire polls were still open.
When CBS and NBC came on at 7, however, the polls were closed.


Gooden Awaits Contract Decision
LEAD: Unable to agree on the size of a pay cut, the Mets and Dwight Gooden argued their salary differences before an arbitrator yesterday.
Roger McDowell, though, decided to forgo his hearing, scheduled for tomorrow, and agreed to the Mets' offer of $615,000 for this year.


Melvin Van Peebles: Original Notes In a Spare Space
LEAD: MELVIN VAN PEEBLES - writer, film maker, producer, actor, songwriter, director, financial analyst - never does anything quite the way anyone else does.
His style combines the straightforward and the theatrical.


TENNANT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TENNANT CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
49,680,000
43,107,000
Net inc
3,780,000
3,271,000
Share earns
.72
.61
Yr sales
166,924,000
151,497,000
Net inc
9,818,000
8,816,000
Share earns
1.85
1.66


A HOME ON THE MAKE-BELIEVE RANGE
LEAD: FOR the first nine months Robert and Toby Smith lived in their 1909 redwood house in Ojai, Calif., they refused to furnish it in the one style that the house demanded: Western.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


FGIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FGIC CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
bc16,700,000
d15,600,000
Share earns
.55
.51
Yr net inc
bc62,800,000
d44,800,000
Share earns
2.04
1.62
b-Includes writedown of $1.2 million for both the quarter and year, and the year also includes a $2.2 million writedown in the third quarter.


Federated Holders Get Sweetened Tender Offer
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation turned yesterday to the shareholders of Federated Department Stores Inc., raising its cash tender offer by $14, to $61 a share.


Hundreds of Bronx Nurses Call In Sick at 2 Hospitals
LEAD: Hundreds of nurses at two Bronx hospitals called in sick yesterday to protest what they said were deplorable working conditions that prevented them from providing patients with adequate care.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: WHO AM I THIS TIME?
Uncovering the Fictive Personality.
By Jay Martin. 255 pages.
Norton. $18.95.


SUBARU OF AMERICA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUBARU OF AMERICA INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
516,905,000
555,800,000
Net inc
b529,000
24,555,000
Share earns
.01
.51
b-Reduced by $7 million because of a change in accounting for sales incentives programs.


Music: Pogorelich Plays
LEAD: IVO POGORELICH is a remarkably talented pianist who can be a remarkably infuriating one.


Ideology of the Judges
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Aides Sought North Inquiry in '86
LEAD: More than half a year before the secret White House resupply network to the contras was exposed, a young prosecutor and a Federal agent in Miami were repeatedly frustrated in their attempts to pursue a criminal investigation of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North and others, according to private testimony released today.


Redmen Walloped At Carrier Dome
LEAD: St.
John's, overmatched at nearly every position, took a wicked thrashing tonight.


U.S. Rally Comes Up Short Against Soviet Union
LEAD: Chris Terreri, the losing goaltender, spoke of the pucks he didn't see flying his way, and of the Soviet skaters he and his teammates saw but couldn't stop.
He also spoke longingly of a slap shot launched by Brian Leetch that the Soviet goaltender, Sergei Mylnikov didn't see, a shot that would have fulfilled a late comeback by the United States and tied the score at 6-6 had it not slammed harmlessly into the right post.


Rangers Propelled By Dahlen's 2 Goals
LEAD: Ulf Dahlen does not have Joe Nieuwendyk's gaudy statistics.
He does not have Brett Hull's heritage.
Last night, though, he had two more goals and a hand in a 5-3 victory by the Rangers.


DIVERSIFIED ENERGIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIVERSIFIED ENERGIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
185,843,000
182,285,000
Net inc
9,676,000
7,043,000
Share earns
.61
.44
Yr rev
657,742,000
780,371,000
Net inc
27,232,000
b14,858,000
Share earns
1.70
-


Housing Aides Are Charged In Bribe Case
LEAD: Four of the 10 supervisors responsible for awarding more than $55 million a year in contracts to repair housing owned by New York City were charged yesterday with accepting bribes from private contractors.


Resnik Family in Settlement Over the Challenger Disaster
LEAD: The parents of the astronaut Judith Resnik said they had reached a multimillion-dollar settlement with Morton-Thiokol Inc. over the death of their daughter in the Challenger disaster.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Saturday about the Texas Southwestern Medical Center misstated the patient-admissions policy of its major teaching unit, Parkland Memorial Hospital.
Private patients account for about 10 percent of Parkland's admissions.


JAMES RIVER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JAMES RIVER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 24
1988
1987
Sales
1,237,725,000
1,057,588,000
Net inc
49,213,000
41,691,000
Share earns
.54
.49
9mo sales
3,703,093,000
3,287,638,000
Net inc
149,954,000
124,047,000
Share earns
1.70
1.50


Unions at The Post Offer Deal
LEAD: With a deadline of 2 P.M. tomorrow looming, representatives of eight unions at The New York Post made a new proposal yesterday to representatives of Rupert Murdoch in an effort to avert the threatened closing of the newspaper.


Missing in Lebanon
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
William R. Higgins of the Marine Corps, who was reported kidnapped yesterday near Tyre.
Page A10. (Reuters)


HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (SAN DIEGO,CALIF)(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (SAN DIEGO,CALIF)(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b18,863,000
25,073,000
Share earns
.89
1.18
Yr net inc
b103,045,000
103,672,000
Share earns
4.82
4.88
b-After a tax benefit of $19,141,000 for the quarter and the year includes a $2,757,000 gain from the cumulative effect of accounting changes.


Man Held in Wife's Beating
LEAD: A Bethpage man was arrested and charged wifh severely beating his newlywed wife on Valentine's Day, the Nassau County Police said late today.
A police spokesman, Officer Charles Koller, said no details on the arrest of the man, Thomas Porcella, 30 years old, were immediately available.
The woman, Anne Marie Porcella, 24, is listed in critical condition with a fractured skull at the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow.


High on the Hog in the Cattle Country
LEAD: Wearing a stetson, a western-cut jacket, pointed boots and a silver belt buckle, Rob Brown was in garb that seemed the uniform of the week at Orange County's big convention center here.


Conspiracy Trial of 14 White Supremacists Begins
LEAD: Opening arguments began in Federal District Court here today in the trial of 14 members of the white supremacist movement, including 10 leaders who are charged with seditious conspiracy by plotting to overthrow the Government by force.


Bucharest Journal; It's Mother Nature, Not Ceausescu, Who Relents
LEAD: An exceptionally mild winter, days on end of spring sunshine instead of the usual leaden skies of February, have brought an air of well-being to Bucharest.
It is an illusion.


NEWHALL LAND &amp; FARMING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWHALL LAND &amp; FARMING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
70,515,000
60,858,000
Net inc
16,330,000
14,502,000
Share earns
.80
.71
Yr rev
183,297,000
169,226,000
Net inc
39,619,000
43,674,000
Share earns
1.92
2.20


Health; Treatment For Cancer Is Criticized
LEAD: Many cancer patients are not receiving state-of-the-art treatments that could prolong their lives, according to a new Federal report.


Whimsical Crafts on View in Baltimore
LEAD: A few years ago Judith Strong, a Florida ceramist, had a small but bothersome problem.
Her husband, Sal Guastella, liked to drink strong Cuban coffee but could not find the right size cup for it.
The solution seemed simple enough.
Since she is a clay artist, she created a four-inch-tall narrowed vessel that has become one of her best sellers.


OPPENHEIMER CAPITAL LP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OPPENHEIMER CAPITAL LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,818,000
1,898,000
Share earns
.35
.23
9mo net inc
7,979,000
5,861,000
Share earns
1.00
.73
The year-ago results are pro forma. The company went public July 9, 1987.


Stabbing on a Jetliner
LEAD: A passenger was slashed in the throat by another traveler on a flight from Panama to Miami on Tuesday, leaving the victim in critical condition and the man accused as his assailant under arrest.
Eduardo A. Noel, a 35-year-old aviation inspector from Panama, was slashed with a pocketknife.
Robert Dean Clark of Austin, Tex., and Corona Del Mar, Calif., was charged with attempted murder.


KOMAG INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KOMAG INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,494,000
7,009,000
Net inc
b2,644,000
804,000
Share earns
.21
.09
Shares outst
12,687,000
9,354,000
Yr sales
47,221,000
19,543,000
Net inc
b8,432,000
c1,019,000
Share earns
.75
-
Shares outst
11,210,000
9,069,000


Lawsuit Challenges Census on Illegal Aliens
LEAD: Forty members of Congress, arguing that including illegal aliens in the 1990 census would deprive some states of seats in the House, plan to file a lawsuit to force the Census Bureau to exclude the aliens from calculations for the next Congressional reapportionment.


Charges and Cuts Seen At Lomas &amp; Nettleton
LEAD: The Lomas &amp; Nettleton Financial Corporation, one of the nation's largest mortgage bankers, said today that it expected to take write-offs totaling $93 million after taxes in the current quarter because of rising foreclosures and bankruptcies.


C.F.T.C. Nominee Gains
LEAD: The Senate Agriculture Committee today approved the nomination of Wendy Gramm to be chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
The full Senate may vote on her nomination this week, Senate staff members said.


Cocaine-Related Death
LEAD: A star football player at Forestville High School in Maryland died of cocaine intoxication, according to Dr.
John Smialek, the state's Chief Medical Examiner.
In a report in The Prince George's Journal yesterday, Smialek was quoted as saying that initial toxicological tests showed there was a considerable amount of cocaine in the blood and stomach of Rico Marshall, who died last Saturday.


Soviet Schools Sharply Faulted By Top Official
LEAD: A senior Soviet leader said today that the education system is afflicted with underfinancing, rigid central control and physical conditions so primitive that 40 percent of schools have no indoor toilets.


Wood Fires Restricted By Resorts in Colorado
LEAD: Worried that dirty mountain air might tarnish their image and turn away skiers, Colorado resort towns are clamping down on pollution from wood-burning stoves and fireplaces.


Construction Decline Seen
LEAD: Construction contracts will drop 4 percent this year because of steep declines in office and other commercial building and lesser drops in housing and public works projects, according to a forecast released yesterday.


NEW YORK COURT STRIKES DOWN LAW TO CURB LOITERING
LEAD: In a case affecting hundreds of homeless people in New York City, the state's highest court ruled today that a law banning loitering in major transportation centers like the Port Authority Bus Terminal and Pennsylvania Station was unconstitutional.


P.L.O. SCUTTLES SHIP PLANS
LEAD: The Palestine Liberation Organization said today that it had shelved plans for a ''ship of return'' to take 130 deported Palestinians to Israel, two days after the vessel was bombed in a harbor in Cyprus.


Advertising; Account
LEAD: *
Jewelmark Originals to Kovics &amp; Kovics to introduce the Faberge collection of fashion jewelry.


WANTED: DUMP WITH CHARM
LEAD: NO matter what dump Marley the artist lived in, he managed to be evicted.
Another artist, Daria, had a loft without a bathroom door.


TASTY BAKING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TASTY BAKING CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
64,234,294
54,500,213
Net inc
2,311,346
2,137,498
Share earns
.37
.34
Yr sales
230,195,559
226,244,697
Net inc
7,708,522
6,244,621
Share earns
1.23
1.01


Israeli Actions Raise Questions on U.S. Aid
LEAD: To the Editor:


Matikainen Takes Cross-Country Gold
LEAD: Marjo Matikainen of Finland took the lead at the 4-kilometer mark today and held on to win the women's 5-kilometer cross-country ski race.


BALLY MANUFACTURING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALLY MANUFACTURING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
435,255,000
337,908,000
Net loss
b12,450,000
c10,128,000
Yr rev
1,730,128,000
1,247,544,000
Net inc
b57,138,000
c23,701,000
Share earns
1.62
.81


Landlord in His Own Jail: Tenants Debate His Fate
LEAD: Last Friday the lobby of the apartment building at 320 Sterling Street, in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, was crowded with milling reporters and angry, shouting tenants.


NAVISTAR INTERNATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NAVISTAR INTERNATIONAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
923,300,000
806,000,000
Net inc
b44,900,000
c98,600,000
Share earns
.15
-
b-After a loss of $14.8 million from discontinued operations.
c-Net loss and after a loss of $112.9 million from extinguishment of debt.


GORMAN-RUPP COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GORMAN-RUPP COMPANY (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,962,000
15,791,000
Net inc
1,069,000
701,000
Share earns
.28
.18
Yr sales
74,435,000
65,274,000
Net inc
5,919,000
4,397,000
Share earns
1.53
1.12


JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,028,000,000
1,746,000,000
Net inc
163,000,000
b97,000,000
Share earns
.95
.55
Yr sales
8,012,000,000
7,003,000,000
Net inc
833,000,000
b330,000,000
Share earns
4.83
1.85


Welcoming the Dragon
LEAD: A lion dancer strutting through a barrage of firecrackers as residents of Chinatown celebrated the Chinese New Year and the arrival of the year 4686.


Fire Kills AIDS Patient at a Manhattan Hospital
LEAD: A smoky, fast-moving fire erupted near an oxygen respirator at Beekman-Downtown Hospital in lower Manhattan yesterday, killing a 26-year-old AIDS patient as he lay in his bed.


Rumanian Incident: 4 Conflicting Tales
LEAD: Four conflicting reports have arisen over the reason that all three Rumanian female speed skaters and their coach returned home last weekend, before their Winter Olympics competition began.
The reports revolved around defection, drugs, an automobile accident and a family matter.


Hundreds of Nurses Call In Sick at 2 Bronx Hospitals
LEAD: As 55 percent of the nursing staff called in sick at Lincoln Medical Center, crowds formed outside.
The nurses were protesting what they called deplorable working conditions.
Page B2. (NYT/Jack Manning)


Uruguayan Expected To Lead Latin Aid Unit
LEAD: Uruguay's Foreign Minister, Enrique V. Iglesias, is expected to be elected president of the Inter-American Development Bank at a special meeting of its executive board Thursday, bank officials said today.


E.P.A. Reports Dip in Lead Emissions
LEAD: Emissions of lead into the atmosphere declined 59 percent in 1986, the second straight record drop, the Environmental Protection Agency said today in its annual report on air pollution.


AETNA LIFE &amp; CASUALTY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AETNA LIFE &amp; CASUALTY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,672,400,000
5,649,900,000
Net inc
b197,500,000
c284,900,000
Share earns
1.71
2.48
Yr rev
22,114,100,000
20,482,900,000
Net inc
b920,600,000
c1,043,100,000
Share earns
7.95
9.12


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allegis Corp., Chicago, parent of United Airlines, said it had started its tender offer to buy up to 35.5 million common shares at $80 a share.


Salvador Rebels Kill 12 in Raid on City
LEAD: Salvadoran guerrillas killed a family of seven and five soldiers early today in a poorly executed attack aimed at the main army headquarters in this eastern city.


CORROON &amp; BLACK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORROON &amp; BLACK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
90,695,000
93,004,000
Net inc
6,222,000
8,180,000
Share earns
.36
.43
Yr rev
392,199,000
370,554,000
Net inc
b44,356,000
43,435,000
Share earns
2.34
2.29


Soviet Defeats U.S. in Hockey
LEAD: The Soviet Union defeated the U.S., 7-5, last night, further dimming the American hockey team's chances of winning a medal in the XV Olympic Winter Games.


Afghan Guerrillas Appear to Ease Position on a Future Government
LEAD: Guerrilla leaders in Afghanistan were reported today to be ready to modify a longstanding position and accept minor participation by members of the current Communist regime in Kabul in a future interim government.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Regulatory Czar
LEAD: S. Jay Plager, a senior official at the Office of Management and Budget, is in line for a new, more important position as the Reagan Administration's regulatory czar, the man who reviews virtually all the regulations issued by the Government.


Waldheim Linked to Nazi Roundup
LEAD: The Justice Department based one of its principal charges against President Kurt Waldheim of Austria on captured German documents that point to his involvement in the deportation of 488 Yugoslav civilians to slave labor camps in 1942, possibly making him an accessory to war crimes.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Bridgestone's agreement to buy 75 percent of Firestone's tire-making operations described the status of a Tennessee truck-tire plant incorrectly.
Bridgestone bought the plant from Firestone in 1983; it is not part of the current deal.


Advertising; Ogilvy's New Post
LEAD: To keep up with rising demands for worldwide media placement, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide has named Kenneth E. Caffrey to the new post of director of worldwide media.
Mr.
Caffrey, 49, is also an executive vice president and executive director of operations at Ogilvy &amp; Mather, New York.
Jules Fine, vice chairman of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, held the responsibilities that Mr.


Joseph Brodsky Begins Queens Reading Series
LEAD: Joseph Brodsky, winner of last year's Nobel Prize in Literature, is to read from his works on March 7 at 7 P.M. at the Queens College Student Union, Kissena Boulevard and the Long Island Expressway, Flushing.
Mr.
Brodsky, who left the Soviet Union more than 15 years ago, gave his first poetry reading in the United States at the college.


Shultz Expected to See Sakharov in Moscow
LEAD: To dramatize the Reagan Administration's campaign for improvement in the Soviet human-rights record, Secretary of State George P. Shultz plans to meet with Andrei D. Sakharov and other rights campaigners when he visits Moscow early next week, a senior Administration official said today.


Rikers Inmates Set Up Barricades
LEAD: Rebelious prisoners erected barricades early this morning in a dormitory area of the Rikers Island prison, authorities said.


North Conway Journal; The 'Malling' of a White Mountain Resort Town
LEAD: It is a clear, crisp morning in this White Mountain town, a perfect day to hit the slopes.


The Stage: 'Woman in Mind'
LEAD: THE true test of an artist, whatever the art form, is often to be found in the half-tones, not the primary colors.
Stockard Channing, an actress whose indelible recent performances in ''The House of Blue Leaves'' and ''Joe Egg'' leave her with little need to prove anything, subjects herself to this rough test and triumphs in ''Woman in Mind,'' the modest but watchable Alan Ayckbourn play at the Manhattan Theater


New Baby M Decision Will Breed Confusion
LEAD: To the Editor:


Opposition to Steagall Act
LEAD: More than three-quarters of the chief financial officers of the nation's largest non-financial corporations favor the repeal of a Federal banking law that separates commercial banking from securities underwriting, according to a survey conducted by the Senate Banking Committee and made available this week.


Students End Takeover At U. of Massachusetts
LEAD: Minority students at the Amherst campus of the University of Massachusetts today ended their occupation of a school building after administrators met many of their demands on addressing campus racial problems.


Yields Are Down Again
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were all down for the second consecutive week, but in the week ended yesterday the steepness in the decline eased.


Bridge: Trying for Terrible Contract, Player Was Teased by Fates
LEAD: When providence smiles kindly on a declarer and permits a virtually hopeless contract to be made, the declarer may feel inclined to offer thanks for a miracle.


As Man Dies, a Friend Says E.M.S. Crew Refused to Help
LEAD: A 68-year-old man suffered a fatal heart attack in a Bronx church last night and a friend of the man said that he had urged a city ambulance crew buying sandwiches at a delicatessen to come to the man's aid, but that the paramedics refused.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: The Sports of The Times column on Wednesday and a brief sports report about the New Jersey Devils' attempts to sign Soviet hockey players misidentified one player.
He is Vyacheslav Fetisov, not Fetislov.


Rescued Boy Quits Hospital
LEAD: A 9-year-old boy who was trapped 40 minutes under the ice of a frozen pond walked out of the Medical University of South Carolina Hospital today, smiling shyly at reporters.
The boy, Kendall Smith, and two other children were playing on the pond Jan. 12 when the ice gave way.
His companions were rescued quickly but it was almost 40 minutes before Kendall was rescued.


Advertising; Grey Earnings Rise
LEAD: Grey Advertising has reported an 18 percent increase in fourth-quarter earnings.
It said on Tuesday that net income had climbed to $2.74 million, or $2.06 a share, from $2.32 million, or $1.66 a share, a year earlier.
Revenues rose 26 percent, to $98.1 million, from $77.8 million.
For the year the agency reported that profit was up 13 percent, to $10.3 million, or $7.43 a share, from $9.1 million, or $6.60 a share.


Hunter Gains Final; Staten Island Wins
LEAD: Hunter College rallied from a 7-point halftime deficit in the semifinals of the CUNY tournament at Nat Holman Gymnasium last night to score a 78-64 victory over Lehman.


Paper for All Purposes
LEAD: ''PAPER is a common denominator of all my interests,'' said Wendy Stewart, owner of 80 Papers. ''I like photography, calligraphy and bookbinding.
Paper is so important for all those things.
Also, I really love Oriental things, and the Japanese make wonderful paper.''


Societe Generale's Record Stock Price
LEAD: The stock of Societe Generale de Belgique closed at a record high of 5,000 Belgian francs, or $143, a share, up 140 francs on the Brussels stock exchange today.
The closing price was 1,000 francs above the price offered by the Italian financier Carlo de Benedetti in his public bid for 15 percent of the company.


HERS
LEAD: ''POVERTY stinks,'' Bette exlaims when we meet at a faux-Nantucket seafood house in Santa Monica.
Is she comparing herself with illegal aliens or the Rockefellers, I wonder.
She is wearing a $300 orange and purple quilted satin jacket over a $400 crushed velvet skirt.


Portugal Woos Two Aggrieved Ex-Colonies
LEAD: Portugal and two troubled former colonies, Angola and Mozambique, are forming closer ties after more than a decade of tense relations.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: ARGUING with our children is as much a part of being a parent as nurturing them.


Arizona Senate Grants Mecham Week Delay in Impeachment Trial
LEAD: The Arizona Senate today granted Gov.
Evan Mecham a one-week delay of his impeachment trial, which had been set to begin Monday.


SPORTS OF THE TIMES: THE BEAR ON THE BOBSLED
LEAD: IN his red-white-and-blue Olympic warm-up suit, Willie Gault was holding forth on his sudden presence on the United States bobsled team.
But he's always a presence.
Although best known as a wide receiver for the Chicago Bears, he organized and was the lead singer of their ''Super Bowl Shuffle'' rap video.


LONGVIEW FIBRE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LONGVIEW FIBRE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
137,131,000
132,885,000
Net inc
16,435,000
14,065,000
Share earns
1.48
1.27


U.S. EMBASSY IS HIT BY FIRE IN MOSCOW
LEAD: A brief but intense fire swept through several rooms of the main building of the United States Embassy here today, disrupting operations five days before a visit by Secretary of State George P. Shultz.


Icahn Proposes to Build Apartments in Morrisania for the Homeless
LEAD: About 100 apartments for homeless families will be built in a poor area of the South Bronx under a philanthropic venture conceived by Carl C. Icahn, the Wall Street takeover specialist.


Health: Medical Costs; A Few Expensive Procedures Are Focus of Effort to Trim Bill
LEAD: The coronary bypass operation, developed in the 1960's, was still uncommon 15 years ago.
But as techniques improved, more Americans began to demand it and insurance plans began to pay for it.
Thousands of lives have been saved by the procedure, in which blood is shunted around clogged portions of an artery to the heart.


Talking Deals; More Japanese Investing in U.S.
LEAD: THE pace of Japanese investment in the United States continues unabated.
The type of companies making acquisitions is changing, and so is the type of targets.
This week Japanese companies have announced plans to make their largest investments in the United States so far - in a manufacturer and in a financial institution.


Music: Jazz Passengers, A Modernist Septet
LEAD: SEVEN seems to be a lucky number for avant-gutbucket jazz.
Henry Threadgill's seven-member Sextett, the Microscopic Septet and now the seven-piece Jazz Passengers make jazz that's smart and witty and raucous.
For all its unpredictable forms and modernist dissonances, the music comes across as boisterous fun.


SUPERIOR INDUSTRIES INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUPERIOR INDUSTRIES INTERNATIONAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
47,287,000
35,737,000
Net inc
2,718,000
2,115,000
Share earns
.47
.35
Yr sales
169,495,000
148,550,000
Net inc
9,475,000
8,505,000
Share earns
1.61
1.43


J. P. Morgan Loses a Top Credit Rating
LEAD: J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, the last bank holding company in the United States to hold the top rating of the two major credit-rating agencies, lost one of those ratings yesterday.


Access Talks In Japan Falter
LEAD: The United States and Japan are almost back where they started months ago in trying to solve a dispute over access to the Japanese construction market, an American official said today.
Although Japan's negotiators surprised the Americans with new proposals today, he said, they would effectively shut


Board of Trade Reduces Limits
LEAD: Directors of the Chicago Board of Trade voted on Tuesday to reduce daily price limits for Major Market Index futures to 20 points and Institutional Index futures to 12 points.
The changes will become effective only if approved by the Federal Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
A 20-point move in the


Bond Prices Off in Slack Trading
LEAD: Bond prices fell slightly yesterday amid slack investor demand.


Two Texas Issues Total $313 Million
LEAD: Two issues of double A-rated tax-exempt bonds totaling $313 million were offered by issuers from Texas yesterday.


Concert: Verdehr Trio
LEAD: LAST season at Alice Tully Hall, the Verdehr Trio presented an excellent if underattended concert of five recently composed works, its fourth such concert in New York.
If the trio's return to Tully Tuesday night, with a program of new works and new transcriptions of old works, didn't reach quite the level of last season's, that didn't mean the performances were any less winning or the concert's high points any less meritorious.


Global Classrooms
LEAD: To the Editor:


FAIRCHILD INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAIRCHILD INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
123,248,000
111,471,000
Net inc
b487,000
c73,000
Yr sales
453,832,000
448,834,000
Net inc
b23,071,000
c9,962,000
Share earns
.82
-
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $6,847,000 for the quarter and $4,372,000 for the year; gains from an accounting change of $152,000 and $2,753,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and tax credits of $512,000 for the quarter and $13,199,000 for the year.


Japan's Resilient Exporters
LEAD: By reducing costs, Japanese manufacturers remain competitive, even as the strong yen has made their goods more costly overseas.
Page D1.


Dukakis, Talking Tough, Marches Into Dixie
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts crossed the Mason-Dixon line today with a display of flag-waving and muscular oratory, attempting a pre-emptive strike against the idea that he is too liberal for the South.


ECONOMY GROWING AT SLUGGISH PACE, LATEST DATA SHOW
LEAD: The Government released two reports today that indicated the economy would continue to expand, though at a sluggish pace.


PROFESSIONAL CARE SERVICES INC reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROFESSIONAL CARE SERVICES INC (AMEX)
Year to Sept 30
1987
1986
Revenue
39,738,000
53,139,000
Net loss
b9,208,000
1,830,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $3,522,000.


Employers Endorse AIDS Guidelines
LEAD: Some of the nation's leading companies and organizations yesterday endorsed a new 10-point ''bill of rights'' on AIDS issues in the workplace, formulated by a citizens' commission.


MARINE WITH U.N. SEIZED IN LEBANON
LEAD: An American Marine officer serving with a United Nations truce monitoring group was reported kidnapped today in southern Lebanon.


Fed in Shift On Reporting M-2 and M-3
LEAD: The Federal Reserve surprised economists yesterday by announcing that it would report weekly, rather than monthly, changes in the broadly defined M-2 and M-3 money supply measures.


Ski Jumping Is Postponed
LEAD: Gusting winds today prompted officials to postpone the 90-meter team ski jumping to next Wednesday.


UNITED CITIES GAS CO reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED CITIES GAS CO (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
162,721,000
160,983,000
Net inc
5,669,000
b4,954,000
Share earns
1.06
1.00
b-Includes a gain from cumulative effect of accounting adjustment of $1,059,000.


GORBACHEV URGES PARTY TO UPDATE COMMUNIST THEORY
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev, continuing his campaign for major changes in Soviet society, told Communist Party leaders today that key elements of Communist doctrine were outdated and calcified.


Auctions
LEAD:  Bidding by Mail


Market Place; Home Building Stocks Strong
LEAD: HOUSING starts are down, but home building stocks are up on Wall Street.
It sounds like one of those classic paradoxes in the equity market, but analysts offer some explanations.


Violin: Grubert
LEAD: LONG before the end of the Ysaye sonata that opened his debut program in Town Hall on Wednesday evening, Ilya Grubert established himself as a musician of exceptional talent, a violinist in the tradition of the great Russian virtuosos, possessed of a clear, unwavering tone and an extraordinary technique.


TRADITIONAL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRADITIONAL INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,667,000
8,485,000
Net inc
1,262,000
778,000
Share earns
.52
.33
6mo rev
24,234,000
15,504,000
Net inc
2,455,000
1,403,000
Share earns
1.02
.62


Francisco Manrique, Argentine Official, 69
LEAD: Francisco Manrique, a former Argentine naval officer, journalist and presidential candidate who served as Secretary of Tourism under President Raul Alfonsin, died of lymph cancer Monday at the Diagnostic Institute in Buenos Aires.
He was 69 years old and lived in Buenos Aires.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Fight for Green Space
LEAD: About 70 citizens of a tiny Japanese coastal town paid $3,000 each to come to Washington this week to protest the proposed construction of United States military housing units in the last open green space in the Tokyo metropolitan area.


Gore, in Texas Debate, Spars With Dukakis and Gephardt
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee, who for the most part had been waiting in the South for the Presidential campaign to reach him, tonight assailed two Democratic rivals riding victories in the North.


CULLINET SOFTWARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CULLINET SOFTWARE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
54,218,000
44,696,000
Net loss
b12,717,000
5,351,000
9mo rev
152,344,000
113,835,000
Net loss
b26,524,000
c23,500,000
b-Includes a charge of $13,720,000 from revaluation of certain purchased software assets and writeoff of selective notes and accounts receivable for both the quarter and 9 months.


Richard Deneen, 49; Audit Bureau Official
LEAD: Richard W. Deneen, senior vice president of auditing services for the Audit Bureau of Circulations, died of an apparent heart attack last Friday at Memorial Hospital in Woodstock, Ill.
He was 49 years old and lived in Woodstock.


6,000 Firefighters Protest Budget Cutbacks
LEAD: Six thousand uniformed firefighters -almost half of New York City's force -paraded across the Brooklyn Bridge to City Hall yesterday to protest $11.2 million in cuts from the Fire Department's proposed 1989 budget.


Our Towns; Herb and Herb: Spreading Cheer To the Disabled
LEAD: When some people decide they want to walk again, they make pilgrimages to Lourdes.
They start watching more television evangelists.
But this isn't for everyone.
Sometimes even if you want to walk again, you don't have the patience to listen to someone talking loud on TV on Sunday morning.


CRACKER BARREL OLD COUNRY STORE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRACKER BARREL OLD COUNRY STORE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 29
1988
1987
Sales
26,605,000
21,135,000
Net inc
523,00
351,000
Share earns
.10
.07
6mo sales
56,589,000
45,002,000
Net inc
2,445,000
1,543,000
Share earns
.45
.29


Ungermann-Bass Chairman Finds a Merger He Likes
LEAD: When Ungermann-Bass Inc. successfully rebuffed a takeover proposal by Digital Communications Associates Inc. last November, analysts predicted that Ralph K. Ungermann would never agree to any kind of merger.
But this week Ungermann-Bass, which produces local area networks that link computers, agreed to merge with Tandem Computers


FORD MOTOR CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORD MOTOR CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
18,800,000,000
16,300,000,000
Net inc
932,000,000
785,000,000
Share earns
1.87
1.50
Yr sales
71,600,000,000
62,700,000,000
Net inc
4,600,000,000
b3,300,000,000
Share earns
9.05
6.16


UNIVERSAL VOLTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSAL VOLTRONICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,304,724
1,856,750
Net loss
427,992
b51,292
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
2,912,805
4,012,996
Net loss
510,347
b269,140
Share earns
-
.10


INTERFACE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERFACE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Sales
75,167,000
39,032,000
Net inc
4,278,000
2,937,000
Share earns
.25
.24
Shares outst
17,087,828
12,445,226
Yr sales
267,008,000
137,410,000
Net inc
13,700,000
8,576,000
Share earns
.87
.68
Shares outst
15,740,321
12,561,252


Concessions by Sandinistas Asked In Peace Talks With the Contras
LEAD: In an effort to break the deadlocked peace talks here, the mediator today offered his own peace proposal and asked the Nicaraguan Government to make major political concessions to the rebels.


Poor Food and Housing Lie Behind TB Rise
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Official and Africans Confer On Testing AIDS Vaccines There
LEAD: Large-scale tests of potential AIDS vaccines may have to take place in Africa, a senior Federal health official said yesterday, and he has begun discussing the possibility with African officials.


Kane-Miller Voids Pact With P.I.P.
LEAD: The Kane-Miller Corporation has terminated a standstill agreement with Postal Instant Press Inc. and is considering seeking control of the Los Angeles-based franchiser of printing centers, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Is Central America Ready for Self-Government?; 'Disappear,' to Burke
LEAD: To the Editor:


JAM INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JAM INC
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,548,705
1,709,640
Net inc
261,221
75,466
Share earns
.02
.02
Shares outst
13,348,229
4,302,341


Key Rates
LEAD:
$
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.56
6.79
6.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.73
5.42
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.99
5.98
5.37
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.05
8.10
7.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.48
8.48
7.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.44
9.46
8.79
MUNICIPAL BONDS*
7.93
7.94
7.09


U.S. Halts Ionizing Gun Use
LEAD: Federal regulators today ordered an immediate suspension of the use of an industrial device that has leaked tiny particles of a radioactive substance at plants around the nation.


LEGGETT &amp; PLATT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEGGETT &amp; PLATT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
162,835,000
146,610,000
Net inc
8,999,000
9,576,000
Share earns
.55
.57
Yr sales
649,245,000
585,686,000
Net inc
37,469,000
34,575,000
Share earns
2.28
2.07


The Public's Stake in the Brawley Case
LEAD: Tawana Brawley can thank her lawyer, Alton Maddox Jr., for helping win the appointment of a special state prosecutor to pursue the ugly charges of her rape case.
But he is not entitled to anyone's thanks for continuing to withhold the black teen-ager's cooperation.
The public is entitled to have the disturbing charges of this episode investigated properly and have justice done promptly.


BARR LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARR LABORATORIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
15,586,000
16,970,000
Net inc
726,000
1,584,000
Share earns
.10
.25
Shares outst
7,561,893
6,257,770
6mo sales
28,273,000
20,365,000
Net inc
1,601,000
2,601,000
Share earns
.21
.42
Shares outst
7,560,522
6,261,679


Dole, Stung by Loss, Lashes Out at Bush in South
LEAD: Angry and somber, Senator Bob Dole traveled across the South today, lashing out at Vice President Bush and pressing the theme of ''strong leadership'' that has dominated his Presidential campaign.


YOUNG DANCERS WHO STAND OUT IN A CORPS
LEAD: THE New York City Ballet's winter season at the New York State Theater comes to an end this weekend with a number of public and private closing rituals.
One of those rituals is the benefit performance on Sunday night, coordinated and introduced by Sean Lavery, for the Dancers' Emergency Fund, which provides help for City Ballet dancers facing crises without the necessary resources.


LOEWS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOEWS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,947,604,000
1,813,035,000
Net inc
b291,452,000
c101,625,000
Share earns
3.80
1.25
Yr rev
9,323,705,000
8,606,885,000
Net inc
b696,165,000
c545,503,000
Share earns
8.92
6.69


Albany Fund Plan Seeks Road Bonds
LEAD: Adding another wrinkle to the debate over how to spend hundreds of millions of dollars in surplus revenues that the state put aside last year, Assembly Democrats proposed today that half the money be used for a bond issue to pay for road and bridge repairs.


FIRST SERVICE BANK FOR SAVNGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST SERVICE BANK FOR SAVNGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,816,000
1,818,000
Per share
.36
.36
Yr net inc
6,212,000
4,075,000
Per share
1.23
-
The per share earnings for 1986 was not available; the bank converted to stock form of ownership in August 1986.


MURRAY OHIO MANUFACTURING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MURRAY OHIO MANUFACTURING (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
47,960,000
36,169,000
Net loss
1,051,000
2,108,000
Yr sales
438,150,000
374,193,000
Net inc
7,048,000
3,003,000
Share earns
1.81
.77


UNITED BANKSHARES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED BANKSHARES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,600,000
b1,933,000
Per share
.50
-
Yr net inc
7,300,000
2,500,000
Per share
2.72
.94
b-Net loss


JEFFERSON BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JEFFERSON BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
651,000
511,000
Per share
.23
.21
Yr net inc
2,368,000
1,812,000
Per share
.95
.71


MOHASCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOHASCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
214,449,000
208,725,000
Net inc
8,704,000
c7,955,000
Share earns
.64
.58
Yr rev
806,906,000
757,710,000
Net inc
b12,672,000
c15,835,000
Share earns
.92
1.15
Shares outst
13,804,817
13,793,304


China's Fallen Hero: A Hair Shirt's Not His Style
LEAD: Success was, for Bu Xinsheng, so sweet.


Eaton Will Pay U.S. To Settle Billings Case
LEAD: The Eaton Corporation's AIL division, which was accused of falsifying payment requests on Air Force contracts and committing other improprieties, has agreed to pay the Government $6 million in restitution and penalties to settle a planned civil suit by Federal authorities.


HEWLETT-PACKARD CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEWLETT-PACKARD CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,192,000,000
1,740,000,000
Net inc
179,000,000
116,000,000
Share earns
.71
.45


PENNEY, J C CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENNEY, J C CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,943,000,000
4,989,000,000
Net inc
280,000,000
b253,000,000
Share earns
1.93
1.70
Yr sales
15,332,000,000
14,740,000,000
Net inc
608,000,000
b478,000,000
Share earns
4.11
3.19


Deficits Fill a Vacuum; Election-Year Surrender of Responsibility By Congress and Reagan Is Seen in Budget
LEAD: For once, no one is calling President Reagan's budget ''dead on arrival,'' as Democrats in Congress described most of his earlier proposals and as indeed they turned out.
The President and Congress have already agreed on the broad outlines of how much to tax and how much to spend, so the disputes this time are in the details.


UNITED BANKERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED BANKERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
8,062,709
593,885
Yr net loss
21,938,028
5,167,119
The provision for loan losses totaled $4,247,900 for the latest fourth quarter and $18,770,280 for the latest year, compared with $2,824,015 for the year- ago quarter and $11,969,300 for 1986.


Doner Effort For Arby's
LEAD: ''The Arby's Revolution,'' the first campaign created by the fast-food chain's new agency, W. B. Doner &amp; Company, Baltimore, will be taking on the burger world beginning next month.


U.S. Olympic Skater Falls Again
LEAD: Dan Jansen sliding on the ice after falling in the 1,000-meter speed skating event in Calgary, Alberta.
It was his second fall in five days.
Earlier, a top U.S. skier, Pam Fletcher, suffered a broken leg in practice.
It was the 14th injury suffered by American skiers since last June.
Page B9. (AP)


Bridge: New York Pro-Am to Pair Novices and Life Masters
LEAD: There is no normal way that a tennis tyro can hope to play with, say, Steffi Graf, or a golfing novice with Jack Nicklaus.
But something of the kind can happen in bridge.


'Indigo Blue,' Drama, At the Billie Holiday
LEAD: ''Indigo Blue,'' the Billie Holiday Theater's final production of its current three-play repertory season, will open today.
The new play, by Judi Ann Mason, is a drama of two middle-aged sisters awaiting the return of a man each once loved, The Billie Holiday Theater is in the Restoration Plaza complex at 1368 Fulton Street.


DATAKEY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATAKEY INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,396,814
384,054
Net inc
b488,097
c79,625
Share earns
.14
-
Yr sales
3,767,178
1,705,897
Net inc
b803,252
c324,276
Share earns
.23
-
b-Includes tax benefits of $195,000 and $382,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


PERINI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PERINI CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
206,153,000
218,769,000
Net inc
5,977,000
b2,608,000
Share earns
1.68
.80
Yr rev
741,424,000
801,493,000
Net inc
11,257,000
b5,043,000
Share earns
3.46
1.56


AMERICAN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK- DUVAL reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK- DUVAL
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,402,000
950,000
Per share
1.50
-
The bank converted to a stock form of ownership from a mutual in January 1987.


Univision Picks Acting Head
LEAD: The new owners of Univision, the Spanish-language television network, have named William Stiles acting president of the network.
Hallmark Cards Inc. and a


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''People don't like to pay taxes, people like the programs the Government spends money on, and people like to be told fairy tales.''  - Alan Blinder, an economist, on the Federal budget.  [ A1:5. ]


Folk Guitarist
LEAD: Dan Ar Bras, a folk guitarist from Brittany, will perform tomorrow at 8 and 10 P.M. at the New York Open Center, 83 Spring Street (219-2527).
Tickets are $9.


Pickens Seeks Part Of Texaco
LEAD: T. Boone Pickens, the Texas oilman and corporate raider, has notified Texaco Inc. that he is seeking clearance from antitrust regulators to buy up to 15 percent of the company.


Utility in Offering Of Option Bonds
LEAD: The Consumers Power Company of Jackson, Mich., offered $250 million worth of 8 3/4 percent noncallable first mortgage bonds yesterday at 99.72, to yield 8.82 percent to 1993, through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The bonds have a final maturity in 1998.


Washington Talk: Nicaragua Peace Talks; American Sitting Opposite U.S.-Backed Rebels
LEAD: When Nicaragua resumed peace talks today with with rebel leaders, it may have seemed strange to some that one of the four Sandinista Government delegates sitting opposite the American-backed contras was himself an American, Paul S. Reichler.


Allegis in Talks On Covia Sale
LEAD: The Allegis Corporation disclosed today that it was in talks to sell up to 50 percent of its Covia/Apollo reservation system to four European airlines and other third parties for more than $350 million.


HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (SEYOUR, IND)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK (SEYOUR, IND)(O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
403,666
353,913
6mo net inc
1,489,756
553,012
The per share earnings were not available; the company went public Jan. 22.


Anthony Newman
LEAD: Anthony Newman will perform works by Bach on the new Rieger tracker organ in Holy Trinity Church (316 East 88th Street) on Sunday at 5 P.M.
It is the first of three consecutive Sunday concerts by Mr.
Newman featuring the complete preludes, fugues, toccatas and fantasies.
Tickets are $7, $6 for students and the elderly.


Interpublic Profit Up
LEAD: The Interpublic Group - which comprises McCann-Erickson Worldwide; Lintas: Worldwide; Dailey &amp; Associates, and interests in Lowe Marschalk and other companies -announced that fourth-quarter earnings rose 28 percent, to $18.7 million, or 86 cents a share, from $14.6 million, or 67 cents a share, a year earlier.


GILLETTE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GILLETTE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
866,300,000
790,600,000
Net inc
58,300,000
bc124,300,000
Share earns
.51
-
Shares outst
115,328,000
127,347,000
Yr sales
3,166,800,000
2,818,300,000
Net inc
229,900,000
c15,800,000
Share earns
2.00
.12
Shares outst
115,072,000
127,344,000


THOMSON NEWSPAPERS LTD reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THOMSON NEWSPAPERS LTD
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,095,800,000
1,027,600,000
Net inc
230,700,000
b221,300,000
Share earns
1.56
1.50
b-Includes a $20.6 million special gain.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


GAMING &amp; TECHNOLOGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GAMING &amp; TECHNOLOGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,471,000
9,690,000
Net inc
1,142,000
1,139,000
Share earns
.15
.15
6mo rev
23,908,000
18,824,000
Net inc
2,325,000
2,290,000
Share earns
.30
.31
Shares outst
7,672,000
7,401,000


Exorcising Brezhnev's Foreign Policy
LEAD: Having removed the name of the erstwhile leader Leonid I. Brezhnev from all public places, General Secretary Mikhail S. Gorbachev is now attempting the more daunting task of exorcising Mr.
Brezhnev's foreign policy legacy.
If he makes good on his pledge to remove Soviet troops from Afghanistan, he will begin to render credible Moscow's much publicized ''new thinking'' about the


U.N. AND AMAL SEEK ABDUCTED MARINE
LEAD: United Nations forces aided by local Moslem militiamen virtually sealed off the southern port of Tyre and surrounding areas today in their search for a kidnapped United States Marine officer.


Boitano Takes Lead
LEAD: Brian Boitano and Brian Orser let the question of their Olympic supremacy linger on a bit tonight.


INTERNATIONAL MICROCOMUTER SOFTWARE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL MICROCOMUTER SOFTWARE
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,044,992
1,094,135
Net loss
420,275
46,511
6mo rev
2,086,332
2,092,807
Net loss
695,963
139,760


College Basketball; N.C. State Trounces Clemson
LEAD: Brian Howard scored a career-high 26 points and Chucky Brown added 25 tonight as North Carolina State defeated Clemson, 88-63.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Donegan's Inventions


Sports People; Reed and Nets Meet
LEAD: Willis Reed, the former Knick captain and coach who is Bill Russell's top assistant with the Sacramento Kings, has had his third interview for the Nets' coaching post.
Bob Casciola, the Nets' executive vice president and chief executive officer, flew to Cleveland last Monday, where the Kings played the Cavaliers, to meet with Reed.


TMIC Aide Urged Liquidation in '86
LEAD: Nhe former California official appointed in 1986 to manage the ailing TMIC Insurance Company said yesterday that as early as May of that year he had argued that the company needed to be liquidated to contain its already large losses.


WASHINGTON BANCORP NEW JERSEY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WASHINGTON BANCORP NEW JERSEY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,100,000
833,000
Per share
.46
-
Yr net inc
3,640,000
3,690,000
Per share
1.58
-
The per share earnings for year-ago periods were not available; the company converted to public ownership in May 1987.


In the Hall of Mirrors
LEAD: Right now, I do not know whom I will vote for when New York State, where I live, holds its primaries.
I do not know whom I will wind up voting for on Election Day nor whether the lucky fellow will be a Republican or a Democrat.


An Opera Innovator Readies Britten Work
LEAD: While New York's major opera companies continue their decades-long dithering over the establishment of a smaller alternative house, adventure and flexibility in opera productions is left to the small independents struggling for life in this city.


Dr. Melville A. Platt, Hospital Official, 60
LEAD: Dr.
Melville A. Platt, a retired deputy director of New York Hospital, died of kidney cancer Monday at the hospital.
He was 60 years old and lived in Elmsford, N.Y.


PROPERTIES OF AMERICA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROPERTIES OF AMERICA
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,325,315
3,607,335
Net inc
383,136
168,239
Share earns
.16
.09
Shares outst
2,349,714
1,874,700
6mo rev
14,754,438
8,106,281
Net inc
907,865
493,502
Share earns
.43
.26
Shares outst
2,112,208
1,874,700


CENTRAL MAINE POWER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL MAINE POWER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
162,900,000
134,400,000
Net inc
13,393,000
3,996,000
Share earns
.55
.07
Yr rev
598,200,000
508,800,000
Net inc
46,525,000
45,287,000
Share earns
1.79
1.54


Arab Nations Seek U.N. Debate on U.S. Plan to Close P.L.O. Office
LEAD: Arab countries said today that they were formally requesting an emergency session of the General Assembly to debate an American move to close the Palestine Liberation Organization's United Nations observer mission in Manhattan.


SOUTHWEST GAS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHWEST GAS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
151,496,000
123,532,000
Net inc
17,687,000
12,504,000
Share earns
.96
.88
Yr rev
468,584,000
450,509,000
Net inc
39,700,000
23,734,000
Share earns
2.13
1.66


Old-Line Law Firm Agrees To Biggest New York Merger
LEAD: Suffering from the recent defections of top partners, one of the nation's oldest law firms, Lord, Day &amp; Lord, announced yesterday that it would merge with a slightly smaller New York partnership.


At the Movies
LEAD:  The Ceremony


DRESSER INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DRESSER INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
800,900,000
717,100,000
Net inc
b44,200,000
c7,800,000
Share earns
.62
-
b-Includes net from discontinued operations of $22.7 million and an extraordinary gain of $12.4 million.


Horse Racing Notebook; Gulfstream Times Mystify Handicappers
LEAD: How good a race was the Fountain of Youth Stakes last Monday, in which Forty Niner outdueled Notebook by a nose?
Because the race was at Gulfstream Park, speed handicappers are still trying to figure it out, without much success.


FIRST BANCORP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST BANCORP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
482,611
322,165
Per share
.44
.46
Shares outst
1,135,050
730,550
Yr net inc
1,448,161
1,011,921
Per share
1.46
1.54
Shares outst
992,468
658,214


MORGAN KEEGAN &amp; CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MORGAN KEEGAN &amp; CO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,950,444
21,298,197
Net inc
574,211
1,757,886
Share earns
.10
.37
Shares outst
5,671,421
4,774,937
6mo rev
35,516,999
40,721,375
Net inc
951,312
3,304,655
Share earns
.16
.70
Shares outst
5,790,641
4,754,502


Life Term for Bronx Rapist
LEAD: A Bronx judge imposed a life term yesterday on a 30-year-old man who raped a woman and later beat her because she went to the police.
The man, Luis McCray, must serve at least 20 years in prison before seeking parole, Justice Donald Covington of State Supreme Court ruled.
Mr.
McCray raped and sodomized a 22-year-old civilian employee of the Police Department in a deserted Bronx schoolyard on March 6, 1986, the prosecutors said.


299-Billion Military Budget Drops Weapons and People
LEAD: The Pentagon today proposed cutting military forces on active duty by 36,000 people while canceling 18 weapon programs as it sent to Congress a $299.5 billion budget for in 1989.


Capital Losses
LEAD: To the Editor:


TWO NIGHTS OF SINGING THE BLUES
LEAD: IN an ironic fit of democracy, the local music of some of the most dispossessed citizens of the United States - black, rural Southerners - has changed the nature of international life.
The relatively small, 200-mile-long area known as the Mississippi Delta produces music full of pride, rebellion and emotion, a deeply felt version of the blues.


SANDWICH CO-OPERATIVE BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANDWICH CO-OPERATIVE BANK (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Net inc
676,000
788,000
Per share
.37
.43
9mo net inc
1,995,000
2,059,000
Per share
1.10
-
The company converted to stock ownership in July 1986.


GREAT SOUTHERN FEDERAL SAVNGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREAT SOUTHERN FEDERAL SAVNGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
217,000
204,000
Per share
.12
.11


Rothschild's New Trouble
LEAD: L. F. Rothschild Holdings Inc., the brokerage house that went into a precipitous decline in the wake of the stock market crash, announced yesterday that it faces further problems because its net worth has declined sharply.


MULTI-LOCAL MEDIA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MULTI-LOCAL MEDIA (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,634,042
6,574,384
Net loss
b2,463,520
681,206
b-Includes a writeoff of $503,000 from planned start-up costs associated with Florida operations.


Carter Hawley, Penney Gain
LEAD: The J. C. Penney Company yesterday reported an increase in its fourth-quarter profit despite a slight drop in sales, while another important retailer, Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., also said it had stronger fiscal second-quarter earnings.


PERES SAYS ISRAEL SHOULD YIELD GAZA
LEAD: Underlining the governing coalition's disarray, Foreign Minister Shimon Peres suggested today that Israel would do well to yield control of the Gaza Strip, not because of unrest there but because of the ''demographic clock'' of the Palestinians' population growth.


A Budget Without Bluster
LEAD: There is a welcome breath of reality in President Reagan's new budget.
His past budgets have been studded with blustering assaults on the fundamental social functions of government.
Not the new midnight-blue tome for fiscal 1989.
There will be battles with Congressional Democrats over individual priorities.


LA-Z BOY CHAIR CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LA-Z BOY CHAIR CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 23
1988
1987
Sales
116,268,000
107,299,000
Net inc
b7,383,000
6,350,000
Share earns
.40
.34
9mo sales
331,215,000
298,300,000
Net inc
b18,083,000
16,555,000
Share earns
.98
.90


Restaurants
LEAD: THERE are only a handful of restaurants in the Lincoln Center area where I could be persuaded to pass an evening unless I was at the business end of a revolver.
At first I had reservations about the newcomer Cameos, a splashy, pastel-hued, piano bar with an overly energetic public-relations staff.


I.R.S. Harder to Convince On Doing Business at Home
LEAD: A personal computer, a luxury car, a home-office and even hobby expenses can still be written off under the new tax law by many employees and self-employed business people.
But many taxpayers will also find that they can no longer count on the Government to provide as much of a helping hand in subsidizing the cost of an I.B.M.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: THE flourishing neighborhood between Union Square and the Flatiron district has spawned yet another stylish restaurant, Ristorante da Umberto.
Owned by Umberto Assante and his wife, Kathleen, the three-month-old establishment specializes in the hearty cuisine of Florence.
The high-ceilinged dining rooms are bright and tidy, with sponge-dappled amber walls and well-spaced tables.


West German Chancellor Begins Talks in Washington
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl, center, meeting yesterday with Jesse Helms, left, and Claiborne Pell of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
Mr.
Kohl also met with Secretary of State George P. Shultz, who asured the Chancellor of American support for his efforts to obtain a comprehensive NATO decision on the development of a new overall arms strategy.


Kennedy Sworn As 104th Justice On High Court
LEAD: Anthony McLeod Kennedy took his two oaths as the 104th Justice of the Supreme Court today, in separate ceremonies at the Court and the White House.


ART BLAKEY
LEAD: Art Blakey on drums and his Jazz Messengers will perform tonight through Sunday at Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street (242-1785).
Sets are at 10 and 11:45 P.M. and 1:30 A.M.; there is a $12 cover and a $6 minimum.


Is Central America Ready for Self-Government?; Trained in the U.S.
LEAD: To the Editor:


Art: A Tamer Vito Acconci in Show at the Modern
LEAD: ONCE confrontational, he now cajoles.
Still, Vito Acconci continues to implicate an audience in his discomfiting scenarios.
Having created a reputation during the 1970's as a Conceptual artist who staged bizarre, often sexually charged events, Mr.
Acconci turns his attention these days to superficially peaceable pastimes -constructing environmental sculptures that function something like playgrounds or parks.


Empty Seats Upset Residents
LEAD: Local residents were told months ago that many Olympic events, including hockey, speed skating, figure skating and curling, were sold out.
They have become angry because there have been large blocks of empty seats at these events.


ETHICS COMMITTEE URGES THE HOUSE TO REMOVE BIAGGI
LEAD: The ethics committee of the House of Representatives recommended today that Mario Biaggi be expelled from Congress.


UNITED SECURITY FINANCIAL (ILLIOIS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED SECURITY FINANCIAL (ILLIOIS)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b43,978
c262,502
Per share
-
.03
Yr net inc
b208,858
b679,100
Per share
.03
.09
b-Includes realized investment losses of $2,651 for the quarter, and the year includes realized investment gains of $76,452, compared with 172,116 in 1986.


NORTHWEST ILLINOIS BANCORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHWEST ILLINOIS BANCORP
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,260,000
1,260,000
Per share
1.41
1.42


Du Pont Quits Republican Race; Babbitt Makes Pullout Official
LEAD: Former Gov.
Pete du Pont of Delaware, who had vowed last Tuesday night to take his battered Republican Presidential campaign south for the crucial primaries on March 8, capitulated to fiscal and political reality today and withdrew from the race.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Aiding the Rebels
LEAD: While the White House has taken great pains to dissociate itself from private efforts to raise money for the Nicaraguan rebels, a political organization called Citizens for Reagan, is trying to take up the slack.


Crew Gives Statement in Ambulance Inquiry
LEAD: The New York City Emergency Medical Service said yesterday that it had received statements from an ambulance crew that was said to have refused to leave a Bronx delicatessen to help a man dying of a heart attack in a church a block away.


'MYSTERY!' AT OXFORD
LEAD: ''MYSTERY!'' turns plummy tomorrow night.
Chief Inspector Morse looks for a killer among Oxford's dons.
The dons inhabit spacious, sunny offices amid turrets, spires and greens.
Morse drinks ale, listens to Wagner, and solves difficult crossword puzzles in his bachelor apartment.
There is not a handgun to be seen.


ABC Fans the Fire of Of Emotional Game
LEAD: FOR a United States-Soviet Union hockey game to succeed for the 80 million fans watching on television, the game has to be set up with dramatic tension.


Conservationists Offer Park System 'Blueprint'
LEAD: A leading conservation group called today for reform and a major expansion of the national park system.
The proposal drew quick support on Capitol Hill.


Lisbon Seeks Revision Of U.S. Defense Accord
LEAD: Portugal plans to ask for a ''thorough overhaul'' of a 37-year-old mutual defense treaty with the United States that allows the use of military sites in the Azores Islands, the Portuguese Foreign Minister says.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
AST Research Inc., Irvine, Calif., a maker of computer hardware and software products, appointed Bruce Edwards chief financial officer and a senior vice president and Bruce Cassel senior vice president of United States sales.


TRANS FINANCIAL BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANS FINANCIAL BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
267,000
b668,000
Per share
.29
.85
Yr net inc
1,619,000
6,000
Per share
1.93
-
b-Included a tax credit of $446,000.
The loan loss provision in 1987 was $1,276,000, compared with $4,431,000 for 1986.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Campbell Soup Co.
$84,600,000
+20.2
Carter Hawley Hale Stores
20,400,000
*-
Dresser Industries
44,200,000
*-
Ford Motor Co.
932,000,000
+18.7
Gillette Co.


Art: Skewed World Of Steve Gianakos
LEAD: STEVE GIANAKOS in his new paintings at the Barbara Toll Gallery comes on at first like a cartoonist.
A master of everyday embarrassments and nighttime fears, he touches terrain often worked over by others.
Of old, we know his baffled businessmen.
The house that goes out of control is also a familiar ploy, though one with unlimited potential.


UNITED BUILDING SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED BUILDING SERVICES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,361,000
2,086,000
Net inc
65,000
77,000
Share earns
.04
.08
Shares outst
1,703,000
912,000
9mo rev
9,267,000
5,096,000
Net inc
166,000
340,000
Share earns
.12
.37


Nasser Son Indicted In Attacks on Envoys From Israel and U.S.
LEAD: In a case that is certain to stir emotions in the Arab world, Egypt today charged the eldest son of President Gamal Abdel Nasser with involvement in the murder and attempted murder of several Israeli and American diplomats.


DIGIORGIO CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGIORGIO CORP (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
949,935,000
876,868,000
Net loss
b4,615,000
c14,333,000
Share earns
-
1.79
b-Includes net from continuing operations of $10,591,000, or $1.24 a share, a loss from discontinued operations of $16,323,000 and a credit of $1,117,000 from an accounting change.


BOND PRICES END THREE-DAY SLIDE
LEAD: Bond prices rose modestly yesterday after three consecutive days of declines.


STONE CONTAINER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STONE CONTAINER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
909,000,000
567,000,000
Net inc
58,100,000
24,700,000
Share earns
1.45
.71
Yr sales
3,233,000,000
2,032,000,000
Net inc
161,300,000
35,400,000
Share earns
4.21
.97


INSIDE
LEAD:  Plea in Nicaragua Talks


CUNY Final Is Tonight
LEAD: There will be two objectives for College of Staten Island in the CUNY Conference basketball final tonight in Nat Holman Gymnasium.
One is in the hands of the players, but for the other, the players can only keep their fingers crossed.


Livestock Down the Limit; Precious Metals Also Fall
LEAD: Livestock futures plummeted the limit allowed for daily trading yesterday in a wave of profit taking apparently prompted by weak demand for beef and pork products.


Stage: Len Jenkin's 'American Notes,' at the Public
LEAD: IN his plays, Len Jenkin has often taken us on dark midnight rides to mythic environments.
With ''American Notes,'' his new play at the Public Theater, he leads us through a stretch of the American landscape.
Though the route is almost as strange as ever, there are signposts, identifiable at least to those who have seen ''Buried Child,'' ''Blue Velvet'' and other baleful studies of small-town provincial life.


Latin Aid Bank Selects Leader
LEAD: Uruguay's Foreign Minister, Enrique V. Iglesias, who once headed one of the largest private banking groups in his country, was elected president of the Inter-American Development Bank today.


TOLLAND BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOLLAND BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
297,000
218,000
Per share
.26
-
Yr net inc
1,151,000
-
Per share
.99
-
The bank did not report comparable figures for 1986 because it changed to a calendar year from a March 31 year.


Stage: 'Yard Sale' and 'Betty Lemon'
LEAD: BOTH of Arnold Wesker's one-act, one-character dramas, which the Jewish Repertory Theater is presenting together under the title of the evening's curtain-raiser, ''Yard Sale,'' profile mature women painfully coping with life beyond marriage.
Both plays star Marilyn Chris, an actress of considerable resourcefulness who over the course of the evening successfully leaps from the role of a Brooklyn school teacher to that of a bilious invalid widow of a British M


Insider Penalties' Effect
LEAD: Severe insider-trading penalties are damaging new cases by discouraging potential defendants from cooperating, a top official of the Securities and Exchange Commission has been quoted as saying.
Gary Lynch, the S.E.C. enforcement director, was quoted as saying in an interview that the prospect of imprisonment, civil fines and financial ruin is convincing some people that ''it's better to hunker down than cooperate.


Sports People; Bird Expected to Play
LEAD: Larry Bird, who suffered a broken nose Wednesday night in the Celtics' 138-125 loss to the Denver Nuggets, is expected to play tonight when Boston continues its trip in Portland, Ore., against the Trail Blazers.


Farm Credit Shows Profit
LEAD: The Farm Credit System said yesterday that it had earned a profit of $179 million in the final quarter of 1987, but the nation's biggest farm lender posted a loss for the full year in spite of a big reduction in its reserve for loan losses.


Photos of Levin Are Released By Prosecutors
LEAD: The last three photographs of Jennifer Levin in the hours before her death, taken in an Upper East Side bar as she posed, tanned and smiling, with her friends, were shown to reporters and photographers for the first time yesterday by prosecutors.


CARTER HAWLEY HALE STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARTER HAWLEY HALE STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
865,953,000
995,082,000
Net inc
20,361,000
c24,203,000
Share earns
.94
-
6mo sales
1,476,518,000
1,704,867,000
Net inc
b31,086,000
c7,778,000
Share earns
1.33
-


New Face:; France's Softhearted Tough Guy: Richard Bohringer
LEAD: WHEN Richard Bohringer made his first film, ''L'Italien des Roses,'' in the 1970's, French critics raved about ''the new Brando.''


TORO COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TORO COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 29
1988
1987
Sales
152,709,000
130,629,000
Net inc
6,015,000
5,170,000
Share earns
.56
.47
6mo sales
280,932,000
228,362,000
Net inc
10,270,000
8,671,000
Share earns
.94
.77


Quick Shifts in Public Mood Can Fool Day-to-Day Polling
LEAD: Two major polling operations failed to predict Vice President Bush's surge of last-minute support in the New Hampshire primary election on Tuesday, and polling specialists said it demonstrated the difficulty of using day-by-day surveys for news coverage of a Presidential primary.


Dining Out Guide: 3-Star French, Part 1
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
The date of original publication is listed after the phone number.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
AURORA, 60 East 49th Street (692-9292) - (Jan. 31, 1986) Well-spaced tables and comfortable chairs and banquettes contribute to the luxurious atmosphere of this midtown restaurant.


Soviet Says It Lost 3 Satellites as Rocket Failed
LEAD: The Soviet Union's Proton rocket experienced its third failure in 13 months today when the rocket's fourth stage failed to send three satellites into a planned orbit high above the Earth.


Jansen Tumbles; Gold to Guliaev
LEAD: Four nights after having fallen on the first turn of the Olympic 500-meter only hours after his sister's death, Dan Jansen of West Allis, Wis., fell again tonight on the backstretch straightaway during the 1,000-meter speedskating event.


SOVIET JEWISH ART, 1912-1928
LEAD: The Russian Revolution fostered a brief though remarkable burst of artistic creativity that was particularly pronounced amoung many of the country's Jewish artists.
Yet unlike others in the new Soviet avant-garde, many of the Jewish artists incorporated traditional and folk-art styles into their work.


More Time Allowed on Canada Pact
LEAD: The Reagan Administration and Democratic Congressional leaders agreed today to allow the White House more time to present the Canadian free-trade accord to Congress for final approval.
The agreement assures that a vote will be taken this year.


ABS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABS INDUSTRIES INC
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,581,000
4,508,000
Net inc
b6,000
b450,000
Share earns
.01
.53
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $67,000 and $19,000 for the latest quarter and year-earlier period, respectively, and tax credits of $2,000 for the latest quarter and $189,000 for the year-earlier period.


Conde Nast Campaign Breaks Into Four-Color
LEAD: It has been four years since Conde Nast Publications created a new trade campaign, and with its new one, beginning this month, it is moving away from its traditional black-and-white style.


New-Music Group
LEAD: Relache, a new-music ensemble from Philadelphia, and David Cullen, a guitarist, will present works by Guy Klucevsek, Thomas Albert, Paul Epstein, Phillip Corner and Stephen Montague on Sunday at 2 P.M. in Merkin Concert Hall (129 West 67th Street).
Tickets are $10.
Information: 362-8719.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Oliver Lake and Quartet
LEAD: Oliver Lake, an alto saxophonist, is leading a quartet - with Geri Allen on piano, Reggie Workman on bass and Andrew Cyrille on drums - tonight through Sunday at Carlos 1, 432 Avenue of the Americas, at Ninth Street (982-3260).
Sets begin at 9 and 11 P.M., plus a 12:30 A.M. set tonight and tomorrow; there is a $10 cover with a $7 minimum at tables and a one-drink minimum at the bar.


GREINER ENGINEERING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREINER ENGINEERING INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,481,000
18,937,000
Net inc
603,000
378,000
Share earns
.37
.22
Yr rev
83,818,000
79,626,000
Net inc
2,589,000
1,870,000
Share earns
1.52
1.10


Bristol Journal; The Border War That's Fought With Billboards
LEAD: A border war is brewing along Interstate 94, the major thoroughfare between Chicago and Milwaukee.
It involves Wisconsin and Illinois and is being waged in three-foot-high letters on a pair of billboards at the state line just south of here.


Money Fund Assets Off
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 418 money market mutual funds decreased $1.19 billion, to $276.85 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 113 institutional funds decreased $1.32 billion, to $81.01 billion.
The 208 general purpose funds had an increase in assets of $370.9 million, to $81.78 billion.


Soviet Ousts Yeltsin From Ruling Body
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin, a onetime ally of Mikhail S. Gorbachev whose sharp criticism of the pace of reform last October led to his ouster as Communist Party chief in Moscow, lost his Politburo post today while two new Gorbachev allies joined the ruling body.


Chinese New Year's
LEAD: A Chinese New Year celebration, with music and dance, is to be held Sunday at 2 P.M. at Pace University, Schimmel Center, Spruce Street, between Park Row and Gold Street.
Those appearing include former members of dance companies in Beijing, Shanghai and Tianjin.
The event is sponsored by the Young People's Chinese Cultural Center.


A NEW SITE OPENS FOR OLD MOVIES
LEAD: OLD-MOVIE buffs in New York have had little to cheer about in the last few years, with revival theaters closing or being transformed into first-run theaters at the faster-than-life pace of a Mack Sennett comedy.
But good news finally has arrived, in the form of a new revival house called the Biograph Theater that opens today at 225 West 57th


PICTURETEL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PICTURETEL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,352,859
758,324
Net loss
1,189,801
811,830
6mo rev
1,953,472
1,224,375
Net loss
2,492,310
1,715,924


C.F.T.C. Head Is Confirmed
LEAD: The Senate today approved the nomination of Wendy Lee Gramm as the next chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.


XYTRONYX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XYTRONYX INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
507,002
13,811
Net loss
68,136
394,780
9mo rev
826,005
66,800
Net loss
730,562
1,075,662


PATRICK INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PATRICK INDUSTRIES INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
30,570,000
28,094,000
Net inc
375,000
197,000
Share earns
.27
.14
Yr sales
127,057,000
120,773,000
Net inc
1,618,000
1,255,000
Share earns
1.16
.95


WARRENTECH reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARRENTECH
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,391,986
507,529
Net inc
99,732
28,565
Shares outst
118,104,265
91,974,241
9mo rev
2,998,371
938,345
Net inc
211,170
b404,011
Shares outst
115,992,046
88,411,981


MORGAN STANLEY LOSES CHIEF OF LONDON OFFICE
LEAD: After 23 prosperous years at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, including the last 11 as managing director in charge of the firm's highly successful London office, Archibald Cox Jr. has decided to resign.


People
LEAD: *
David Charney, a senior vice president at Robert A. Becker, the medical advertising subsidiary of the WCRS Group, has been named creative director.


Candidates Regroup for Test in South
LEAD: After months of intense politicking in two states, the campaign for President spread across half the continent today, with most candidates focusing on the South.


Chock Full o'Nuts Prices
LEAD: The Chock Full o'Nuts Corporation said yesterday that it had raised coffee prices by 20 cents a pound because of the higher cost of the high-quality beans used in its blends, and industry sources expect similar moves from other United States roasters shortly.
The suggested retail price for a pound of Chock Full o'Nuts coffee was increased to $3 a pound.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Golf  Couples Takes Lead: Fred Couples capped a nine-under-par 63 with a birdie-birdie-birdie finish yesterday to take the opening-round lead at the $650,000 Andy Williams Open in La Jolla, Calif.
Couples, who lost the Phoenix Open in a playoff, birdied 10 of the 18 holes at the North course at the Torrey Pines Golf Club.


A Dance-Music Project
LEAD: Meet the Composer has initiated a $1.3 million national project to pay for collaborations between American composers and choreographers.
The three-year project was begun by a $300,000 first-year grant from the Ford Foundation, with an additional $600,000 committed over the next two years, and a contribution of $450,000 from the Pew Charitable Trusts.


U.S. Needs Help to Advance
LEAD: It will take close to a miracle, and some unsolicited cooperation from the Soviet Union, for the United States hockey team to advance to the medal round.


ROPAK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROPAK CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,865,000
12,138,000
Net inc
378,000
b74,000
Share earns
.15
-
Yr sales
69,022,000
47,603,000
Net inc
1,577,000
1,492,000
Share earns
.63
.60
b-Net loss


White Supremacists, at Trial, Charge Persecution for Beliefs
LEAD: Opening statements on behalf of white supremacists on trial here on charges of seditious conspiracy and conspiracy to murder Federal officials were completed today.


SKIPPER'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SKIPPER'S INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
24,933,000
24,022,000
Net inc
382,000
b1,639,000
Share earns
.14
-
Yr rev
79,781,000
78,844,000
Net inc
1,469,000
b1,496,000
Share earns
.54
-
b


Elmar Oliviera
LEAD: Elmar Oliviera, a violinist, will be the soloist with the conductor-less Opheus Chamber Orchestra in works by Mozart and Saint-Saens tomorrow at 8 P.M. in Carnegie Hall.
Tickets are $11 to $20.
Information: 247-7800


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Marcovicci's Torch


How Major Government Programs Would Be Affected by Reagan's Budget
LEAD:  Education


Peniamin Noorigian, Translator, 93
LEAD: Peniamin Noorigian, an Armenian-American translator and writer, died Feb. 6 after a long illness in Hollywood.
He was 93 years old.


BIOSPHERICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIOSPHERICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,008,996
2,270,952
Net inc
29,907
40,180
Share earns
.01
.01
Yr rev
10,548,576
8,013,424
Net inc
452,052
309,455
Share earns
.12
.08


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-8


INTERPROVINCIAL STEEL &amp; PIPE LINE LTD reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERPROVINCIAL STEEL &amp; PIPE LINE LTD (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
857,600,000
561,800,000
Net inc
122,400,000
130,800,000
Share earns
3.09
3.36
The results are in Canadian dollars.


Writer, Twice Restrained, Has New Salinger Book
LEAD: Barred by the courts from publishing an unauthorized biography of J. D. Salinger by Ian Hamilton, Random House will soon publish what it describes as ''a substantially new book'' by Mr.
Hamilton about the reclusive Mr.
Salinger.


Knicks Win 9th in Row at Home, 108-104
LEAD: The Knicks beat the Sacramento Kings by 108-104 last night to run their winning streak at Madison Square Garden to nine games, their longest at home since the 1975-76 season.


Sports People; Wagner Star Sidelined
LEAD: Dean Borges of Wagner, the nation's fifth-leading scorer with a 25.4 average, underwent arthroscopic surgery on his right knee Wednesday and will be out for the rest of the season, said Coach Neil Kennett.


Standard Acts to Foil Decker Bid
LEAD: In a move to thwart an unwanted takeover offer from the Black &amp; Decker Corporation, American Standard Inc. said yesterday that its directors had approved a recapitalization plan that was ''financially superior'' to Black &amp; Decker's cash offer of $65 a share, or $2.1 billion.


INVESTORS SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INVESTORS SAVINGS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
616,000
747,000
Per share
.26
.45
6mo net inc
865,000
1,353,000
Per share
.36
.83


Is Central America Ready for Self-Government?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Irish Music
LEAD: Martin (Buddy) Connolly on button accordion and Ken Vesey on fiddle will play Irish traditional music tomorrow at the Eagle Tavern, 355 West 14th Street (924-0275).
Sets are at 9 and 10:30 P.M.; tickets are $5.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the headline yesterday on a brief article about a money transfer to Hong Kong by an adviser to Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d described the tranaction incorrectly.
There is no evidence that the money moved by the adviser, W. Franklyn Chinn, had any connection with Mr.


Federated Shares Dip as Deal Stalls
LEAD: The price of Federated Department Stores' common stock fell $1.75, to $60, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, suggesting that some investors may be growing uncomfortable with the lingering impasse in the Campeau Corporation's takeover attempt.
Federated's directors rejected Campeau's $66-a-share offer on Tuesday, and the next day


PRATT &amp; LAMBERT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRATT &amp; LAMBERT INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
52,935,000
45,186,000
Net inc
1,320,000
b2,129,000
Share earns
.22
.36
Yr sales
226,016,000
193,857,000
Net inc
8,622,000
b8,237,000
Share earns
1.42
1.38


D&amp;N SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*D&amp;N SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,400,000
2,400,000
Per share
.44
.69
Yr net inc
5,000,000
10,200,000
Per share
1.56
3.19
For the year-ago periods certain amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation.


Sports of The Times; Relax, U.S. Will Survive Winter Games
LEAD: All right, you Americans mourning the lack of medals at the Winter Games, open the blinds, let in some daylight and repeat after me:


Economic Scene; Austria's Shift On Waldheim
LEAD: ETHICS often plays a crucial role in economics, and vice versa.
The mounting pressures on Kurt Waldheim to resign from the Presidency of Austria are a case in point.


FARM CREDIT SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FARM CREDIT SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
179,000,000
b384,000,000
Yr net loss
17,000,000
1,913,000,000
b-Net loss  The company said the major factor in the drop in the loss for the Farm Credit Systems to $17 million for 1987 from $1,913,000,000 in 1986 was a $1,994,000,000 reduction in the provision for loan losses.


ALLECO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLECO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,047,000
356,000
Net inc
b20,250,000
c42,791,000
Share earns
2.38
-
9mo rev
2,544,000
1,962,000
Net inc
b11,095,000
c53,381,000
Share earns
1.30
-


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about personnel changes at the New York Film Festival incorrectly described Richard Corliss, who has resigned from its program committee.
Mr.
Corliss remains co-editor of Film Comment, the magazine of the Film Society of Lincoln Center, which sponsors the festival.


Hewlett Net Rises 54.3%
LEAD: Buoyed by strong sales growth in all its product lines, the Hewlett-Packard Company today reported improved revenues and earnings for its first quarter, which ended Jan. 31.
Hewlett-Packard also said order levels were the highest for any quarter in the company's history.


PLESSEY COMPANY PLC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLESSEY COMPANY PLC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Revenue
527,800,000
635,300,000
Net inc
44,700,000
56,000,000
Share earns
.60
.76
9mo rev
1,662,300,000
1,926,800,000
Net inc
128,600,000
153,400,000
Share earns
1.74
2.08


Washington Talk: Briefing; D.C., Here We Come
LEAD: Ronald Reagan notwithstanding, Californians have a reputation for shunning Washington in favor of their state's celebrated sunshine and surf.


GIANT GROUP LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GIANT GROUP LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
20,250,000
18,542,000
Net loss
3,805,000
bc14,016,000
Share earns
-
3.07
Yr sales
82,518,000
81,329,000
Net inc
5,043,000
c21,398,000
Share earns
1.05
5.47


KERR GLASS MANUFACTURING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KERR GLASS MANUFACTURING CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
52,503,000
50,833,000
Net loss
b1,845,000
933,000
Yr sales
249,742,000
251,646,000
Net inc
b3,102,000
3,772,000
Share earns
.62
.26
b-Included net charges of $349,000 related to a reduction of the company's salaried work force and after-tax restructuring costs of $140,000 for the quarter; the year was after a gain of $1,271,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change and included a net gain of $1,059,000, or 29 cents a


Yen-Denominated Paper From Sears
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said it had received approval from Japanese officials to issue yen-denominated commercial paper in Japan.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
British Petroleum Co., London, said it had received 79.8 percent of Britoil P.L.C.'s shares and that it was extending the closing date of its $:2.5 billion offer to next Wednesday.


EASTCO INDUSTRIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASTCO INDUSTRIAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,408,986
4,431,590
Net inc
b81,110
1,033
Share earns
.04
-
6mo sales
15,596,893
8,539,632
Net inc
b131,205
1,661
Share earns
.06
-
b-Includes extraordinary gains from tax benefits of $40,000 for the quarter and $63,000 for the 6 months.


More Wheat to Soviet
LEAD: An additional 500,000 metric tons of subsidized United States wheat has been sold to the Soviet Union, the Agriculture Department said Wednesday.
At recent prices averaging $2.82 a bushel, the wheat would have a value of $52 million.
Nearly 5.7 million tons of subsidized wheat has been sold to the Soviet Union under the department's Export Enhancement Program for delivery in the fiscal year that began Oct.


Music: Jerry Hunt Pastiche
LEAD: IN his business suit and loosened red tie, furiously chewing gum, Jerry Hunt resembles a slightly wasted Wall Street commuter who has descended at the wrong station.
Mr.
Hunt was part of a program of music or whatever you want to call it at the Alternative Museum on Wednesday.
He shared it with the altogether more sedate Annea


UNITED INSURANCE COS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED INSURANCE COS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,167,000
c2,006,000
Per share
.55
.49
Yr net inc
b5,980,000
c7,760,000
Per share
1.67
1.95
b-Includes a capital loss of $216,000 for the quarter; the year includes capital gains of $208,000.


Jean-Paul Bourelly's Avant-Garde Jazz
LEAD: Jean-Paul Bourelly, a young guitarist from Chicago, moved to New York eight years ago.
He immersed himself in the avant-garde of the city, working with the composers Muhal Richard Abrams and Henry Threadgill, and playing with the saxophonist and band leader Steve Coleman.


The Law; Special Counsel Hires Expert
LEAD: The independent prosecutor investigating the Iran-contra affair said today that he had retained Laurence H. Tribe, a leading constitutional scholar, to defend the 1978 law authorizing courts to appoint such special prosecutors.


GRACO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRACO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Sales
67,284,000
58,046,000
Net inc
4,290,000
3,439,000
Share earns
.92
.57
Shares outst
4,679,000
5,976,000
Yr sales
239,713,000
225,071,000
Net inc
12,816,000
14,296,000
Share earns
2.28
2.38
Shares outst
5,577,000
5,964,000


Film: 'Lust for Freedom'
LEAD: THE worst kind of exploitation film masquerades as a spoof, luring innocent but otherwise intelligent people to the theater.
In ''Lust for Freedom,'' when an undercover detective sees her fiance-and-partner gunned down during a botched drug bust, she loses her professional demeanor and runs away in tears.


FILM: A NON-TURGENEV 'MONTH IN THE COUNTRY'
LEAD: ''A Month in the Country'' was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 27.
The film opens today at the 68th Street Playhouse, at Third Avenue.


HERITAGE ENTERTAINMENT YEAR reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HERITAGE ENTERTAINMENT YEAR (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,439,000
778,000
Net inc
444,000
b1,020,000
Share earns
.09
-
9mo rev
5,402,000
9,289,000
Net inc
688,000
553,000
Share earns
.13
.12
Shares outst
5,404,000
4,674,000


Doubt, Not Materialism, Besets Freshmen
LEAD: To the Editor:


ELDORADO BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELDORADO BANCORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
544,000
450,000
Per share
.26
.22
Yr net inc
2,321,000
1,804,000
Per share
1.10
.87


FLEMING COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLEMING COMPANIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,069,478,000
2,041,721,000
Net inc
b2,863,000
17,966,000
Share earns
.11
.68
Yr sales
8,608,101,000
8,316,931,000
Net inc
b49,487,000
c26,975,000
Share earns
1.86
1.02


IMREG INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMREG INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
950,890
728,906
Yr net loss
3,245,056
2,067,942
Imreg is a start-up biotechnology firm and does not yet have revenue to report.


UNION THREATENS STRIKE AT PAN AM
LEAD: The head of the teamsters' union's airline division warned yesterday that the union would strike Pan American World Airways Sunday unless the airline withdrew what the teamsters called ''unreasonable'' contract demands or agreed to binding arbitration.


Sports People; Gretzky Ties Mark
LEAD: Down by 2-0 after the first two periods, the Toronto Maple Leafs battled back to take a 4-3 lead in the third period Wednesday night before Mark Messier of Edmonton scored with 26 seconds left in regulation, giving the Oilers a 4-4 tie.
But the goal gave more than that to Wayne Gretzky.
It was his second assist of the game, and it enabled him to tie Gordie Howe at l,049 on the career assists list.


GEICO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEICO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b12,689,964
c67,275,879
Share earns
.77
4.00
Shares outst
16,378,251
16,832,622
Yr net inc
b177,914,344
c217,741,898
Share earns
10.67
12.61
Shares outst
16,672,605
17,260,930


Jersey Balks at Renewal Of Trump Casino Permit
LEAD: The Casino Control Commission refused today to relicense Donald J. Trump's Resorts International casino, unless he cleared up ''numerous contradictions'' in his testimony before the panel.


Strike Ends At British Ford Plants
LEAD: Workers at the Ford Motor Company's factories in Britain voted overwhelmingly today to end an 11-day strike that had threatened production across Europe and cost the company millions of dollars, Ford said.


Dollar Up Modestly in U.S.; Gold Prices Mostly Lower
LEAD: The dollar closed moderately higher in New York and mixed in London yesterday after falling in Tokyo earlier in the day.


SLATTERY GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SLATTERY GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
56,714,000
47,003,000
Net inc
b406,000
c1,490,000
Share earns
.28
1.00
Yr rev
219,261,000
192,647,000
Net inc
b1,227,000
cd169,000
Share earns
.83
-


Classical Quartet
LEAD: The Classical Quartet will present works by Boccherini and Beethoven on period instruments tonight at 8 o'clock in St.
Michael's Church (225 West 99th Street).
Tickets are $9, $6 for students and the elderly.
Information: 874-4037.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  IN THE DRAGON'S YEAR


Jasper Johns's 'Diver' To Be Sold at Auction
LEAD: Jasper Johns's ''Diver,'' one of the the artist's first large-scale paintings, is to be auctioned at Christie's on May 3.
The 1962 work, on five panels, is 7 1/2 feet high and 14 feet wide.


Brazil Agrees to Renew Meetings With I.M.F.
LEAD: Ending a three-year boycott of talks with the International Monetary Fund, Brazil expects to start negotiations on a new borrowing arrangement next month and to conclude an agreement by the end of June, Finance Minister Mailson Ferreira da Nobrega said here today.


On Stage
LEAD:  Holzer Is Back, With Projects


Arbitrator Cuts Gooden's Pay $100,000
LEAD: The Mets registered their first victory of the year yesterday, emerging as a philosophical and financial winner over Dwight Gooden in their salary-arbitration encounter.
The outcome made Gooden only the eighth player of the 265 whose salaries have been determined by arbitrators to have his salary cut.


NWA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NWA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,006,041,000
950,662,000
Net inc
b21,000
c9,762,000
Share earns
-
.45
Yr rev
4,371,624,000
2,920,458,000
Net inc
b103,011,000
c76,941,000
Share earns
3.59
3.26
Shares outst
29,631,000
26,915,000


The Law; At the Bar
LEAD: The dean of Stanford Law School has called it ''the most innovative and exciting experiment in legal education in the country.'' A Harvard professor said it ''stands as a role model for all of us.'' And the president of the American Association of University Professors said it had pierced ''the barriers of methodology, subject matter and admissions standards which have shackled much of legal education for nearly three decades.


MICHAEL ANTHONY JEWELERS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICHAEL ANTHONY JEWELERS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
52,189,000
30,016,000
Net inc
453,000
1,166,000
Share earns
.09
.24
6mo sales
78,635,000
44,642,000
Net inc
1,339,000
1,953,000
Share earns
.27
.44


Martha Granger Krock, 87, Ex-Society Columnist
LEAD: Martha Granger Krock, a former society columnist in Chicago and Washington, died of pneumonia yesterday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
She was 87 years old and lived in Washington.


BIO-RAD LABORATORIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BIO-RAD LABORATORIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
44,091,000
34,021,000
Net inc
1,601,000
b915,000
Share earns
.21
.12
Yr sales
159,479,000
126,579,000
Net inc
7,713,000
b5,462,000
Share earns
1.02
.75
Shares outst
7,552,000
7,262,000


FIRST GEORGIA SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST GEORGIA SAVINGS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,000
27,000
Per share
-
.08
Shares outst
879,434
319,434
The company attributed decreased earnings to the acquisition of eight branches from Anchor Savings Bank F.S.B.


CENTRAL BANK GETS ADVISE
LEAD: Using the 1989 Budget Message as a platform, the Reagan Administration continued to warn the Federal Reserve Board today against clamping down on economic growth and pushing up interest rates.


ZZZZ Case Guilty Plea
LEAD: An associate of Barry Minkow, the young entrepreneur whose ZZZZ Best Company collapsed amid scandal last year, pleaded guilty to three fraud charges today.
Thomas Gordon Padgett, who posed as the source of ZZZZ Best's phony carpet restoration contracts, was the second of 11 co-defendants to plead guilty to what prosecutors described as a scheme that defrauded investors and banks of $24 million.


Finland Shocks Punchless Canada, 3-1
LEAD: They knew their chronically weak offense would probably return to haunt them.
Tonight, not even a calculated attack on the legality of the opposing goalie's helmet proved useful.


Ex-CBS Official In Joint Venture
LEAD: The former president of the CBS entertainment division, B. Donald Grant, and a subsidiary of the Tribune Company said they had agreed to form a venture to produce television programs.


The Law; In Celebration of 'Dignified Frivolity'
LEAD: Whereas the law profession is often perceived as ruled by arcane stuffiness and sartorial solemnity, and whereas it is considered stylishly unsafe for any one party to appear too different, be it known that one day each year the Manhattan firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts will henceforth spoof itself by celebrating the lowly bow tie.


POLY-TECH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POLY-TECH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,856,000
16,767,000
Net inc
717,000
34,000
Share earns
.20
.01
Yr sales
71,866,000
62,723,000
Net inc
472,000
b1,474,000
Share earns
.13
.44
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $426,000 from debt retirement.


BRAINTREE SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRAINTREE SAVINGS BANK
(
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
534,000
546,000
Per share
.35
.34
Yr net inc
1,850,000
1,692,000
Per share
1.21
1.51
Shares outst
1,534,860
1,118,024
The latest year net included a provision for possible loan losses of $206,000, compared with $157,000 for 1986.


NUVISION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUVISION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,228,000
8,467,000
Net loss
516,000
b506,000
Share earns
-
.16
Yr sales
51,897,000
34,101,000
Net inc
2,172,000
3,000,000
Share earns
.71
1.00
b


AMAX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMAX INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
912,400,000
423,200,000
Net loss
b280,800,000
c49,700,000
Yr sales
3,383,200,000
1,307,500,000
Net inc
b51,200,000
c14,300,000
Share earns
.53
.05
Shares outst
88,090,000
73,510,000


Yesterday's Medal Winners
LEAD:  Luge: Women's Singles  Gold: Steffi Walter, East Germany  Silver: Ute Oberhoffner, East Germany  Bronze: Cerstin Schmidt, East Germany  Speed Skating: Men's 1,000  Gold: Nikolai Guliaev, Soviet Union  Silver: Uwe-Jens Mey, East Germany  Bronze: Igor Gelezovsky, Soviet Union


Hundreds of Prisoners Take Over 12 Dormitories on Rikers I.
LEAD: A disturbance erupted early yesterday in one of Rikers Island's largest jails, apparently sparked by inmates upset over a weapons search, New York City correction officials said.


CAMPBELL SOUP COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAMPBELL SOUP COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,336,100,000
1,248,600,000
Net inc
84,600,000
70,400,000
Share earns
.65
.54
6mo sales
2,515,200,000
2,363,200,000
Net inc
147,000,000
129,100,000
Share earns
1.13
.99


GERBER SCIENTIFIC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GERBER SCIENTIFIC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
68,834,000
53,351,000
Net inc
7,749,000
5,226,000
Share earns
.30
.20
9mo sales
195,048,000
164,070,000
Net inc
21,684,000
14,704,000
Share earns
.83
.57


RAYCOMM TRANSWORLD INDUSRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAYCOMM TRANSWORLD INDUSRIES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,937,000
14,376,000
Net loss
b107,000
d285,000
9mo rev
48,129,000
45,656,000
Net inc
b47,000
cd862,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Includes net of $13,000 and $158,000 from discontinued operations for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


UNITED MEDICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED MEDICAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,658,000
6,995,000
Net loss
b1,075,000
c374,000
Yr rev
37,705,000
24,232,000
Net loss
b3,033,000
c1,061,000
b-Includes a gain of $33,000 and $789,000 from extinguishment of foreign notes for the quarter and year, respectively, and a loss from discontinued operations of $41,000 and $795,000 for the same periods, respectively.


Late Flyer Goal Ties Islanders
LEAD: When it was over, most of the Islanders talked somberly of the goal they gave up with 23 seconds left, another in an expanding series of infuriating late lapses and one that left them with an unsatisfying 3-3 draw against the Flyers.


K N ENERGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*K N ENERGY INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
84,323,000
80,411,000
Net inc
7,558,000
1,890,000
Share earns
.78
.15
Yr rev
303,101,000
304,310,000
Net inc
b13,332,000
8,622,000
Share earns
1.25
.72


Efforts Pressed To Avert Closing The Post Today
LEAD: Differences between The New York Post and its unions were said to have narrowed yesterday, but two points threatened to overwhelm the negotiators and force the talks to come down to the deadline - 2 P.M today.


GEPHARDT'S ALLIES DELAY VOTE
LEAD: It pays to have friends in high places.


Martin Lays Out Agenda As His Fifth Term Begins
LEAD: For most of the morning, the sun struggled in vain to break through the haze that stretched across the Florida sky.
The day never fully warmed, but the pictures made it feel like spring anyway: children hanging over the dugout roof, players slowly filing into the clubhouse, uniforms being carefully unfolded.


Harshness, and Hope, in Israel
LEAD: Listen to the progressive echoes of history resound in the news: President Waldheim of Austria rejects conclusions, from a commission he requested, that he must have known about Nazi atrocities in World War II . . .
Palestinians contemplate sending a ship from Cyprus to Israel, mimicking the heroism of the Nazi survivors who sailed on the Exodus in 1947 .


Violence of Workplace: Unseen Signs, Unexpected Explosions
LEAD: When a shooting spree erupts in the workplace, workers everywhere are suddenly uneasy.
The latent rage in an office or factory, a confined environment where self-esteem and financial worth are on the line, takes on new meaning.


SUFFOLK BANCORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUFFOLK BANCORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,484,000
1,380,000
Per share
.45
.50
Shares outst
3,275,386
2,766,130
Yr net inc
5,173,000
4,812,000
Per share
1.71
1.82
Shares outst
3,030,059
2,642,436


ENCORE COMPUTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENCORE COMPUTER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,540,000
2,217,000
Net inc
b370,000
c1,827,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Includes an extraordinary tax benefit of $127,000.
c-Net loss


Jazz: Roy Haynes and Band
LEAD: THE great drummer Roy Haynes drove his young band through a set of jazz standards at Visiones on Wednesday.
Mr.
Haynes, who's made significant contributions to jazz history by playing and recording with everyone from the saxophonist Lester Young and the pianist Thelonious Monk to John Coltrane, was on his band like a blanket, all set long.


Iowa Team Fulfills A Coach's Dream
LEAD: This is all her fault.
Nearly five years ago, having just accepted the job of building the women's basketball program at the University of Iowa, C. Vivian Stringer stood before the lights and cameras and spoke of dreams.


Ford's Theater Thrives on Politics
LEAD: The cultural institutions of the capital city, from the National Symphony and Washington Opera to the art museums and the Kennedy Center, assiduously court the Washington establishment, sprinkling their guest lists with Congressional heavies, studding their boards with corporate and political celebrities.


Art People
LEAD:  Onto the Wall


Tirez Tirez
LEAD: Tirez Tirez, a rock band led by Mikel Rouse, will perform tonight at 9:30 and midnight at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street (219-3055).
Tickets are $7.


'89 REAGAN BUDGET, A 'CONSENSUS' PLAN, GOES TO CONGRESS
LEAD: In keeping with a bipartisan agreement reached last year, President Reagan today sent Congress a $1.09 trillion budget devoid of the ideological fervor that enabled a small band of committed conservatives to reorder Federal spending priorities in the last seven years.


Judge Orders Bronx Nurses Back to Work
LEAD: The Health and Hospitals Corporation obtained a restraining order yesterday to prevent nurses at two municipal hospitals in the Bronx from continuing to call in sick in a protest over working conditions.


Sports People; 'Hardship' Backed
LEAD: The executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association advocates allowing college football players to turn pro early, as do basketball players. ''It's time to take a whole new look at the situation,'' Dick Schultz told The Atlanta Constitution.


INMAC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INMAC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
57,317,000
38,315,000
Net inc
2,435,000
1,843,000
Share earns
.26
.19
6mo sales
106,148,000
74,784,000
Net inc
4,616,000
3,460,000
Share earns
.49
.39


A New Yorker Back From Paris Sees Home in a Dimmer Light
LEAD: To the Editor:


DEXTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEXTER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
203,551,000
164,695,000
Net inc
10,673,000
8,236,000
Share earns
.43
.33
Yr rev
793,403,000
656,505,000
Net inc
42,785,000
33,635,000
Share earns
1.72
1.35


Whale Expedition Defended
LEAD: Japan will not stop a hunt in the Antarctic in which 300 whales are to be killed for what it calls research purposes, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said today.
The spokesman, Yoshifumi Matsuda, said the International Whaling Commission, which has imposed a moratorium on commercial whaling, does not regulate whaling for research.


PAN AM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAN AM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
877,100,000
798,600,000
Net loss
245,500,000
197,500,000
Yr rev
3,590,000,000
3,040,000,000
Net loss
265,300,000
462,800,000
Pan Am said it posted $60.4 million of foreign exchange adjustments in 1987, compared with $46.8 million in 1986.


VISUAL GRAPHICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VISUAL GRAPHICS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
35,843,000
19,429,000
Net inc
614,000
260,000
Share earns
.23
.15
9mo sales
93,837,000
53,042,000
Net inc
1,689,000
939,000
Share earns
.63
.54
Shares outst
2,688,000
1,755,000


ANIMED INC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANIMED INC (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,630,102
4,403,560
Net loss
b585,116
c14,883,199
Yr rev
18,822,006
15,434,817
Net loss
b1,822,186
c16,091,894
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $232,000 and $482,584 for the quarter and year, respectively.


CENTENNIAL SAVINGS BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTENNIAL SAVINGS BANK
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
149,000
260,000
Per share
.24
.42


Edward E. Rhatigan Dies at 78; Former New York Welfare Chief
LEAD: Edward E. Rhatigan, a former New York City Welfare Commissioner, died of a heart attack yesterday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 78 years old and had lived in Greenwich for more than 20 years.


First Baby Is Placed in Organ-Donor Ward
LEAD: A baby born with most of his brain missing has become the first patient in a special ward set up to use such infants to supply organs for transplantation, hospital officials said today.


Sweep in the Luge For East Germans
LEAD: Steffi Walter, who took last year off from competition to have a baby, led an East German sweep in the women's Olympic luge race.


Factory Use Unchanged In January at 82.2% Rate
LEAD: The nation's factories, mines and utility companies operated at 82.2 percent of capacity last month, unchanged from December's levels, the Federal Reserve said yesterday.


USAIR GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USAIR GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,125,770,000
483,379,000
Net inc
26,698,000
32,067,000
Share earns
.62
1.06
Shares outst
43,197,000
31,758,000
Yr rev
3,001,084,000
1,835,199,000
Net inc
194,649,000
98,352,000
Share earns
5.28
3.34
Shares outst
37,728,000
31,560,000


Dow Loses 14.58 Points, to 1,986.41
LEAD: The Dow Jones industrial average fell below the 2,000-point level yesterday as many cautious investors remained on the sidelines.


At Fat Tuesday's
LEAD: Gary Burton, a vibraphonist, will lead a quartet tonight through Sunday at Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street (533-7902).
Sets begin at 8 and 10 P.M., plus a midnight set tonight and tomorrow; there is a $12.50 cover and a $7.50 minimum.


Sports People; Raiders of the N.B.A.
LEAD: Since the aggressive Detroit Pistons have been referred to as the ''Raiders of the N.B.A.,'' Al Davis decided they should look the part.
So Davis, owner of the Los Angeles Raiders, a football team with a tough reputation, sent Piston players and coaches white-knit sweaters with the Raiders' black skull-and-crossbones logo.


Girl's Lawyers Sought Limits On Inquiry
LEAD: Lawyers for Tawana Brawley sought to impose five major sets of conditions on Attorney General Robert Abrams in talks that ended in an impasse on whether the black teen-ager would cooperate with an inquiry into her charges of abduction and rape by six white men.


THE PRESIDENT'S PRIORITIES
LEAD: Some programs he wants to increase:  Education: Spending for discretionary programs up $656 million to $16.9 billion.
Additional increases in the Pell Grant program for needy college students.
AIDS: Nearly $2 billion in spending on research, education and treatment, a 38 percent increase.


Advertising; Joint Venture For Fortune In France
LEAD: IT is entirely appropriate that the first issue of Fortune France has the chairmen of Louis Vuitton and Moet-Hennessy on the cover toasting one another with - what else? -champagne.
The pair are the subject of the lead article on the giant luxury goods conglomerate.


Merrill Obtains Specialist's Rights
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said its Merrill Lynch Specialists Inc. subsidiary had acquired the specialist rights of Berkman &amp; Leff.
It would not disclose the terms of the acquisition, which had the prior approval of the American and New York stock exchanges and was effective as of last Friday.


State Dept. Aide Hints at a Deal If Noriega Quits
LEAD: A top State Department official has told Panama's President that indictments against the Panamanian military leader might be dropped if the general and his top associates withdraw from politics and go into exile, Administration officials and Congressional staff members said today.


KOLLMORGEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KOLLMORGEN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
84,001,000
70,777,000
Net inc
1,117,000
c14,126,000
Share earns
.11
-
Yr sales
301,010,000
319,164,000
Net inc
b285,000
c19,947,000
Share earns
.03
-


NATIONAL GUARDIAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL GUARDIAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
37,893,000
29,026,000
Net inc
b2,577,000
386,000
Share earns
.25
.04
Yr rev
147,306,000
98,255,000
Net inc
b7,533,000
5,513,000
Share earns
.69
.54


Opera: Cast Changes in Met 'Elisir'
LEAD: SHORTLY before 7 P.M.


John Mackenzie Jr., Investment Banker, 70
LEAD: John Mackenzie Jr., an investment banker, died of cancer Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 70 years old.


No Retired Group Majority for Fixing the Notch
LEAD: To the Editor:


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: THE CENSORSHIP PAPERS: Movie Censorship Letters From the Hays Office, 1934 to 1968.
By Gerald Gardner. 226 pages.
Dodd, Mead. $18.95.


GOTAAS-LARSEN SHIPPING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOTAAS-LARSEN SHIPPING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
61,800,000
52,000,000
Net inc
10,800,000
6,500,000
Share earns
.80
.48
Yr rev
241,900,000
178,300,000
Net inc
37,700,000
30,600,000
Share earns
2.76
2.36


Silverstein's Designs
LEAD: An exhibition devoted to Louis Silverstein's contributions to the redesign of The New York Times is on view at the Houghton Gallery and Lubalin Study Center of Cooper Union at 7 East Seventh Street.
During the 1970's and early 80's, when Mr.
Silverstein was an assistant managing editor and corporate art director at The Times, the paper gave itself a major facelift, introducing nine new sections, redesigning several old ones and shifting to a six-column format.


Kansan Gets Health Post
LEAD: Dr.
Ralph R. Reed of Lawrence, Kan., has been named Deputy Assistant Secretary for Health in the Department of Health and Human Services, a position that helps oversee the Public Health Service.
Dr.
Reed, a physician, replaces Lowell T. Harmison, who resigned recently, as the top assistant to Dr.
Robert E.


Sports People; Foreman to Fight Qawi
LEAD: Bob Arum, the boxing promoter, announced yesterday that the next opponent for George Foreman in the former heavyweight champion's comeback would be Dwight Muhammad Qawi on March 19 in Las Vegas, Nev.


Art: African Artworks and Artifacts Shown in 2 Exhibitions
LEAD: AT the moment, two exhibitions of African art that have just opened in uptown museums are igniting an unexpected dialogue and exchange of ideas. ''Art/ Artifact: African Art in Anthropology Collections,'' now at the Center for African Art, takes as its subject not so much African art per se, but the various ways Westerners have displayed it since the late 19th century.


TUCKER DRILLING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TUCKER DRILLING INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,208,000
2,190,000
Net loss
593,000
319,000
9mo rev
11,646,000
6,023,000
Net loss
105,000
1,087,000


The Road To a Ticket
LEAD: The Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary have mercifully passed away, mini-events - let us manfully refrain from calling them pseudo-events - that may have made it somewhat more likely that the Democrats will enliven things with a ''brokered convention'' at Atlanta next summer.


Murdoch's Riches: His Edge in Post Talks
LEAD: Like a rich, savvy gambler holding most of the aces, Rupert Murdoch is in a position of great strength in today's showdown with union leaders at The New York Post, according to union officials and industry analysts.


The Very Modern Corporation
LEAD: Most economic analysis is dated within a few months or years.
The insights of Gardiner Means, who died this week, are as relevant today as when they were first published in 1932. ''The Modern Corporation and Private Property,'' written with Adolf Berle, later a close adviser to President Franklin Roosevelt, offered striking prophecies on the significance of corporate gigantism.


FARAH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FARAH INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
64,999,000
71,017,000
Net inc
b607,000
c1,891,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-After a tax benefit of $1,904,000.
c-Net loss and after a tax benefit of $869,000.


LaRouche Aide Gets 3-Year Term
LEAD: A former security consultant to Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. has been sentenced to three years in prison and fined $50,000 for conspiring to obstruct an investigation into charges of fraud against the political extremist and his supporters.


Hank Jones Duo
LEAD: The duo of Hank Jones on piano and Red Mitchell on bass will perform tonight and tomorrow at Bradley's, 70 University Place (228-6440).
Music begins at 9:45 P.M.; there is a $5 cover and an $8 minimum.


New Yorkers Honored For Improving the City
LEAD: Three New Yorkers and five community groups representing hundreds more were honored last night for their efforts to make the city a better place.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the possible liquidation of an insurer of home mortgages misidentified the company.
It is the TMIC Insurance Company, formerly called the Ticor Mortgage Insurance Company.
Its parent, Ticor, and other Ticor subsidiaries are not involved in the possible liquidation.


NORTHWESTERN STEEL &amp; WIRE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORTHWESTERN STEEL &amp; WIRE CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
114,617,000
79,679,000
Net inc
b6,412,000
c1,710,000
Share earns
.85
.23
6mo sales
221,752,000
177,964,000
Net inc
b11,490,000
c4,169,000
Share earns
1.53
.56


MAXCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAXCO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,137,000
18,503,000
Net loss
1,240,000
b32,000
9mo sales
62,396,000
51,688,000
Net loss
1,330,000
b680,000
Share earns
-
.13
b-Net income


Film: Judy Davis Stars in 'High Tide'
LEAD: ''HIGH TIDE'' begins with shots of a cut-rate Australian Elvis impersonator, and rarely has an Elvis impersonator given off this much heat and light.
This man's flash has nothing to do with his act, of course, and everything to do with the pop exuberance with which the director Gillian Armstrong (who made ''Starstruck'' in much the same spirit) captures him on screen.


Polish Paper Criticizes 1968 Anti-Semitism
LEAD: A Polish Communist Party weekly today called the official anti-Semitic campaign of 1968, which drove as many as 20,000 Jews from the country, infamous and an embarrassment to Poland.


LAWTER INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAWTER INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
31,059,000
27,804,000
Net inc
4,573,000
3,510,000
Share earns
.26
.20
Yr sales
112,018,000
103,515,000
Net inc
16,701,000
12,945,000
Share earns
.95
.74


Congress Need Not Like The Budget to Adopt It
LEAD: Members of Congress today received President Reagan's 1989 budget with the acknowledgment that there was little inclination on Captiol Hill to seek major changes even if the President's deficit estimate proved too optimistic.


VOPLEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VOPLEX CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
18,268,473
20,625,228
Net loss
b2,931,699
cd309,775
Share earns
-
.12
Yr sales
75,924,370
78,079,059
Net loss
b2,759,315
c2,127,558
b-Includes a loss from the company's share of a joint venture of $31,675 and $385,869 for the quarter and year, respectively.


ATLANTIC SOUTHEAST AIRLINES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTIC SOUTHEAST AIRLINES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
31,848,000
22,995,000
Net inc
2,806,000
3,019,000
Share earns
.22
.23
Yr rev
119,145,000
92,295,000
Net inc
11,261,000
10,536,000
Share earns
.85
.87


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


Art Directors Museum
LEAD: Karl H. Steinbrenner, president of the Art Directors Club, announced the formation of the Art Directors Club Museum of Advertising and Communications Design.
The club, which publishes an advertising and graphic design annual, also has a large television commercial archive.
Those interested in donating historical material dealing with advertising, design and television to the nonprofit museum should write to the club, 250 Park Avenue South, New York 10003, or call 212-674-0500.


PRONET INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRONET INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,409,000
1,924,000
Net inc
b122,000
c128,000
Share earns
.03
.04
Shares outst
3,921,000
2,908,000
Yr rev
9,216,000
7,081,000
Net inc
b497,000
c118,000
Share earns
.15
.04
Shares outst
3,315,000
2,909,000


CENTRAL CO-OPERATIVE BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL CO-OPERATIVE BANK
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Net inc
511,000
450,000
Per share
.27
.24
9mo net inc
1,649,000
1,155,000
Per share
.87
-
The per share earnings for the year- ago 9 months is not available; the company converted to stock form of ownership in October 1986.


Transit Police Arrests Decrease 37.7%
LEAD: Arrests by the New York City transit police dropped 37.7 percent in December, a dramatic decrease compared with December 1986, Acting Chief Vincent Del Castillo said yesterday.


V.A. UNDER ATTACK AT HOUSE HEARING
LEAD: The Veterans Administration came under attack today as a chaotic monolith badly in need of reform.


American Skier Injured in Practice
LEAD: Instead of ski poles, Pam Fletcher's arms were wrapped round crutches, and her right leg was in a fiberglass cast.
Only an hour before she was scheduled to be the first starter in the women's downhill at Mount Allan today, her Olympic hopes were ended when she broke her leg after colliding at the bottom of a warm-up slope with a volunteer course worker.


GOODRICH, B F CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOODRICH, B F CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
567,300,000
491,300,000
Net inc
b20,500,000
c13,000,000
Share earns
.73
.51
Yr sales
2,168,000,000
2,553,300,000
Net inc
b105,000,000
c32,700,000
Share earns
4.06
1.32


The Law; Drive for Plain English Gains Among Lawyers
LEAD: For the last few years Justice William A. Bablitch of the Wisconsin Supreme Court has traveled around the state lecturing law students and lawyers on the need to write clearly and crisply.
To illustrate his point that too often ''legal writing'' is a contradiction in terms, he opens each lecture with this passage from a brief submitted to the


ECI TELECOM LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ECI TELECOM LTD (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,856,000
5,730,000
Net inc
350,000
b1,810,000
Share earns
.07
-
Yr sales
24,479,000
19,155,000
Net inc
860,000
b7,995,000
Share earns
.17
-
b-Net loss


Ford Had Record Net Of $4.6 Billion for 1987
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company today reported a profit of $4.6 billion for 1987, an increase of 39.4 percent from $3.3 billion in 1986 and the best earnings ever for an automobile company.


Role of Credit Cards Expanded in Budget
LEAD: President Reagan's $1.1 trillion budget will propose a major expansion of the Government's acceptance of payment with credit cards, the White House says.


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 3-6, 28  Rivalry between the superpowers was condemned by Pope John Paul II in an encyclical letter, charging that it subjected poor nations to imperialistic ''structures of sin'' that deny them freedom and development.
Page 1  News Analysis: Papal encyclicals are scrutinized by theologians the way constitutional lawyers pore over Supreme Court decisions.


ZYCAD CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZYCAD CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
9,114,000
6,765,000
Net inc
b1,227,000
c14,477,000
Share earns
.08
-
Yr sales
32,886,000
24,010,000
Net inc
b5,516,000
c17,677,000
Share earns
.36
-


Owens-Illinois Merger Blocked
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has stayed a lower court decision that would have allowed a merger creating the nation's largest glass-container company.
The United States Court of Appeals said today that the stay, which keeps the proposed merger between Owens-Illinois Inc. and Brockway Inc. on hold, remained in effect until further notice.


New Pact for Parcells
LEAD: A lot has changed since Coach Bill Parcells led the Giants to victory in the 1987 Super Bowl and then made a handshake deal with the general manager, George Young, on a contract extension.
There was a sharp drop in the team's fortunes to a 6-9 record last season.
Despite that, one thing that has apparently not changed is the club's confidence in Parcells, whose former contract ran through the 1988 season.


A Hemisphere at Risk From Drugs
LEAD: The specter of drugs is haunting the Americas.


New York Has Mishandled Water Conservation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Musical Re-Creates a Razed Cape Town Slum
LEAD: One of apartheid's most bitterly resented acts, the destruction of the vibrant multi-racial District Six neighborhood near Cape Town, has been elevated into the most successful stage musical in decades.


U.S. Keeps Hopes Alive
LEAD: It was strange, Scott Fusco said, for he and his American teammates to find themselves preparing for their game against Norway tonight by ardently supporting the Soviet Union.


The Great Majority
LEAD: Are half the men and women who ever lived on earth living today, as a contributor to the Op-Ed page wrote the other day?
Can it be that more people were born in the last 100 years than in all of the previous 50,000, or 500,000?


Post Talks Test Figures and Emotions
LEAD: Down the long corridor on the 14th floor that separated the two camps -union and management - they huddled in small groups, figuring and refiguring, pencils scratching against their legal pads, pulling at their hair, their voices rising and falling.


QUANEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUANEX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
102,229,000
76,487,000
Net inc
b2,165,000
c1,591,000
Share earns
.18
-
b-After tax loss carryforwards of $754,000.
c-Net loss


AIDS Risk Articles Criticized
LEAD: Surgeon General C. Everett Koop today criticized articles minimizing the risk of heterosexual transmission of AIDS.


SAGE ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAGE ENERGY (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,775,000
6,072,000
Net loss
661,000
1,123,000
6mo rev
16,660,000
11,819,000
Net inc
b309,000
c2,659,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Includes a charge of $1,069,000 from repurchse and retirement of a portion of the company's convertible debentures.


City Tow Trucks Will Help Drivers on 4 S.I. Highways
LEAD: A city fleet of tow trucks will offer free gasoline, jump starts and tows to motorists on Staten Island highways in a test beginning Monday.


Lois C. Campbell, Advertising Executive, 53
LEAD: Lois C. Campbell, vice president of Willliam Altman Advertising Inc., died of complications after surgery Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 53 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Regulator Seeks TMIC Liquidation
LEAD: In a widely expected move that will sharply increase the likelihood of losses from the collapse of the TMIC Insurance Company, the California Commissioner of Insurance moved yesterday to liquidate the company.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, articles last Saturday and Sunday about an F.B.I. inquiry into organizations opposing United States policy in Central America omitted the name of the group that disclosed it.
The Center for Constitutional Rights, a lawyers' group based in New York, obtained the data through the Freedom of Information


BURLINGTON HOLDINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURLINGTON HOLDINGS
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
788,700,000
710,100,000
Net loss
19,300,000
b10,000,000
b-Net income  The company said year-ago figures were those reported by Burlington Industries, before its acquisition by Burlington Holdings.


An Impasse Halts Nicaraguan Talks
LEAD: Negotiations between Nicaraguan Government and guerrilla representatives were suspended today by the official mediator, who said the two sides remained too far apart to have meaningful talks.


E'TOWN CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*E'TOWN CORP (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
67,916,588
66,298,887
Net inc
8,820,357
8,493,951
Share earns
3.61
3.49
Shares outst
2,269,442
2,003,799
Share earnings are fully diluted.


Staten I. Takes Title
LEAD: The College of Staten Island won the men's CUNY Conference basketball tournament last night by beating Hunter College, 72-69, in the championship game at the Nat Holman Gym at City College.


OLYMPICS MIND GAMES
LEAD: One winter we invented a new sport while working the night shift.
We would take a Frisbee into the hall and try to sling it past each other from 20 yards away.


FARM &amp; HOME SAVINGS ASSN reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FARM &amp; HOME SAVINGS ASSN
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,491,000
5,196,000
Share earns
.63
.72
Yr net inc
19,691,000
21,739,000
Share earns
2.77
3.07
The company said the latest year includes a $12.5 million charge related to settlement of litigation and a $1.6 million writeoff of the FSLIC secondary reserve.


Jersey Ends Move to Retry Rubin Carter
LEAD: New Jersey prosecutors said yesterday that they would not try Rubin (Hurricane) Carter and John Artis a third time for a triple-murder in a case that provoked national attention over charges that the authorities had framed both men.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Gretzky, Lemieux Hurt: The top two scorers in the league, Mario Lemieux and Wayne Gretzky, were hurt during the Oilers' 7-3 victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins last night at Edmonton.
The Oilers lost Gretzky at 4 minutes 45 seconds of the first period when he was hit in the eye with a stick.


Genteel Predators
LEAD:  A FRIEND FROM ENGLAND. By Anita Brookner. 205 pages. Pantheon Books. $15.95.


Soviet Skier Wins Nordic Gold Medal
LEAD: Mikhail Deviatiarov, setting a blazing pace from the start before bursting free in the last leg, won the men's 15-kilometer cross-country ski race today, giving the Soviet Union its third gold medal in four cross-country races.


ALEXANDER &amp; ALEXANDER SERVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALEXANDER &amp; ALEXANDER SERVICES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
281,100,000
281,300,000
Net inc
10,700,000
c2,400,000
Share earns
.25
.06
Yr rev
1,118,700,000
1,068,200,000
Net inc
b68,400,000
c43,200,000
Share earns
1.62
1.05


Winfield Weds
LEAD: Dave Winfield, the Yankees' slugger, with his bride, Tonya, during their wedding Thursday night. (AP)


Chrysler to Weigh Kenosha Extension
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation, under fire for planning to close a plant that it acquired in its buyout of the American Motors Corporation, will consider a ''modest, short'' extension of production there, Lee A. Iacocca, Chrysler's chairman, said.
He had met in Washington with Gov.
Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, who has threatened to have the state sue


Fare Collection System To Be Tested in Subway
LEAD: The New York City Transit Authority will begin testing an automatic fare collection system in the subways next month, and 1,500 randomly selected passengers will get free rides for two weeks of the experiment.


Murdoch and Unions Reach Deal, Averting Threat to Close The Post
LEAD: The New York Post and its unions agreed early today to cut labor costs by $24 million over the next three years, clearing the way for Rupert Murdoch to sell the beleaguered newspaper to the real-estate developer Peter S. Kalikow.


K-V PHARMACEUTICAL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*K-V PHARMACEUTICAL CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,144,218
5,277,036
Net inc
556,546
12,321
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
20,390,703
16,854,015
Net inc
1,182,084
568,163
Share earns
.13
.11


JOSEPHSON INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOSEPHSON INTERNATIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
60,253,000
63,064,000
Net loss
b283,000
cd2,362,000
Share earns
-
.49
Shares outst
4,074,000
4,812,000
6mo rev
120,372,000
122,232,000
Net inc
b6,643,000
d24,310,000
Share earns
1.53
4.99
Shares outst
4,354,000
4,874,000


Jackson Stumping in South For Votes of Discontented
LEAD: Having finished credibly but well behind the leaders in Iowa and New Hampshire, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson turned his attention to his home turf this week, campaigning confidently for votes from Southerners who find the promises of the New South unfulfilled.


GENZYME CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENZYME CORP (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,500,000
13,000,000
Net inc
409,000
41,000
Share earns
.05
.01


Eskimo Guards on Alert Off Siberia
LEAD: Tensions between East and West may have been reduced in the wake of successful negotiations to reduce nuclear arms in Europe.
But for the Eskimo scouts of Alaska's National Guard the cold war persists with a frigidity to match an Alaskan winter.


APACHE PETROLEUM reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APACHE PETROLEUM (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
35,013,000
42,958,000
Net loss
82,514,000
168,086,000
Yr rev
155,134,000
189,931,000
Net loss
101,181,000
182,761,000
The latest quarter and year includes additional amortization of $70,000,000 to reflect a reduction in the carrying value of oil and gas properties.


Brazil Talks to Continue
LEAD: Negotiators from Brazil and a committee of its major commercial bank creditors will continue discussions this weekend on a new multibillion-dollar financial package, the Brazilian Finance Minister, Mailson Ferreira da Nobrega, said yesterday.


METHODE ELECTRONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*METHODE ELECTRONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
28,512,000
22,994,000
Net inc
1,408,000
737,000
Share earns
.13
.07
9mo sales
81,090,000
69,753,000
Net inc
3,587,000
1,917,000
Share earns
.33
.18


Surgery for Siamese Twins
LEAD: Siamese twins separated in a historic operation last fall were doing well today after surgery to implant metal plates over the skull holes at the point where they were once joined.
The West German infants, Patrick and Benjamin, were listed in stable condition at Johns Hopkins University Hospital here, said a spokeswoman.


Private-Label Clothes Find New Buyers
LEAD: My name or yours?


Jean Baube, 81, Former Aide to de Gaulle
LEAD: Jean Baube, a French journalist and confidant of de Gaulle who served as counselor for press relations at the French Embassy in Washington for nearly three decades, died of heart failure yesterday at Venice Hospital in Venice, Fla.
He was 81 years old and had lived in Boca Grande, Fla., since his retirement in 1974.


D'Amato Sees Kemp for Senate
LEAD: Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has put forward a new name as a potential Republican challenger for Daniel Patrick Moynihan's Senate seat: Jack Kemp, the Buffalo area Congressman and a candidate for his party's Presidential nomination.


MATERIALS RESEARCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MATERIALS RESEARCH CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
27,384,000
21,438,000
Net inc
227,000
66,000
Share earns
.05
.02


Gardens Of Sweet Ignorance
LEAD: The good news is that giant snowdrops and brilliant yellow winter aconite are blooming in our garden.
I found them Thursday morning, which was mild and cloudy, in that patch between the out-of-control climbing rose bush and the coffee bean tree.


LATE 28.18 SPURT PUTS DOW AT 2,014.59
LEAD: Stock prices surged late yesterday, sending the Dow Jones industrial average past the 2,000-point mark again.


Uganda Frees 110 Prisoners
LEAD: The Ugandan Army has freed 110 prisoners captured during anti-rebel operations in northeast Uganda, a Government newspaper said today.


Canada Ruling On Hyundai
LEAD: Canada's Department of Revenue and Customs said today that it had found that the Hyundai Motor Company of South Korea is dumping cars at unfair prices in the Canadian market.


P.I.P. May Accept $66 Million Offer
LEAD: Postal Instant Press said it was considering a $17-a-share, or $66 million, buyout offer from an investor group that includes some of its managers and a Chicago leveraged-buyout firm.
P.I.P., which franchises quick-printing outlets, also said it had adopted a plan to curb hostile takeovers, to be triggered if a shareholder obtained at least 20 percent of the company's stock.


No Aid for Democracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Coping: With Catered Parties
LEAD: Planning a large catered party, especially a wedding that calls for flowers and limousines and champagne, is a once-in-a-lifetime experience for many people.
But even when a catered affair is more limited in scope it is bound to cost thousands of dollars.
At any price, the party ought to be memorable, and that requires attention to every detail.


For Bronx Nurses in Protest, Staying Home Is Painful
LEAD: For Carmen Fascio, the decision to call in sick on Tuesday was easy, compared with the life-or-death judgments she makes every day as a head nurse in the emergency room at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx.


Salvadoran Recants Confession in Slaying
LEAD: A man who had confessed to a role in the slaying of the country's most prominent human rights advocate recanted Thursday and said he had been drugged and abused in jail.


The Dance: Mitchell Rose
LEAD: Mitchell Rose has a comic turn of mind that allows him to see not just the undersides but the quirks of things.
He doesn't always fully communicate those quirks and his responses to them.
His humor has grown gentler in the last few years.
But there were moments when everything came together in a program of 13 new and recent pieces by Mr.


Swaggart Is Subject of Investigation by His Church
LEAD: The Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart, the television evangelist, is under investigation by his church, the Assemblies of God, a church spokeswoman said today.
Newspaper and broadcast reports said the inquiry involved allegations of sexual misconduct.


Excerpts From Papal Encyclical on Social Concerns of Church
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the encyclical letter ''Sollicitudo Rei Socialis'' (''The Social Concerns of the Church''), issued yesterday by Pope John Paul II:  SURVEY OF CONTEMPORARY WORLD


EXCEL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EXCEL INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
46,950,000
43,667,000
Net inc
1,312,000
591,000
Share earns
.23
.10
Yr sales
186,357,000
148,202,000
Net inc
5,051,000
3,804,000
Share earns
.87
.81


PAPAL ENCYCLICAL SAYS SUPERPOWERS HURT THIRD WORLD
LEAD: Pope John Paul II today issued an encyclical letter charging that the ideological rivalry between East and West was subjecting poor nations to imperialistic ''structures of sin'' that deny them freedom and development.


DANAHER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DANAHER CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
172,521,000
107,615,000
Net loss
b245,000
cd7,274,000
Share earns
-
.35
Yr rev
616,954,000
262,487,000
Net inc
b18,969,000
d15,401,000
Share earns
.85
.75


Pentagon Releases Pictures and Videotape of Black Sea Incident
LEAD: A photograph from film said to show the Soviet Krivak-class frigate Bezzavetny, right, bumping the American cruiser Yorktown last week in the Black Sea.
Videotape shot from the Yorktown shows the cruiser being bumped not once, as originally reported, but twice as it steamed on a straight course. (Defense Department Photograph via Agence France


COMBUSTION ENGINEERING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMBUSTION ENGINEERING INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
895,127,000
738,109,000
Net inc
17,538,000
b9,795,000
Share earns
.46
.30
Shares outst
38,126,000
33,322,000
Yr sales
3,042,074,000
2,551,469,000
Net inc
56,560,000
b50,866,000
Share earns
1.54
1.53
Shares outst
36,727,000
33,322,000


RUSS BERRIE &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RUSS BERRIE &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
73,155,000
56,837,000
Net inc
b8,894,000
8,824,000
Share earns
.60
.59
Yr sales
282,822,000
229,278,000
Net inc
b34,798,000
30,434,000
Share earns
2.32
2.05


Money Managers Still in Shock
LEAD: Even though four months have passed since the stock market collapsed, professional money managers are still acting as if it happened yesterday.
Stunned by the experience, they prefer to hold billions of dollars in cash instead of buying now-cheaper stocks.


Mannes F. Lipski, Factory Chief, 100
LEAD: Mannes F. Lipski, for more than 50 years a factory superintendent and leather buyer for prominent manufacturers of women's shoes, died of pneumonia Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 100 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Andre F. Cournand, 92, Is Dead; Nobel Prize Winner in Medicine
LEAD: Dr.
Andre F. Cournand, a professor of medicine at Columbia University for many years who won the Nobel Prize in 1956 for perfecting a simple method of exploring the heart through catheterization, died of pneumonia yesterday at his home in Great Barrington, Mass., after a long illness.
He was 92 years old.


On Heroin; Right for Many of the Terminally Ill
LEAD: To the Editor:


Getting a Headstart
LEAD: Gary Carter taking his cuts yesterday at an informal workout in Port St.
Lucie, Fla.
The Mets open their training camp today. (UPI)


RECOGNITION EQUIPMENT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RECOGNITION EQUIPMENT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
63,393,000
58,894,000
Net inc
959,000
2,101,000
Share earns
.10
.21


Informer Shuns Pact At Hearing
LEAD: A major Mafia informer testified for the first time yesterday at a court hearing, but refused to answer many questions and said he could not remember if his family had received ''threats of violence.''


Rikers Island Warning Signals
LEAD: The riot at Rikers Island was not the first at New York City's main correctional facility.
It is not likely to be the last unless serious steps are taken.
In contrast with the heavy-handedness used to quell the last riot, in October 1986, the Department of Correction handled this disturbance well.


Unfair to Alter Singapore's Trade Status
LEAD: To the Editor:


Slaught Hopes to Win a Job
LEAD: On the first day of spring training, the Yankees gathered in their clubhouse early this morning and introduced themselves to one another.


BABIES ARE SOUGHT FOR ORGANS OF INFANT WHO IS BRAIN DEAD
LEAD: Doctors and nurses continued their efforts today to find recipients for the organs of an infant born with only a brain stem who was kept on a respirator to preserve his organs for transplant.


Trump Studies Fight
LEAD: The decision on the site for the Mike Tyson-Michael Spinks fight will apparently be made next week.
Donald Trump said yesterday that he would be reacting soon to the asking price he has received in writing. ''I haven't accepted,'' said Trump, ''but you could say that more than likely I will accept.


WYMAN-GORDON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WYMAN-GORDON CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
64,187,000
78,190,000
Net inc
3,036,000
b31,206,000
Share earns
.17
-
Yr sales
310,258,000
340,991,000
Net inc
14,563,000
b20,590,000
Share earns
.82
-


Charles Delaunay, 77, Jazz Scholar in France
LEAD: Charles Delaunay, a French jazz scholar, died of Parkinson's disease on Tuesday near Paris.
He was 77 years old.


CRIMINAL PENALTY GUIDELINES ARE VOIDED BY FEDERAL COURT
LEAD: Guidelines intended to bring consistency to sentencing for those who commit Federal crimes have been declared invalid by two judges in the Southern Federal District of California.


3 Senators Wary of Bank Mergers
LEAD: Members of Congress cautioned the Federal Reserve Board today about the possible ill effects of permitting hostile takeovers among the nation's largest banks.


After a Death, Quiet Nights At Rutgers
LEAD: At Rutgers University, as at many colleges, Saturday nights on fraternity row usually mean no studying, loud parties and a steady flow of beer.


Weapon Against Gays
LEAD: To the Editor:


GUIDEPOST
LEAD: Mail by Courier  With the United States Postal Service curtailing some services, consumers may want to consider alternatives for urgent mail.
There are four major private courier companies to choose from, in addition to the Postal Service's Express Mail, for reliable overnight delivery of letters.


Concert: Northern Sinfonia
LEAD: The Northern Sinfonia, a chamber orchestra based in Newcastle, England, presented in its program at Carnegie Hall on Thursday evening music by Elgar, Robin Holloway, Mozart, Gounod and Haydn - ingratiating works, for the most part, rendered in gentle, carefully crafted performances.
Barry Tuckwell conducted the ensemble and doubled, with reasonable success, as soloist in the Mozart E-flat Major Horn


Brawley's Lawyers Deny Setting Conditions
LEAD: Lawyers for Tawana Brawley, the black teen-ager who says she was abducted and raped by six white men last November, denied yesterday that they had given Attorney General Robert Abrams five major sets of conditions under which she would cooperate with the authorities.


Bridge:; California Player Is Praised For Showing 'Active Ethics'
LEAD: The Laws of Bridge have for many years included an important appendix on etiquette and proprieties.
The revised code for duplicate play published a year ago enlarged this and emphasised it by embodying it in the main text.


West German Wins in Women's Downhill Skiing
LEAD: Marina Kiehl after her victory yesterday in the Winter Olympics at Mount Allan, Alberta.
The U.S. hockey team stayed alive by defeating Norway, 6-3, and Mikhail Deviatiarov of the Soviet Union won a gold medal in the men's 15-kilometer cross-country skiing.
Pages 47 and 49. (AP)


Murdoch's Man Lauded as Charming
LEAD: In seeking cuts from the unions at The New York Post, Rupert Murdoch has relied on Victor Strimbu Jr., a lawyer whose negotiating skills have won him high marks among newspaper publishers and employees in several cities.


LUXTEC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LUXTEC CORP
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,063,048
732,000
Net inc
56,648
8,200
The company said the share earnings for the latest quarter was less than one cent.


New York's Chinese: Living in 2 Worlds
LEAD: In Flushing, Queens, some Chinese businessmen urge others to put up English signs, even though the bulk of their relatively affluent customers are Chinese.
They suggest it might seem more neighborly.


Figini and Walliser Shut Out
LEAD: She stood near the photo corral, her eyes fixed on the finish line, unwilling to wave to the crowd or pose for pictures until the last racer had completed her run.
Marina Kiehl of West Germany had been burned before in the downhill, twice losing World Cup races to late starters who had been overlooked.


American Film Festival Opens in Moscow
LEAD: The first major American film festival in Moscow opened today with a screening of ''Roxanne,'' Steve Martin's comic updating of ''Cyrano de Bergerac,'' and lines of Muscovites patiently waiting for tickets.


Ballet: For Soviet Pair, A Challenge
LEAD: Nina Ananiashvili and Andris Liepa, the dancers from Moscow's Bolshoi Ballet who have been guest artists with the New York City Ballet this season, faced their biggest challenge Thursday night when they performed George Balanchine's ''Symphony in C'' at the New York State Theater.
It was a challenge they triumphantly met.


FREYMILLER TRUCKING INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FREYMILLER TRUCKING INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,908,423
8,902,400
Net inc
b436,794
385,150
Share earns
.18
.23
Shares outst
2,450,000
1,700,000
Yr rev
43,014,649
32,691,998
Net inc
b1,995,636
1,311,987
Share earns
.90
.77
Shares outst
2,217,808
1,700,000


BellSouth Signs Pact To Purchase Mobile
LEAD: The BellSouth Corporation, one of the seven regional Bell telephone companies, announced in Atlanta yesterday that it had signed an agreement to buy the Mobile Communications Corporation of America for $28.75 a share, or $710 million.
Mobile, based in Jackson, Miss., provides cellular telephone and paging services.


BELL &amp; HOWELL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELL &amp; HOWELL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
196,546,000
189,771,000
Net inc
8,634,000
c8,068,000
Share earns
.82
.76
Yr sales
726,869,000
709,726,000
Net inc
b61,365,000
c32,895,000
Share earns
5.78
3.10


KINARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KINARK CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,267,000
8,514,000
Net loss
b4,760,000
c893,000
Yr sales
28,439,000
27,908,000
Net loss
b4,032,000
c1,206,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $5,120,000 for the quarter and $5,348,000 for the year.


YESTERDAY'S MEDAL WINNERS
LEAD:  Alpine Skiing: Women's Downhill  Gold: Marina Kiehl, West Germany  Silver: Brigitte Oertii, Switzerland  bronze: Karen Percy, Canada  Cross-Country: Men's 15 km  Gold: Mikhail Deviatiarov, Soviet Union  Silver: Pal Gunner Mikkelsplass, Norway  Bronze: Vladimir Smirnov, Soviet Union


2 Die in Texas Plane Crash
LEAD: A small plane barely missed traffic on an Interstate highway this morning before it smashed into a shopping mall's parking lot and burst into flames.
The crash killed at least two people on the plane, both of them unidentifed, but there were no casualties on the ground.


Publisher Sells Control of U.P.I. to WNW Group
LEAD: Mario Vazquez-Rana, the Mexican newspaper publisher, announced last night that he had sold control of United Press International Inc. and that the former president of the Financial News Network Inc. will take over direct operational control of the company.


LA PETITE ACADEMY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LA PETITE ACADEMY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
34,659,000
28,885,000
Net inc
2,999,000
2,356,000
Share earns
.19
.15
Yr rev
130,114,000
104,625,000
Net inc
10,052,000
7,512,000
Share earns
.64
.48


Family of a Deceased Smoker Charges Improprieties at Trial
LEAD: The plaintiffs in a tobacco liability case that ended in a hung jury last month have charged representatives of the defendant, American Brands Inc., with improper contact with some jurors while the trial was under way.


APACHE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APACHE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
22,600,000
29,483,000
Net loss
b71,639,000
c16,674,000
Yr rev
100,511,000
106,011,000
Net loss
b71,035,000
c10,873,000
b-After gains from discontinued operations of $7,725,000 and $9,342,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and an extraordinary gain of $1,096,000 for both the quarter and year.


In South Korea, a New Cabinet Full of Old Faces
LEAD: President-elect Roh Tae Woo of South Korea, who will take office next week, named a Cabinet today filled with holdovers from the present Government in many key positions.


Investment Group Seeks Dravo Role
LEAD: Drillbit Partners L.P., an investment group led by Arthur M. Goldberg, said it had discussed the possible acquisition of the Dravo Corporation, a mining and engineering company based in Pittsburgh, with several banks.


N.H.L. Close to Soviet Deal
LEAD: The prospect of as many as 10 players from the Soviet Union playing in the National Hockey League next season is now merely a matter of money, Alan Eagleson, director of the N.H.L.
Players Association, said today.
Eagleson and John Ziegler, the N.H.L. president, have been negotiating with officials from the


Korea Tariff Cut Praised
LEAD: United States Government officials today applauded an announcement by South Korea that it would lower import tariffs on cars and more than 400 other products next month.
The Ministry of Finance said the move was intended to curb inflation and reduce the country's trade surplus.


Nabisco Bakery
LEAD: RJR Nabisco Inc. plans to build a $600 million bakery, covering 1.1 million square feet on 120 acres near Raleigh, N.C.
The bakery will make Nabisco-brand cookies and crackers.
Construction is to start this spring and is scheduled to be completed in 1990, the company said.


OFFICIALS CRITICIZE FEDERAL RESERVE
LEAD: The Reagan Administration today blamed the Federal Reserve, along with October's stock market rout, for the slowdown in the election-year economy.
The President's economic advisers also said that the Federal Reserve had helped cause the rout but that its current policies were satisfactory.


MONARCH MACHINE TOOL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MONARCH MACHINE TOOL CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
23,106,081
19,551,316
Net inc
935,304
631,026
Share earns
.24
.17
Yr rev
74,488,567
65,753,539
Net inc
471,280
1,130,301
Share earns
.12
.30


Bob Stivers, 66, Dies; Produced TV Specials
LEAD: Bob Stivers, a producer of television entertainment programs, died of cancer Wednesday at Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Stivers, who lived in Los Angeles, would have been 67 years old on Thursday.


JOHN PAUL'S SOLEMN TEACHINGS
LEAD: The encyclical letter issued by Pope John Paul II today is his seventh.
It is his second encyclical focusing on the church's social teachings but the first to emphasize international issues.


Benjamin H. Brinton, Stock Exchange Official, 95
LEAD: Benjamin H. Brinton, a lawyer and a former treasurer of the New York Stock Exchange, died Wednesday at his home in Tucson, Ariz., after a long illness.
He was 95 years old.


The System Frustrates 'Temporary' Teachers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bomb Kills 14 Near a Base in Namibia
LEAD: At least 14 people were killed and more than 30 wounded today when a bomb exploded in a bank branch office near a military base in South-West Africa, the territory also known as Namibia.


MILTON ROY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MILTON ROY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
30,675,000
26,555,000
Net inc
1,258,000
b1,621,000
Share earns
.30
-
Yr sales
112,937,000
115,065,000
Net inc
3,778,000
b3,786,000
Share earns
.90
-


2d Bidder May Emerge In Fight for Federated
LEAD: A potential challenge to the Campeau Corporation's bid for Federated Department Stores Inc. may emerge from a group including Dillard Department Stores Inc. and the Jay Pritzker family, people close to the takeover rivals said yesterday.


LAURENTIAN CAPITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAURENTIAN CAPITAL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b1,810,000
c3,557,000
Yr net inc
b106,000
c1,110,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Includes realized investment losses of $625,000 for the quarter and realized investment gains of $2,033,000 for the year.


Scarcity Lifts Coffee Prices To Highest Point Since 1986
LEAD: Coffee futures for near-term delivery surged above $1.40 a pound yesterday for the first time since December 1986 on persistent concerns about the scarcity of high-quality beans.


ILLINOIS TOOL WORKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ILLINOIS TOOL WORKS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
452,027,000
389,428,000
Net inc
26,724,000
b27,269,000
Share earns
.52
.53
Shares outst
51,780,000
51,254,000
Yr rev
1,698,353,000
961,077,000
Net inc
106,184,000
79,583,000
Share earns
2.06
1.56


Notebook; Selective Nostalgia For Close of Games
LEAD: Oleg and Lyudmila Protopopov, who won the Olympic pairs figure skating gold medals in 1964 and 1968, were invited to take part in the closing ceremony of the XV Olympic Winter Games here.
Then the invitation was withdrawn because, the organizers said, the ceremony would have run longer than the allotted 90 minutes.


HOUSTON INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOUSTON INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
816,267,000
778,568,000
Net inc
73,817,000
89,222,000
Share earns
.63
.79
Yr rev
3,628,213,000
3,535,968,000
Net inc
434,958,000
424,935,000
Share earns
3.74
3.81
Shares outst
116,322,000
111,593,000


States Spurring Outlays In Biotechnology Field
LEAD: State governments are playing a more important role than ever before in financing biotechnology research and helping young companies develop new products, according to industry analysts and state officials.


Andrysiak Loses
LEAD: Terry Andrysiak, the Notre Dame senior who started four games at quarterback last season until he suffered a broken collarbone, will not be permitted to play a fifth season although he played only four minutes in his freshman season, the university announced. ''In Terry's case, there is not sufficient medical evidence of physical injury in his freshman season to merit the extra season being approved,'' said Richard Rosenthal, the athletic director.


Insuring a Long Life For Compact Disks
LEAD: A number of new mechanical cleaners for compact disks are being advertised in record catalogues and are appearing in specialized audio shops.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.60
6.54
5.42
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.66
5.69
5.46
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.94
5.99
5.49
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.05
8.05
7.04
30-YR.


Fed's Report Shift Stuns Traders
LEAD: Trading in fixed-income securities ground to a near-halt yesterday after the Federal Reserve announced late Thursday that it would report weekly, rather than monthly, changes in the nation's broader money supply, or M-2 and M-3.


Air Crashes Kill 18 in Carolina and New Jersey
LEAD: Eighteen people were killed last night in the crashes of two airplanes, 12 aboard an American Eagle commuter plane taking off from Raleigh-Durham airport in North Carolina and six in the crash a small plane in a wooded area near Atlantic City.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Stage: 'Shirley Basin,' on a Lonely Mining Town
LEAD: Shirley Basin, as described by Molly Ivins in a 1978 article in The New York Times, was an incredibly isolated uranium-mining town in a desolate area of Wyoming.
The town was like ''a moonscape capped with snow, a huge clot of trailers, one after another, and nothing else.'' There were no trees, houses or parks and the barren social life revolved around the bar at the Bad Medicine Inn.


NETS FALL AS BARKLEY SCORES 43
LEAD: Charles Barkley scored 43 points, hitting 16 of 22 shots from the field, to lead the Philadelphia 76ers to a 115-100 victory over the Nets tonight.


Film: 'Stranded,' Sci-Fi
LEAD: Sheriff Hollis McMann - we know he is Sheriff Hollis McMann because he shouts ''This is Sheriff Hollis McMann!'' into his megaphone before beginning every speech - arrives at the house where the kindly grandmother and her sweet teen-age granddaughter are being held hostage. ''How many people are in the house with you?


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE CORP (COMSAT) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE CORP (COMSAT) (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
82,200,000
78,500,000
Net inc
b4,100,000
d21,100,000
Share earns
.22
1.15
Yr rev
333,700,000
304,900,000
Net loss
b47,300,000
cd58,900,000
Share earns
-
3.22


F.D.A. Budget for AIDS Called Too Low
LEAD: The chairman of President Reagan's AIDS commission said yesterday that the Federal Food and Drug Administration urgently needed more money and staff to help speed the approval of new drugs to fight AIDS.


Dollar Mixed in a Quiet Day While Gold Prices Advance
LEAD: The dollar turned in a mixed performance against major foreign currencies yesterday, failing to hold gains made late in the previous trading session.


About New York; Artists' Model Bares Physique But Hides Secret
LEAD: It is not the custom of this corner to sketch and obscure, but then it is not every day one deals with a man's darkest secret.
That said, no doubt it is best to start at the beginning.


CRYSTAL BRANDS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRYSTAL BRANDS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
95,131,000
99,732,000
Net inc
7,749,000
4,581,000
Share earns
.86
.51
Yr sales
359,814,000
367,607,000
Net inc
b15,993,000
8,572,000
Share earns
1.78
.96


OPTICAL RADIATION CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OPTICAL RADIATION CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
23,070,000
23,219,000
Net inc
1,740,000
1,298,000
Share earns
.22
.16
6mo sales
47,416,000
47,648,000
Net inc
4,069,000
3,291,000
Share earns
.51
.40


Trash Disposal Problem Besieging Philadelphia
LEAD: Much like last year's unhappy garbage barge from Islip, L.I., two cargo ships are plying the high seas somewhere today, presumably in the Caribbean, laden with ash from this city's trash incinerators and looking for somewhere to dump it.


SUNSHINE-JR. STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SUNSHINE-JR. STORES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
45,237,647
37,484,920
Net inc
225,920
148,410
Share earns
.14
.09
Yr sales
178,385,166
165,871,175
Net inc
1,039,323
2,736,800
Share earns
.61
1.61


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Coast Federal Savings and Loan Association, Sarasota, Fla., said it had accepted a $20-a-share tender offer from Hugh H. Culverhouse.


Haiti's Unrequited Gifts to U.S. History and Culture
LEAD: To the Editor:


UNITED FINANCIAL GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED FINANCIAL GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
74,669,000
37,080,000
Yr net loss
117,980,000
36,250,000


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article yesterday about the potential impact of President Reagan's budget on major Government programs misstated the change proposed for the Environmental Protection Agency.
The $1.63 billion budget would be an increase of $48 million over this year, not a decrease.


Bowles Wins in Hurdles
LEAD: Dawn Bowles was smiling when the race was over last night.
Monifa Taylor was laughing.
The nation's two best high school performers in the 55-meter hurdles had just completed another duel, this time at the Colgate Women's Games at Madison Square Garden.
But the two athletes would not overplay the importance of one meet or the significance of who won.


Boy, 16, Charged in Ax Murders Of 4 in His Family in Minnesota
LEAD: The authorities today arrested David Brom, 16 years old, in the ax murders of his parents, a brother and a sister.
Prosecutors said they would seek to try him as an adult on murder charges.


Pretoria Denies Role In Zimbabwe Killing
LEAD: To the Editor:


CORRECTION
LEAD: A chart on Thursday listing foreigners held captive in Lebanon carried an erroneous identification from The Associated Press for a British hostage, John McCarthy.
He is a producer not a cameraman, for Worldwide Television News.


Candidates Less Than Eager For Advice From Economists
LEAD: For all the Presidential candidates' promises on matters of trade, taxes, jobs, welfare and Social Security, something quite novel is happening this election year.
They are making much less use of economists and their advice than candidates did in the past.


Kluge Files to Buy More Orion Shares
LEAD: John W. Kluge, the chairman of the Metromedia Company, is seeking Federal antitrust clearance to raise his stake in the Orion Pictures Company to as much as 50 percent.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Mr.
Kluge said that the purchases of shares in the New York-based motion picture and television company would be for investment purposes.


Negotiations With Post Keep Kheel in Limelight
LEAD: For Theodore W. Kheel, perhaps the most influential industrial peacemaker in New York City in the last half-century, advising the newspaper unions in their negotiations with The New York Post is a matter of providing guidance and ''clarification'' - in what are acknowledged by both sides to have been very important dollops.


Caraguatay Journal; People Leave and the Dollars Arrive
LEAD: Many inhabitants of this small farming town have never visited Asuncion, the Paraguayan capital, and a few speak only the traditional Guarani language, but everyone, it seems, has a daughter or a cousin or some other close relative living in New York.


2 IN G.O.P. DEBATE AND 2 STAY AWAY
LEAD: Half the Republican Presidential field debated here tonight, opening with criticism of the other half for refusing to take part.


Sematech Facing Cut
LEAD: The semiconductor industry's new research consortium, Sematech, is facing a sharp cutback in Federal financing in the 1989 fiscal year under the President's proposed budget, which was released this week.


Webster Retires
LEAD: Mike Webster, the Pittsburgh Steelers' center for 14 years, said yesterday he was retiring.
Webster, 35 years old, was the last active Steeler to have played in all four of the team's Super Bowl victories.


HAWTHORNE FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAWTHORNE FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,977,008
3,642,672
Share earns
1.91
1.40
Yr net inc
14,749,235
12,069,473
Share earns
5.67
4.64


Dole Challenges Bush's Tax Stand
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole's campaign organization, seeking to turn the tables on Vice President Bush, today issued a ''challenge'' to Mr.
Bush to ''make up his mind on taxes.''


Indy Suit Filed
LEAD: The widow of a man from Rothschild, Wis., who was killed by a tire that flew off a car driven in the 1987 Indianapolis 500 by Tony Bettenhausen has filed a $9 million wrongful death suit against the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, the United States Auto Club, Bettenhausen and other defendants.
Lyle G.


Music: 'La Voix Humaine'
LEAD: Some artists stick to what they know they can do well, content to carve out careers in narrowly defined grooves, or, in extreme cases, ruts.
Others, an honorable few, are driven to branch out into unlikely roles and whole idioms that stretch their talents interestingly, if sometimes to the breaking point.


JACLYN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JACLYN INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,287,000
13,607,000
Net inc
937,000
499,000
Share earns
.38
.20
Shares outst
2,493,534
2,453,093
6mo rev
41,806,000
30,086,000
Net inc
2,185,000
1,183,000
Share earns
.88
.48


PRO-IRANIAN GROUP CLAIMS ABDUCTION
LEAD: A clandestine group believed to be made up of pro-Iranian Moslem fundamentalists said today that it was holding a United States Marine officer who was kidnapped Wednesday.


Speculator Held on Gun Charges; Said to Have Threatened Boesky
LEAD: A top Wall Street speculator was arrested late Thursday on charges of illegal possession of a gun that he purportedly intended to use on witnesses against him in a Government securities investigation.


LANGLY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LANGLY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,249,200
2,167,400
Net inc
147,300
105,400
Share earns
.11
.08


Returns Have More Traps And Cost of Mistakes Rises
LEAD: With the tax law's numerous changes, 1987 tax returns contain many more pitfalls that can surprise unwary taxpayers and draw the attention of Internal Revenue Service auditors.


MMR HOLDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MMR HOLDING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
124,441,000
70,237,000
Net inc
2,262,000
758,000
Share earns
.42
.18
Shares outst
5,402,000
4,152,000
6mo rev
226,473,000
127,296,000
Net inc
4,393,000
3,277,000
Share earns
.81
.79


NICHOLS INSTITUTE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NICHOLS INSTITUTE (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,285,000
9,519,000
Net inc
463,000
101,000
Share earns
.12
.03
Yr rev
55,164,000
34,894,000
Net inc
1,382,000
b108,000
Share earns
.35
-


Prosecution Witness Clears 3 In a French Terrorist Group
LEAD: A special antiterrorist court today acquitted three members of the Direct Action leftist guerrilla group of charges of tempted manslaughter after the prosecution witness said the police had forged his signature on a statement.


Uncovered Short Sales Inch Up on the Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short and not yet covered in the month ended Feb. 12 rose by 3.3 million shares, or nine-tenths of 1 percent, to 383.4 million, from a revised 380.1 million in the previous month.


When Is a Sale a Sale?
LEAD: With spring just a month away, winter clearance sales are in full swing.
But just what is a sale?


Coniston Seeks Gillette Seats
LEAD: Coniston Partners said yesterday that it wanted to unseat four directors on the Gillette Company's board, including the chairman and president, and have its nominees elected so it can influence policy.


TV: 'Noble House,' Four-Part Mini-Series
LEAD: ''Noble House'' clunks through eight hours on nearly leaden feet.
The fire in the floating restaurant is spectacular; the horse race isn't bad; the landslide is at least dramatic.
Otherwise, there's not much to see.
People get in and out of cars or on and off of junks and yachts or wander through board rooms, houses and lobbies.


Answers to Quiz
LEAD: Questions appear on page 15.


Draft U.S. Report on Drugs Urges No Penalty for Panama or Mexico
LEAD: A draft State Department report has concluded that while Panama and Mexico have failed to take adequate steps to control drug trafficking, they should not be penalized by the United States, Administration officials said today.


THERMAL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*THERMAL INDUSTRIES INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,433,000
7,561,000
Net inc
647,000
833,000
Share earns
.33
.43
6mo sales
16,536,000
14,461,000
Net inc
1,467,000
1,327,000
Share earns
.76
.69


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article yesterday about the merger of two Manhattan law firms gave incorrect addresses.
Lord, Day &amp; Lord is at 25 Broadway, and Barrett Smith Simon &amp; Armstrong is across the street, at 26 Broadway.


Brown Lifts Devils To Fourth-Place Tie
LEAD: In the battle to avoid last place in the Patrick Division and close in on a playoff berth, the Devils defeated the Rangers, 6-3, tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Teaching the Classics In Student Productions
LEAD: Annabelle Howard wanted to teach Greek history to her fifth-grade class, but she didn't like the textbooks on the subject.
So she cast her students in a Greek tragedy instead.


Girl, 5, Dies in Brooklyn Fire
LEAD: A 5-year-old girl died yesterday in a fire that heavily damaged her family's apartment in Brooklyn, fire officials said.
The victim, Jennifer Rivera, was pronounced dead at Woodhull Hospital after the fire at 140 Bayard Street in the Greenpoint section.
The fire in the three-story building was reported at 9:15 A.M.


TEXAS UTILITIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXAS UTILITIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
931,984,000
911,147,000
Net inc
131,999,000
135,703,000
Share earns
.87
.95
Yr rev
4,082,923,000
3,932,045,000
Net inc
679,976,000
626,851,000
Share earns
4.55
4.45


TRANSMATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRANSMATION INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,433,000
3,843,000
Net inc
102,000
171,800
Share earns
.04
.07
9mo sales
12,138,000
11,143,500
Net inc
216,000
98,000
Share earns
.09
.04
Results for the year-ago third quarter benefited by $133,500, or 6 cents a share, as a result of the sale of land.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''When the West gives the impression of abandoning itself to forms of growing and selfish isolation, and the East in its turn seems to ignore for questionable reasons its duty to cooperate in the task of alleviating human misery, then we are up against not only a betrayal of humanity's legitimate expectations - a betrayal that is a harbinger of unforeseeable consequences - but also a real desertion of a moral obligation.


A Man Is Shot and Wounded By an Off-Duty Police Officer
LEAD: An off-duty police officer shot and wounded a man who was firing a gun during a dispute on a Brooklyn street last night, the police said.


Emmis to Buy 5 NBC Radio Stations
LEAD: The National Broadcasting Company said yesterday that it had tentatively agreed to sell five of its seven radio stations, including two in New York, to the Emmis Broadcasting Corporation for $121.5 million.


SEALRIGHT CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SEALRIGHT CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
36,051,000
27,501,000
Net inc
1,525,000
1,612,000
Share earns
.21
.22
Yr sales
157,948,000
121,420,000
Net inc
11,155,000
6,536,000
Share earns
1.52
.91


Brooklyn Landlord Freed 8 Days Early
LEAD: The landlord who had been under house arrest in one of his neglected apartment buildings in Brooklyn for 15 days was ordered released yesterday, eight days early because of time off for good behavior.


PANNILL KNITTING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PANNILL KNITTING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
98,928,000
78,645,000
Net inc
7,911,000
b6,807,000
Share earns
.53
.45
Yr sales
259,922,000
245,498,000
Net inc
16,779,000
b21,703,000
Share earns
1.12
1.41


An Unsparing View of Economic Ills
LEAD: Theologians scrutinize papal encyclicals the way constitutional lawyers pore over Supreme Court decisions, looking for subtle shifts in phrasing, new lines of argument, discreet silences about past statements that are now better forgotten.
Pope John Paul II's


A Fitting Finale For Boitano, Orser
LEAD: In a fitting crescendo to their rivalry of the last three years, Brian Boitano of the United States and Brian Orser of Canada will lead a field of 24 Saturday night into the freestyle program, the final event of the Olympic men's figure skating competition.


Texaco Stock Rises After Meeting
LEAD: The stock of Texaco Inc. jumped in heavy trading yesterday after James W. Kinnear, its president and chief executive, told securities analysts that the company was negotiating with an oil-exporting country for the sale of an interest in its refineries in Texas, Louisiana and Delaware.


COMPUTER CONSOLES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER CONSOLES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
39,202,000
41,279,000
Net inc
b8,990,000
494,000
Share earns
.59
.04
Yr rev
148,394,000
129,557,000
Net inc
b11,320,000
c4,383,000
Share earns
.86
-


U.S. and Bonn Agree on Need For Review of Arms Control
LEAD: President Reagan and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany agreed today on the need for a comprehensive review of NATO arms control strategy as a follow-up to the American-Soviet treaty eliminating medium- and shorter-range land-based missiles in Europe.


COMPUTER &amp; COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOLGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUTER &amp; COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOLGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
24,281,000
16,873,000
Net inc
b1,008,000
c4,863,000
Share earns
.09
-
Yr sales
98,798,000
75,300,000
Net inc
b6,393,000
c26,844,000
Share earns
.55
-


INSIDE
LEAD:  14 Die in Namibia Attack


Polaroid Suit Seeks $5.72 Billion
LEAD: The Polaroid Corporation is seeking as much as $5.72 billion in damages from the Eastman Kodak Company for infringement on its instant photography patents, according to court documents released yesterday by the Federal District Court in Boston.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 50.


Bush Edges Dole in a Straw Poll in Nevada
LEAD: Vice President Bush has won a Presidential straw poll among Nevada Republicans, but his total was nearly equaled by the undecided votes, many of which were said to have been cast by supporters of Pat Robertson in an attempt to control later balloting.


Marine Acquitted at 2d Assault Trial
LEAD: A military jury today acquitted Cpl.
Lindsey Scott of the Marine Corps at his second trial on charges of sexually assaulting and attempting to kill the wife of a fellow marine in 1983.


A FAMILY'S LOVE OF FLAGS HELPS TO AVERT TRAGEDY
LEAD: &gt;I USED to live on the third floor of an apartment building facing a row of town houses.
When one of those houses changed hands, the new owners erected an oversized flagpole in the small yard beside their front steps.
Every morning around seven, either the husband or the wife would emerge with a flag, attach it to the halyard and hoist it up, and every evening, not precisely at sunset but around that time, it was lowered and carefully folded away for the night.


Too Close To Reality
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


IF TAX RISES ARE COMIN, WHICH ONE WILL THEY BE?
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the budget President Reagan submitted last week formally projects that the Federal deficit will fall in each of the next five years, reaching a relatively negligible $23 billion in 1993, politicians and economists generally agree that the chances of this happening are practically zero.


South Africa's Liberals: Divided and Dropping Out
LEAD: South African liberals are more divided than ever about their future.


Pre-CPC Days
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Palestinian View
LEAD: OBVIOUSLY, A LONGSTANDING conflict like that between the Israelis and the Palestinians can be resolved any number of ways - particularly when one side has the power to impose a settlement on the other.
The question here, however, is not about a so-called ''agreement'' that one side forces the other to accept, but a true, lasting settlement that elicits a reasonable degree of consent from both.


GROUP OFFERS ADVICE ON OLDER BUILDINGS
LEAD: NEW LONDON LANDMARKS, a nonprofit preservation group, has begun a program to provide owners of the city's many older homes and other buildings with advice on rehabilitation and restoration.


Ambulance Workers To Face Discipline In a Death in Bronx
LEAD: Two Emergency Medical Service ambulance workers face disciplinary action because they waited for sandwiches in a Bronx delicatessen before responding to a report that a man was suffering a heart attack in a church one block away, officials said yesterday.


Virus' Threat
LEAD: To the Editor:


A GREAT HOSPITAL IN CRISIS
LEAD: From the moment I arrived in the emergency room of New York Hospital complaining of chest pains, I was treated by doctors, nurses and technicians with promptness, consideration and good humor.
I don't know how you measure a good outcome like mine against the terrible misfortune of Libby Zion.
But I do know that a fair analysis would not have focused on specific cases of negligence at one hospital without mentioning specific cases at any other hospitals.


PHOTOGRAPHERS TAKE AIM AT THE IMAGES FROM EARLIER WORKS
LEAD: MARCEL DUCHAMP bestowed a moustache on a reproduction of the Mona Lisa in 1919.
However, art about art didn't take root as an official policy until the 1950's when Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns began their careers parodying Abstract Expressionism and it was another two decades before photography followed suit.


Ski-Jump Article Is Refreshing
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


THE NATION: The Opportunities; Can Republicans Wrest Control?
LEAD: QUESTION. Who's hard to beat - on both sides.


Baseball; Yanks Impressed Early by Dotson
LEAD: Richard Dotson sat quietly in front of his locker stall this morning, his attention drawn to a copy of the Yankee media guide that someone had handed to each of the players.
Beside him sat Lee Guetterman, a pitcher of imposing physical proportions - he is 6 feet 8 inches - and not far away was Tim Stoddard, who is 6-7 and a former basketball player on North Carolina


A GREAT HOSPITAL IN CRISIS
LEAD: Individual physicians, or even New York Hospital, should not be blamed for the deaths of Andy Warhol and Libby Zion.
The system failed these patients, and the system must be changed.
When interns, fresh out of medical school, are forced to work for 36 hours without sleep and are left alone at night in charge of 30 or 40 seriously ill patients, deaths that should be avoidable will occur.


ABORTION DEBATE REVIVED IN CANADA
LEAD: After an uneasy political truce that lasted nearly 20 years, Canada has been thrust anew into a bitter dispute over its abortion laws.


NICARAGUA ORDERS A 10% BUDGET CUT
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra announced new austerity measures today to accompany the jarring currency devaluation he decreed a week ago.


A Dark and Difficult Genius
LEAD:  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY  A Writer's Life.
By Geir Kjetsaa.
Translated by Siri Hustvedt and David McDuff.
Illustrated. 437 pp.
New York: Elisabeth Sifton Books/Viking. $24.95.


New Loans Easing the Process
LEAD: Because married couples increasingly need the incomes of both spouses to qualify for a mortgage, a problem can arise when an employer relocates one of the partners.
The spouse of the transferred employee may take several months to find a suitable job in the new location and thus have the second income needed for the loan.


LORRAINE ADAMS, REPORTER, WEDS
LEAD: The marriage of Lorraine Adams, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore V. Adams of Summit, N.J., to Michael Stanford, the son of Dr.
Geoffrey Stanford of Dallas and Rosemary Stanford of Oxford, England, took place yesterday at the Americas Society in New York.


Only One Maker
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Racial Tensions - and Violence - Appear on Rise
LEAD: IN the last 16 months, the University of Massachusetts at Amherst has endured just about the worst kind of publicity a college could get.


Streetscapes: 503 Fifth Avenue; A 6-Story, 1860 Remnant Of a Genteel Midtown
LEAD: Surrounded by office towers, the six-story building at the northeast corner of 42d Street and Fifth Avenue gets barely a glance from passers-by.
But empty buildings do not remain on prime corners indefinitely.
Thus the future of 503 Fifth Avenue, built in 1860 and one of the oldest buildings on the avenue, does not seem bright.


Merle Takes Lead In Combined Event
LEAD: Anita Wachter of Austria and the Swiss duo of Vreni Schneider and Brigitte Oertli positioned themselves as the skiers to beat for the gold medal in the women's combined competition in Mount Allan, Alberta.


DANIELLE I. SCHANZ WEDS B. O. GARBASSI
LEAD: Danielle Iris Schanz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Schanz of New York and East Quoque, L.I., was married in New York yesterday to Bertrand Otton Garbassi, a son of Eva Wellisz of New York and Umberto Garbassi of Leivi, Italy.
Surrogate James D. Benson of Dutchess County, N.Y., performed the ceremony at the


Report Sees Hope for Battered Environment
LEAD: The decline in the earth's environmental health can be reversed, but only with a substantial investment by the rich nations, according to the 1988 State of the World report published by the Worldwatch Institute.


INCEST VICTIMS: NO MORE MARTYRS
LEAD: The excellent article ''Incest Victims Get Sympathy but Little Help'' alerted the public to a serious social problem in Suffolk County but did not explain that in Nassau County we have developed an extensive range of services for victims.


Baseball; Johnson Greets 9 Position Players
LEAD: Dave Johnson began his fifth and final year as manager of the Mets today with a new spring training address but with the old thunder, and predicted: ''We should win.
We could dominate.''


FRANCES TESTA IS A BRIDE
LEAD: Frances Ann Testa and Richard William Egan were married yesterday at Our Lady Queen of Peace Roman Catholic Church in Maywood, N.J., by the Rev.
Stanley Kostrzomb.
The bride, a daughter of Madeline Testa of Saddle River, N.J., and the late Florindo Testa, is the director of medical records at the Alexian Brothers Hospital in Elizabeth, N.J.


STATE MAY HOLD A KEY TO PRESIDENTIAL CHOICES
LEAD: ALTHOUGH it still has a number of stops to make before it arrives June 7, the Presidential political bandwagon is heading toward New Jersey.
And the way things are going in both major parties, New Jersey voters could play an important role in picking the nominees.


TAKING THE TRIVIAL SERIOUSLY
LEAD:  OSCAR WILDE  By Richard Ellmann.
Illustrated. 680 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Board of Estimate in Conflict: The Final Phases
LEAD: The ranking members of New York City's government are in an uproar, and have been for weeks.
With the exception of Mayor Koch, they are angry, even shaken, by a formidable threat to their power.


Opera: 'Curlew River,' Britten's Mystery Play
LEAD: DURING a trip to Tokyo in 1956, Britten twice attended a Noh play, and saw in its static, austere forms a solemn, graceful poetry. ''Sumidagawa,'' the story of a madwoman who had lost her child, struck the composer for the slowness of its action, the combination of speaking, singing and chanting, and the quiet, mystical intensity that sustained the piece, presented both times with no conductor guiding the ensemble of players and musicians.


Q AND A
LEAD: Alaska Ferries  Question: I am told there are ferries from Seattle to Alaska that stop at ports in the way cruise ships do.
Are there sleeping accommodations?
Where do you write for information? - H. C., Hauppauge, L.I.
Answer: A ferry service called Alaska Marine Highway operates year-round between Seattle and Skagway, Alaska.


WHAT'S NEW IN EXECUTIVE SECURITY
LEAD: ''YEARS ago, security was at the bottom of the totem pole,'' said Michael Goodrich, general manager of Spectra Audio Research Inc., which makes electronic security devices.
Now, he went on, executives are quietly investing in bodyguards, bulletproof vests, automatic vehicle locators to trace a missing car and other high-tech gear.


During Talks on Concessions, Players Use Their Best Bluffs
LEAD: It was around the midpoint in three days of talks to save The New York Post, late Thursday evening, and all seemed well on the surface.


Next Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Dining Modestly on St. Barts
LEAD: ''HAVE you found that little hole in the wall where we can get some simple grilled fish and a glass of wine without spending a fortune?'' That was the challenge presented by a friend and colleague we happened to meet while vacationing on St.
Barthelemy.


MISS TYLER BRIDE OF DAVID A. NUFER
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York, Julia Vitale Tyler, a daughter of Celia Vitale of Southbury, Conn., and Naples, Fla., and the late Alexander Vitale, was married yesterday to David Arnold Nufer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
D.
George Nufer of Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
John Halborg performed the ceremony.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  MRS.
CALIBAN, by Rachel Ingalls. (Laurel/Dell, $6.95.) An unhappy California housewife has an affair with a 6-foot-7-inch amphibian humanoid named Larry, who is fleeing from the law.
In 1986, our reviewer, Michael Dorris, compared the novel to ''a strange conversation overheard on a bus: sketchy, incomplete, maddening, but totally unforgettable.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  YALE GLEE CLUB IN BERGEN  The 100-voice Yale Glee Club will appear at the John Harms Center for the Performing Arts in Englewood Friday evening in a benefit for the Scholarship Fund of the Bergen County Yale Alumni Association.


Boitano Wins First Gold Medal for United States
LEAD: Brian Boitano winning a gold medal in the men's figure-skating competition in the Olympic Winter Games last night in Calgary, Alberta.
Brian Orser of Canada took second place in the event.
Eric Flaim won a silver medal for the United States in the men's 1,500-meter speed-skating race.
Section 5. (Reuters)


Digging In for Tough Times at Crazy Eddie
LEAD: WHEN Elias Zinn, an electronics executive, and Victor H. Palmieri, the turnaround specialist, took over Crazy Eddie last November after a heated proxy fight, they ran into more trouble than they expected.


PARIS CREATES
LEAD: Some seasons, the Paris couture is everything it is supposed to be - and more.
This spring is certainly one of those.
The collections shown last month not only had plenty of clothes for the couture clientele to choose from, but, even more importantly, they were loaded with multiple messages for the fashion community at large.


KNOWING WHEN IT'S TIME TO GIVE UP AN UNSOCIABLE HABIT
LEAD: I HAVE been a smoker, on and off, for almost 40 years and a nonsmoker, on and off, for one.
So I feel qualified to make some general unscientific observations and some purely subjective remarks on the subject.


Pro Basketball; Absent Woolridge Calls Before Loss
LEAD: After missing the team bus for Friday night's game in Philadelphia against the 76ers, then failing to report for tonight's 113-101 loss to the Seattle SuperSonics at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, Orlando Woolridge, the Nets' high-scoring forward, finally contacted the team.


City Hall Notes; New York Panel Draws a Whimsical Picture of Government
LEAD: One thing New York City's government has never been accused of is being artistic.
Colorful, maybe.
But not artistic.
Until now.
In an effort to explain the current city government to an electorate that will be voting on changing it next November, the Charter Revision Commission has issued a whimsical poster that illustrates the city's vast bureauracy.


For a Change, The Superpowers Will Venture Beyond Topic A
LEAD: WHEN Secretary of State George P. Shultz arrives in Moscow today for talks, he will be carrying an agenda with an unusually heavy emphasis on regional disputes, most notably Afghanistan, the Iran-Iraq war and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
And he is likely to find Soviet leaders sharing his eagerness to accomplish something in these areas.


A NATION WITHOUT HERETICS
LEAD:  A WORTHY TRADITION  Freedom of Speech in America.
By Harry Kalven Jr.
Edited by Jamie Kalven. 698 pp.
New York: An Edward Burlingame Book/Harper &amp; Row. $35.


HOSPITALS GET NEW LEADERS TO HELP MEET NEW NEEDS
LEAD: HOSPITALS are facing many new challenges, and, in many cases, they are meeting them with new administrators.


Brain-Dead Infant Is Taken off Life Support
LEAD: A baby born with only a brain stem whose body was kept alive to preserve his organs for transplant was removed from life support machines today after no suitable recipient could be found, officials said.


Narrowing the Extremes
LEAD: ''The difference is that the limits are narrowing,'' a young, American-educated Salvadoran businessman said. ''The extremes, right and left, are being ruled out, as more and more people see they can't solve anything.''


DIPLOMATS DO NOT HURRY TO ENLIST IN THE WAR ON DRUGS
LEAD: WHEN President Reagan signed the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, he vowed to wage ''a national crusade against drugs, a sustained relentless effort to rid America of this scourge.'' Two years later, the supply of drugs on American streets is larger than ever, the enforcement effort suffers from lack of money, and officials in at least a dozen


BUSINESS FORUM: Are Corporations Less Charitable?; Giving Gets Unfashionable
LEAD: TRADITIONS that we inherit sometimes lose their vitality and fall into disuse.
Ideas have no claim on us if we haven't made them our own.
Principles that become institutionalized in organizations often wind up as empty rules and regulations enforced by people who have given the word ''bureaucrat'' a bad name.


INTERSTATE 95: THE DEVIL'S HIGHWAY
LEAD: IN the 1950's, it was heralded as a paragon of construction technology.
A shining and proud example of what highways could be, it was a masterful and much-anticipated artery for the enhanced exchange of interstate commerce and a promise of great things to come.


DEFYING TRADITION: PRINCE CHARLES RECASTS HIS ROLE
LEAD: BEHIND PALACE DOORS, THE PRINCE OF Wales sometimes refers to journalists as ''creeps and bloody hacks.'' In the past, such outbursts have greeted aides' suggestions that he hold private, off-the-record meetings with British editors in an attempt to get them to pay more attention to his speeches and less to his troubled marriage.


Jazz: Jelly Roll Kings In Mississippi Blues Bill
LEAD: RAW-BONED, loose-limbed Mississippi blues - music so traditional it can sound avant-garde -twanged and strutted at the Triplex on Friday night, in a triple bill presented by the World Music Institute.
Two of the oldest Mississippi styles and one of their wayward, electrified offspring filled the theater with sounds usually heard at barbecues, back porches and juke joints, defying the formality of a concert hall with down-home directness.


Esther Oshiver Fisher; Marriage Counselor, 77
LEAD: Dr.
Esther Oshiver Fisher, a retired marriage counselor, died of complications from Alzheimer's disease Feb. 13 at her home in Princeton, N.J.
She was 77 years old.


College Basketball: Big East; Panthers Hang On To Beat Hoyas
LEAD: Charles Smith scored 25 points, the final 10 on free throws, as Pitt outlasted Georgetown, 70-65, today in a physical Big East Conference game that ended with a brawl.


Correction
LEAD: An article in The Times Magazine on Jan. 10 about Nicaragua's leader, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, misstated the date of a secret meeting at which the Sandinistas sought to take control of the provisional legislature by adding members.
It was May 2, 1980.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Soft Breezes, Hard Water THEY prefer ''hard water'' to ''soft water,'' but not from the tap.
Hard water means ice to a certain segment of Long Island's sailing population, and sailing on ice tops sailing on water any day, iceboaters contend.


FICTION
LEAD:  THE DARK PATH TO THE RIVER.
By Joanne Leedom-Ackerman. (Saybrook/Norton, $19.95.) Joanne Leedom-Ackerman's first novel is a densely plotted, dialogue-filled story that reads like commercial fiction yet examines unconventional territory.
Frequently shifting points of view, the book focuses on the fates of two American friends and former newspaper colleagues who are united in their interest in a small, unnamed African country on the brink of revolution.


Favorite Elective at Bowdoin: Food
LEAD: Bowdoin College has a message for all those who remember dormitory food as the worst they ever ate: It doesn't have to be bad.


THOSE GOING UP AND THOSE GOING DOWN
LEAD:  DUSK  And Other Stories.
By James Salter. 157 pp.
San Francisco: North Point Press. $14.95.


Harry's Bar
LEAD: To the Editor: It was gratifying to find, in C. L. Sulzberger's piece (Travel, Jan. 3), that newsmen still find Harry's New York Bar in Paris newsworthy.


JOHN WATERS CAVORTS IN THE MAINSTREAM
LEAD: THE VIZIER OF VULGARITY, the titan of terrible taste, the man whose 1972 movie ''Pink Flamingos'' is still disgusting 16 years later, stood - of all places - in front of a film festival audience and licked the rain of applause from his face.


A LOW-KEY SKI RESORT IN COLORADO
LEAD: AS a ski resort, Copper Mountain is a natural.
A ''nearly perfect ski mountain,'' wrote the United States Forest Service in 1969, adding, ''If there ever was a mountain that had terrain created for skiing, it would be Copper Mountain.''


NASSAU MEDICAL CENTER UNDER SIEGE
LEAD: THE Nassau County Medical Center's recent decision to turn away all but the most acutely ill patients until it improves its nurse-to-patient ratio marks a drastic step for a hospital in crisis.


Controversy - and Platitudes - Writ Large
LEAD: ''Committed to Print'' at the Museum of Modern Art is an exhibition of ''social and political'' material - prints, posters, books and magazines that relate to concerns of today and yesterday in the United States.
In almost all of them, the word ranks equal with the image.
The general tone is defined by the museum as ''leftist or liberal,'' and for much of the way the word pulls the image along, the way horses pulled a covered wagon.


Oregon's Law on Open Coastline Faces Test
LEAD: Twenty years ago, when Gov.
Tom McCall signed a bill declaring the uncluttered sands, high dunes and rocky shores of the 362-mile Oregon coast off limits to the claims of private property, some developers called it ''the communist manifesto.''


Biathlon to East German; U.S. Is Far Back
LEAD: What was supposed to be a day in which the United States scored a breakthrough in the biathlon was instead another bitter disappointment.
Josh Thompson left the starting line in this test of endurance and marksmanship, envisioning an Olympic medal, only to cross the finish with tears in his eyes, a victim of his own expectations.


Correction
LEAD: An article in the Sports section on Feb. 7 previewing Winter Olympic competition misidentified the current world hockey champion, and another article misidentified the 1984 winner of the Olympic bronze medal in hockey.
Sweden is the world champion and won the bronze in the 1984 Games at Sarajevo, Yugoslavia.


Fischer-Dieskau Series Of Lieder at Carnegie
LEAD: Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau will give three recitals of lieder - his first performances in the United States in eight years - at Carnegie Hall on March 22, 24 and 27.
He will sing works by Schumann on the 22d, excerpts from Mahler's ''Knaben Wunderhorn'' on the 24th, and Hugo Wolf's ''Morike Lieder'' on the 27th, all with Hartmut


Nation's Armed Forces Running Short of Uniforms
LEAD: The nation's armed forces are running short of a critical spare part: uniforms.


IN SAN FRANCISCO, TV BATTLES ON THE FRONT LINES AGAINST AIDS
LEAD: Early in 1983, Jim Bunn, a new reporter for KPIX-TV here, finished writing his first AIDS report and knew the story was like none before.
It had sex, death, medical intrigue, a host of complex social issues - not the least of which were civil rights and gay life styles - and, by definition, it was going to challenge every taboo known to television.


India Bus Crash Kills 35
LEAD: At least 35 people were killed and many injured when a bus plunged into a ravine in northern India today, the Press Trust of India said.
About 60 people were aboard the bus when the accident occurred 40 miles from Simla, the capital of Himachal Pradesh state.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  IN SEARCH OF THE DARK AGES.
By Michael Wood. (Facts on File, $22.95.) Michael Wood, author of ''In Search of the Trojan War,'' has now turned to slightly more modern times: the genesis of the English nation.
He begins in A.D. 60, when Boadicea led her Celtic tribesmen in a doomed revolt against Roman rule, and ends a millennium later with William the Conqueror.


WESLEYAN SYMPOSIUM CELEBRATES CAGE AT 75
LEAD: UNLIKE the man they are honoring, the music faculty at Wesleyan University has tried to leave nothing to chance.


MARTHA MOSS IS ENGAGED
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Albert M. Moss of Huntington, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Moss to Dr.
David DiBenedetto, a son of Mrs.
Joseph DiBenedetto of Belmont, Mass., and the late Mr.
DiBenedetto.
Miss Moss expects to graduate in May from the Boston University School of Medicine.


THE CAREFUL SHOPPER
LEAD:  LIQUIDATION SALE IN SCARSDALE  Boutique Elle in Scarsdale was the first of three stores of that name selling stylish Italian sportswear, cocktail and evening wear.
The others are in Cedarhurst Center in Cedarhurst, L.I., and the Woodbury Common in Woodbury, L.I.
The two Long Island stores are remaining open and the mailing list will continue to alert shoppers to their sales, but the Scarsdale branch is having its final week of a liquidation sale beginning today and Monday - days it is usually closed -and continuing through


HOW HE SAVED HIS SKIN
LEAD:  THE ADVENTURES AND SUFFERINGS OF JOHN R. JEWITT, CAPTIVE OF MAQUINNA  Illustrated by Hilary Stewart. 192 pp.
Seattle: University of Washington Press. $29.95.


SANDY SIMMONS PLANS TO WED G. P. LEONARD
LEAD: The engagement of Sandy Sevier Simmons to Geoffrey Porter Leonard, the son of James Leonard of New York and the late Georgine Leonard, has been made known by the future bride's mother, Mrs.
John M. Simmons of Olympia, Wash.
A July wedding is planned.


Reporter Cited for Contempt
LEAD: A reporter for The Boston Globe was ordered jailed for contempt of court after refusing to disclose the identities of confidential sources cited in a 1982 article about a former city official.
Judge John P. Sullivan of Suffolk Superior Court said Thursday he would allow the reporter, Charles A. Radin, to remain free at least a week to appeal.


Poll Finds Less Optimism in U.S. On Future, a First Under Reagan
LEAD: For the first time since Ronald Reagan became President more than seven years ago, the American public generally does not believe the nation's future will be better than its present or its past, according to a New York Times/ CBS News Poll.


JULIE FREUDENHEIM TO MARRY SPENCER G. FELDMAN
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Freudenheim of Buffalo of the engagement of their daughter Julie R. Freudenheim to Spencer Greg Feldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Feldman of Patchogue, L.I.
The couple plan to marry in May.


Physician, Heal Thyself
LEAD:  THE CITADEL  With Robert Donat (in photo), Rosalind Russell (in photo), Ralph Richardson and Rex Harrison.
Directed by King Vidor. 1938.
MGM/UA Home Video. 113 minutes. $24.95.


THE PARKWAY FOLLIES, STARRING TOM KEAN
LEAD: WHEN the New Jersey Highway Authority, operator of the Garden State Parkway, features Frank Sinatra, Liza Minelli or Bruce Springsteen at its Arts Center in Holmdel, the S.R.O. sign goes up weeks before the performances.


Question Of the Week; What's the Best Winter Olympic Sport?
LEAD: My choice is luge, perhaps because it is so unusual.
To those who say that being a luger seems much too sedentary, isn't that a snap judgment?
Actually participating seriously in this sport should rapidly dispel erroneous conclusions.
THOMAS G. MORGANSEN  Jackson Heights, Queens


19 PEOPLE KILLED IN 4 AIR CRASHES
LEAD: A commuter plane plowed through a stand of trees just after taking off from the Raleigh-Durham Airport in North Carolina Friday night, killing 12 people.
The president of the airline said yesterday that the plane was only three years old and had just been inspected.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I plan to remove the glass doors that now enclose our tub-shower.
However, the metal runner on the bottom of these doors is apparently cemented onto the top of the tub rim with some kind of grout.
I'm afraid that chipping and scraping might damage the finish on the tub.
Is there any way you know of to remove this grout more easily?


MARINE'S CAPTORS ELUDE SEARCHERS
LEAD: The kidnappers of a United States Marine officer have apparently slipped him through a security net set up in southern Lebanon by United Nations forces and local Moslem Shiite militiamen.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I plan to remove the glass doors that now enclose our tub-shower.
However, the metal runner on the bottom of these doors is apparently cemented onto the top of the tub rim with some kind of grout.
I'm afraid that chipping and scraping might damage the finish on the tub.
Is there any way you know of to remove this grout more easily?


THE SILENT MAJORITY'S LEGACY OF LIFE
LEAD: MOST people avoid cemeteries.
For years I have as well.
With time in such short supply, who needs to pass it among those for whom time has run out?


Local Authorities Aided By U.S. in Prosecutions
LEAD: Two years ago Leon B. Kellner, the United States Attorney here, took over the prosecution of several Miami police officers accused of drug trafficking and racketeering, This arrangement, requested by Janet Reno, the State Attorney for Dade County, evolved into a pattern under which virtually all local corruption cases here are going to the Federal courts for trial.


AMIE M. PILLAR TO WED R. A. FELDMAN IN JUNE
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Pillar of North Woodmere, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amie Michele Pillar, to Robert Alan Feldman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome O. Feldman of Merrick, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.


Bingham's Copyrights
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; What's the Best Winter Olympic Sport?
LEAD: The best Winter Olympic sport?
The 12-yard dash between my TV and refrigerator!
RICH STEINHAUS  Bayside, Queens


DRIED FRUITS CAN BRIGHTEN DESSERTS
LEAD: IF you are looking for new ideas for winter desserts, consider dried fruits.
They are at their best during the winter and are a fine alternative to expensive tropical or out-of-season fresh fruit.
You can now get prunes, dried apple rings, apricots, pears, peaches and figs, mostly from California, good enough to eat straight from the package.


Opera or Musical? It Can Be a Close Call
LEAD: A traveling swindler comes to town.
What he sells to the rural folk isn't worth much, but the power of suggestion runs rampant.
From apparent fraud emerges surprising results - love, happiness and success.
As an operagoer's ''who am I?'' quiz, this one isn't very difficult: Donizetti's ''Elixir of Love.


Sell Solutions, Not Just Products
LEAD: SOME say multinational corporations threaten the economic and political independence of developing countries and represent one of the greatest obstacles to development.
Others find progress in the third world inconceivable without companies operating on an international scale.
Multinationals, they say, transfer technologies, as well as exemplary standards for production safety, the environment and social responsibility.


DRAWING THE LINE ON STUDENT RIGHTS: CENSORSHIP HAS NO PLACE IN HIGH SCHOOL
LEAD: FREEDOM of speech. As an American I've come to take that for granted.


Soviet Takes Lead in 2-Man Bobsled
LEAD: Ianis Kipours of the Soviet Union, aided by deteriorating track conditions that slowed Wolfgang Hoppe of East Germany, the defending gold medalist, jumped from fourth to first on the second run in the Olympic two-man bobsled today to set up what could be one of the biggest upsets with two heats remaining Sunday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It's sort of like living with your husband.
After a while it's not the same as it was in the beginning.
Things happen, as most of us know.
After any President serves eight years, you're ready for something fresh, for some new ideas.''


In Nicaragua, They Learn the Prosthetics Trade
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York Judge Bars Restriction on Abortion
LEAD: A Federal district judge in New York has temporarily barred the enforcement of new regulations that would prevent most family planning centers in the state from helping women to obtain abortions, a spokeswoman for the American Civil Liberties Union reported yesterday.


QUILTS: MORE THAN JUST WARM COVERS
LEAD: ''MORE Than Just Something to Keep You Warm,'' the title of an exhibition of Afro-American folk art at the Bergen Museum of Art and Science, adds an affirmative twist to a black woman's modest appraisal of a quilt she had made.


Candidates Flail Away, but 'Undecided' Is Still Ahead
LEAD: WHAT did the voters of New Hampshire and Iowa tell the American people?


CLASSICAL MUSIC'S FUTURE
LEAD: To The Editor:


South Carolina House Passes A Measure on Sex Education
LEAD: The State House of Representatives here has given preliminary approval to a mandatory sex education program that would separate birth-control classes by sex and prohibit discussion of homosexuality except in negative terms.


Sheet Music Is More Than Just Song Titles
LEAD: ''Sheet music is a whole world,'' said Marianne Wurlitzer, a partner of Wurlitzer-Bruck, a New York firm specializing in antique musical instruments and musical material. ''You could do a history of the United States through sheet-music covers.''


New Sheen for the 'Welfare Banks'
LEAD: NATHAN SHANE licked his counting finger, scooped up a check and identification card from a rumpled, bent-over woman and began nimbly counting dollars.


SECRETS OF THE RAIN FOREST
LEAD: It was exciting to read about how Donald Perry has learned to traverse the jungle canopy to explore the secrets of the rain forest (''Secrets of the Rain Forest,'' by Erik Eckholm, Jan. 17).


STAKING OUT THE GLOBE
LEAD:  THE AGE OF EMPIRE  1875-1914.
By E. J. Hobsbawm.
Illustrated. 404 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $22.95.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:  MOLIERE AT YALE REP  Lewis J. Stadlen, a Tony Award nominee for his performance as Pangloss in the Broadway production of ''Candide'' in 1974, plays the title role in Moliere's ''Miser,'' which will run to March 12 at the Yale Repertory Theater.


Duke Rallies to Top Kansas in Overtime
LEAD: Quin Snyder scored 21 points, including 7 in overtime, as Duke came back twice to beat Kansas, 74-70, today.


Anti-Poverty Program Seeks to Build Self-Esteem
LEAD: On a raw winter morning near Skid Row, a dozen mothers on welfare listened to a story about a poor woman like them who once thought she had not a chance in the world.


NEW YORK'S BRIDGES ARE CRUMBLING TOWERS OF NEGLECT
LEAD: THE next time someone tries to sell you a bridge in New York City, be sure to ask for a warranty.
Officials say about half the city's bridges are rated in poor or fair condition, 31 have had to be at least partly closed off and 100 need to be replaced.


Composing Prize Awarded
LEAD: Jay Anthony Gach, born in New York in 1953, has won first prize in the first Frederick P. Rose Competition of the Brooklyn Philharmonic for new orchestral works by American composers.
Mr.
Gach won a cash award of $10,000 and a performance of his score, ''Chant,'' during the orchestra's 1988-89 season.


A WEEK THAT STARS THE AVANT-GARDE
LEAD: THE big musical event of the week is the six-day series of lectures, discussions and concerts that Wesleyan University is devoting to the avant-garde composer John Cage, who has turned 75 years old.


The Hull Story
LEAD: THE MYSTERY AT THE HEART of the yachting world's raging controversy is scheduled for unveiling March 27, when Michael Fay, a New Zealand investment banker, is to launch the boat with which he'll compete for the America's Cup in September.
The $3 million yacht is being built (above) near Auckland by Marten Marine Ltd.


Opera: At Juilliard, 'Beatrice and Benedict'
LEAD: BERLIOZ'S opera ''Beatrice and Benedict'' contains some of his most magical music, but with its rigorous demands for accomplished acting and singing and its musical complexity, it is rarely performed.
Thus one welcomed Friday evening's production by the Juilliard American Opera Center, especially in the confines of the city's best opera facility, the Juilliard Theater.


Cheap Dollars
LEAD: To the Editor:


From Fathers to Sons on the Waterfront
LEAD: ON RAW DAYS LIKE THIS, with the wind whipping off a hide-brown Hudson and his containers slick with snow, Joseph Benedetto Jr. is numb to everything but the four levers at his finger tips and the greasy square of asphalt 50 feet beneath him.
One distraction and whatever is in that 40-foot aluminum shipping crate he's lifting - shoes or whisky or computers - could slip out of his grasp and go crashing down on the men below.


'BLOOD BROTHERS,' NEW FROM BRITAIN
LEAD: ''BLOOD BROTHERS'' at the Downtown Cabaret Theater has the earmarks of a double event.
Here is the American premiere of a 1983 award-winning, long-running -and downbeat - British musical that can alienate and attract audiences, and what a bold step this is for a theater noted for unthreatening, familiar fare!


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 21, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-23


2 Arabs Killed in Clashes on West Bank
LEAD: Israeli security forces shot and killed two Palestinians, one of them a 12-year-old boy, in another day of protests today.
The shootings raised the death toll to at least 61 Palestinians in the 10 weeks of what Arabs are calling ''the uprising.''


U.S. 'COLONY' IS FEELING A BREEZE OF CHANGE
LEAD: OF all America's possessions, none has appeared more content with the relationship, at least in recent years, than the Virgin Islands.
But there are signs of change.


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  High Tech's Next Twist


Budget Called Bad for New York Area
LEAD: Legislators from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut say that President Reagan's $1.09 trillion budget calls for too many sacrifices from the region's cities, but that the most improvement they expect is revisions for several key programs.


THE ADVENT OF DO-IT-YOURSELF PRINTS
LEAD: THE longest lines at my friendly neighborhood film-processing lab aren't at the counter.
They're over in the corner where the self-service printing machine sits.
No matter that it may take 30 minutes to get to the front of the line, the appeal of while-you-wait prints is apparently too great to resist.


One Woman's Quest For a Hong Kong Suit
LEAD: IF you think having a suit made in Hong Kong, where the tourist association's booklet on shopping and restaurants lists 142 tailoring establishments, is easy, think again.
At least, if you have visions of a beautifully made, perfectly fitting suit with the construction, fit and hand-sewn touches that come only with custom work.


A MAY WEDDING FOR HILARY CURTIS
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew J. Connick of New York have announced the engagement of their niece, Hilary Whittaker Curtis, to William George Hartman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Hartman Jr. of Northbrook, Ill.
The couple plan to marry in May.


PRAGUE, WITH BALLOONS AND ANGELS
LEAD:  MY FIRST LOVES  By Ivan Klima.
Translated by Ewald Osers. 164 pp.
New York: Harper &amp; Row. $14.95.


SCHEDULE OF EVENTS AT MORRISTOWN FLOWER AND GARDEN SHOW
LEAD: Following is a schedule of events:  Saturday


Surprising DePaul Shocks St. John's
LEAD: St.
John's lost for the second time in three days last night, this time to a surprising DePaul team.


DR. G. J. RUTH IS WED TO ALYSE D. GORDON
LEAD: At the Lincoln Square Synagogue in New York, Alyse D. Gordon, the daughter of Philip Gordon of New York and the late Elizabeth P. Gordon, was married last night to Dr.
Gary J. Ruth, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Ruth of Auburn, Wash.
Rabbi Saul Berman, assisted by Cantor Sherwood Goffin, performed the ceremony.


SIKORSKY AIRPORT HOPES TO LOSE ITS ANONYMITY
LEAD: TO Morgan Kaolian, it is ''the best-kept secret in Fairfield County.'' Mr.
Kaolian is referring to Sikorsky Memorial Airport in Stratford, of which he is the manager.
Although it is within a half-hour's drive of anywhere in the county, the airport remains a little-known resource.


FICTION
LEAD:  PURSUED BY THE CROOKED MAN.
By Susan Trott. (Harper &amp; Row, $16.95.) You've heard of novels based on the Bible, Greek myths or even Arthurian legend; this may be one of the first inspired by Mother Goose.
But why not?
The heroine, Miliana Bartha, who is possessed of ''three children, one husband, two lovers, and a woman friend,'' has an inspiration while scrubbing the floor one day.


Anti-Government Protest in South Korea
LEAD: Demonstrators clashing with riot police after a rally yesterday in Seoul, South Korea.
About 500 anti-Government demonstrators protested the proposed changes in rules for electing members of the National Assembly.
Elections are scheduled for April.


Jazz: Irma Thomas
LEAD: IRMA THOMAS'S 47th birthday was celebrated during her early set Thursday at the Lone Star Cafe -much to the audience's, and apparently the singer's, surprise - when her fan club president brought a cake onstage.
Although Ms.
Thomas has been making records since 1958 and had a string of New Orleans rhythm-and-blues hits in the early 1960's, time has been on her side.


New Rochelle Condos: Boat Slips On the Creek
LEAD: Guy Blundon is not one to waste a waterfront.
Of the 16 apartments that compose the Davenport Slip condominium he is developing with his partner, Lenard Thylan, 12 will have stepped terraces and sliding glass walls facing New Rochelle Creek.
The four other apartments will have dockside views.
The creek, a stubby estuary off Long Island Sound in the New Rochelle, N.Y., is lined with marinas, making for lively viewing.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: There are certain inevitables in life and there is absolutely no point fighting them because it won't help.
The only good thing that can be said about them is that they're nondiscriminatory: they happen to everyone -maybe not every single one to every single person, but most of them to most people.


KELLY A. FREEHILL BECOMES A BRIDE
LEAD: Kelly Ann Freehill, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Bernardin Freehill of New York and Westhampton Beach, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael Carey Hoffman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Hoffman of Barker, N.Y.
Msgr.
Francis Boyle performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New


In Japan, Visitors Will Be a Little Less Alien
LEAD: Japan, often accused of xenophobia and sometimes with justification, took a small step this week to make visitors from abroad feel a bit less alien.


Czechoslovak Catholics Appealing for Rights
LEAD: More than 300,000 Czechoslovak Catholics have signed an appeal to their Government to guarantee the Roman Catholic Church fundamental rights, after the church leader threw the weight of his authority behind the petition.


Cy Young Winner Warms Up
LEAD: Roger Clemens of the Red Sox, recipient of the Cy Young Award the last two seasons, loosening up yesterday in Winter Haven, Fla. (AP)


THE RIGHT AGAINST REAGAN
LEAD: The conservative attempt to equate the INF treaty with the Chamberlain-Hitler Munich agreement distorts the historical record (''The Right Against Reagan,'' by Hedrick Smith, Jan. 17).


Soviet Agrees to Wider U.N. Talks on Iran Embargo
LEAD: The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council have taken a significant step toward imposing an arms embargo on Iran as part of their attempt to end the Persian Gulf war, according to diplomats involved in the negotiations.


Chariots of Poetry: Bards Pursue Olympics Gold, Too
LEAD: The three winners stood on the podium, their official Olympic medals hanging from their necks as the crowd cheered.


BEST SELLERS: FEBRUARY 21, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
16
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom
Wolfe. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.95.) A bond
trader caught in the jungles of New York.
2
2
13
THE TOMMYKNOCKERS, by Stephen King.


Q AND A
LEAD:  Fee-Simple Condo


MISS VAN BEUREN TO WED AN ARCHITECT
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John Archbold van Beuren of New York and Middletown, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Barbara van Beuren to Stephen L. Glascock, the son of William Van Dyke Glascock of Greenbrae, Calif., and Dr.
Jean Davison of San Anselmo, Calif.


Correction
LEAD: An item in the Record Notes column in Arts and Leisure on Feb. 7 incorrectly characterized New World Records.
It is a nonprofit organization, not a commercial company.


What Price U.S. Patrols In the Gulf?
LEAD: AMID conflicting calculations by officials over the cost of United States military operations in the Persian Gulf, it is clear that costs have risen and that little relief is in sight, despite the decision last week to reduce the naval force there slightly.


Not for Kids Only
LEAD: To the Editor:


A GREAT HOSPITAL IN CRISIS
LEAD: The authors purport to examine problems at New York Hospital by focusing on a few celebrated cases, but their own statistics do not support their allegations.
If the hospital admits roughly 40,000 patients a year, and 109 complaints have been registered in the last three years (with only 29 percent of those apparently justified), greater than 99 percent of the cases are handled without significant incident.


FLASHING THE FASHIONABLE METALLIC SMILE
LEAD: SOMETIMES it seems as if everyone is wearing them.
Braces are in, especially if you are 11 years old and attending junior high school.
There it is de rigueur to flash a metallic smile.
You can make your peace with not eating bagels and with spending time in the orthodontist's office, where, periodically, the doctor tightens your wires and decorates your mouth with rubber bands.


Jets Can Learn From Redskins
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


THE NATION: The Funds; How Much Does Money TAlk?
LEAD:  SENATOR KERRY. We had 11 new senators come in last time.


Arbitration: In Settlements, Size Counts
LEAD: What victory?


INTO EACH LIFE A LOT OF SNOW SHOULD FALL
LEAD: SNOWED IN!


A Compromise For Hall of Fame
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


AUSTRIANS DEBATING THE HIGH COST OF WALDHEIM
LEAD: THERE is an Austrian saying that seemed to sum up the mood here as the bitter dispute over Kurt Waldheim increasingly battered and divided his small nation: ''Better a horrible end than horror without end.''


In Guatemala, Growing Pessimism on Human Rights Issues
LEAD: In Guatemala, where thousands of people have died in political violence during the 1980's, human rights advocates have never been popular.
So the creation last year of an independent agency empowered to denounce any and all abuses aroused considerable curiosity and even some hope.


Not for Kids Only
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Israeli View
LEAD: TO BE AN ISRAELI THESE DAYS IS, for many of us, to live with the sense that our world has begun to crumble, that our deepest beliefs and most cherished dreams are being shattered.


HARRIS'S 'STEPPING OUT' AT THE MCCARTER THEATRE
LEAD: IN THE lobby of the McCarter Theatre here is a display of Fred Astaire accoutrements -a top hat, a straw hat, a white tie and all manner of cigarette holders - and photographs of his screen partners, mostly Judy Garland.


U.S. to Use Tortilla Packages To Send Amnesty Reminder
LEAD: The government is sending message in tortilla packages to remind illegal aliens about the deadline to apply for immigration amnesty.


Toxic Chemical Spill
LEAD: About 100,000 gallons of flammable toluene has spilled from a ruptured Sun Company pipeline into the Sandusky River near here, forcing the evacuation of about 5,000 people.
Mayor Fred Singer said today that those evacuated Wednesday and Thursday would be allowed to return home.


Correction
LEAD: A front-page article last Sunday about pressures faced by black police officers misidentified the department where Sgt.
Donald Jackson works.


HOW PARAGUAY'S GENERAL STILL KEEPS THE WORLD AT BAY
LEAD: THE official version was that, in a moving display of loyalty and enthusiasm, Paraguayans turned out en masse last Sunday to approve Gen.
Alfredo Stroessner's eighth successive presidential term.
No less predictably, opposition leaders, the Roman Catholic Church and foreign diplomats said the elections were too fraudulent to be taken seriously.


Murder Most Lunatic
LEAD:  NADINE  Starring Kim Basinger (in photo), Jeff Bridges (in photo), Rip Torn, Gwen Verdon, Glenne Headly and Jerry Stiller.
Directed by Robert Benton. 1987.
CBS/Fox Video. 82 minutes. $89.98.
Rated PG.


Rene Char, French Poet, 80, Dies
LEAD: Rene Char, called ''the greatest French poet of the 20th century'' by Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, died here Friday, according to the publishing company Gallimard.
He was 80 years old and lived in Paris.
Gallimard said Mr.
Char died at the Val-de-Grace military hospital.
No cause of death was given.


Does Meyerbeer Deserve His Years of Obscurity?
LEAD: Whatever hap-pened to Meyerbeer?


Electronic Watchdogs for Computers
LEAD: IN December, a computer enthusiast wreaked havoc at Lehigh University by programming a self-destruct code in personal computers on campus.
The prank, which affected an estimated 200 people, was a sobering reminder that computer-dependent executives are vulnerable both to careless leaks and intentional sabotage.


RULING THE JET SET
LEAD: William Safire refers to the phrase ''jet set'' as having ''first appeared in print in 1951 to describe the fashion-conscious group that used jet aircraft to take them to the world's watering spots in passionate pursuit of pleasure'' (On Language: ''Ruling the Jet Set,'' Jan. 24).


Two Soviets Take an Eye-Opening Historic Step
LEAD: George Balanchine was a complex man of firm convictions and deep contradictions.
Like many Russian emigres, he had a love-hate relationship with his native land and he could not abide the Communist regime.
Yet, he enthusiastically accepted its invitation to visit the Soviet Union twice and show off the fruit of his 60-year artistic endeavor abroad - the masterworks he had choreographed and the fabulous company, the New York City Ballet, that he had created and molded.


U.S. Industry's Unfinished Struggle
LEAD: THROUGHOUT the country, corporate chiefs are sounding paeans to American industry's rebound from the competitive doldrums.
In speeches, published papers and annual reports, they note how they have cut the fat out of management layers and divested businesses that did not fit in with overall corporate strategy.


STEAKHOUSE GOES BEYOND CLICHES
LEAD: BRYANT &amp; COOPER in Roslyn is a steakhouse with a difference.
Its dual personality will delight those who normally shun beef palaces.
But fear not, the red meat gang will definitely not be shut out.


No Headline
LEAD: Maria Walliser during downhill run of the women's combined.
She is in second place, with the slalom to be run today. (Reuters)


Correction
LEAD: An article Feb. 7 from Baghdad, Iraq, about an exiled Iranian opposition movement, the People's Mujahedeen, incorrectly gave the reason that Massoud Rajavi, the movement's leader, was jailed in 1971.
Mr.
Rajavi was in jail for revolutionary activity against the Shah, not for purportedly trying to abduct the American Ambassador in


An Iran-Iraq Peace Is Up to the U.N.
LEAD: ''If the Iran-Iraq war does not come to an end officially in 1988, it will at least be practically over.'' This judgment, so contrary to the prevailing image of the war as a conflict without end, was expressed several weeks ago not by an armchair observer from afar but by Crown Prince Abdallah of Saudi Arabia, who had just completed a round of consultations about the war in the major Arab capitals followed by a summit meeting of Arab Gulf states.


Pact to Save The Post Is Reached; Buyer Looks to Regain Advertisers
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch and 10 unions agreed early yesterday on $22 million in concessions to save The New York Post, and hours later plans were under way to rejuvenate the paper and win back readers and advertisers who have defected in recent months.


SoHo Marble
LEAD: To the Editor:


DRAWING THE LINE ON STUDENT RIGHTS: COMMUNITY VALUES ARE ESSENTIAL
LEAD: AS a former member of a Board of Education on Long Island, I believe that the recent Supreme Court decision upholding control of student publications should be supported.
I do not believe the decision to permit school boards and administrators to ban material deemed unsuited for publication is either a devastating blow to freedom of speech or ''the wrong civic lesson'' for teen-age students.


Crewman Dies, 16 Hurt in Fire Aboard a Train
LEAD: A smoky fire in a crew car aboard the Amtrak system's California Zephyr killed a crew member and injured 16 people early today, officials said.
Passengers said they had received no warning of any danger and had been given no help in getting off the train.


KATRIN NAELAPAA WEDS DOUGLAS B. MACLAURY
LEAD: At the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York, Katrin Kai Naelapaa, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Heino Naelapaa of Mexico City and Dallas, was married yesterday to Douglas Bartlett MacLaury, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. MacLaury of Titusville, N.J.
The Rev.
Kenneth O. Jones performed the ceremony.


'Looking Backward'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; What's the Best Winter Olympic Sport?
LEAD: When it comes down to Olympic tradition, the biathlon is the best Winter Olympic sport.
Cross-country skiers swiftly stride through the woods, pushing the limits of physical endurance, then immediately gain absolute control of mind, body and emotion to prove their marksmanship, with the clock ticking in the background.


A REWARDING PASSAGE TO INDIA
LEAD: A QUICK and delicious passage to India can be made enjoyably at a modest storefront restaurant named Bonani in Stamford.


MELANIE CZARRA TO MARRY EDWARD PANEK JR. IN JULY
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar F. Czarra Jr. of Potomac, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Melanie Anne Czarra to Edward Stephen Panek Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Panek of Westfield, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.


Down With Astrology
LEAD: To the Editor:


GIVE PRIVATE ENTERPRISE A CHANCE
LEAD: HIGHER gasoline taxes, rusting bridges, tainted water supplies, unending crusades to ''increase efficiency'' in government offices ''to better serve the public.'' All these result from our constant attempts to stretch government farther than its resources can reach.


Question Of the Week; What's the Best Winter Olympic Sport?
LEAD: Take the sublime natural ingredients -the mountain, the sky, the wind and the snow - add the requisite dash of danger, and you have uncovered the classic dish of the Winter Olympic feast: downhill skiing.
JACK PARL  Bayside, Queens


'Blunt Force' Is Cited in a Death in Police Custody
LEAD: ''Blunt force injuries'' inflicted in a struggle with the police contributed to a Brooklyn man's death in police custody last month, the New York Medical Examiner's office has said.


ANSWERING THE MAIL
LEAD: Q. I plan to remove the glass doors that now enclose our tub-shower.
However, the metal runner on the bottom of these doors is apparently cemented onto the top of the tub rim with some kind of grout.
I'm afraid that chipping and scraping might damage the finish on the tub.
Is there any way you know of to remove this grout more easily?


A LATIN REVIVAL TAKES THE STAGE AT JOHN JAY HIGH SCHOOL
LEAD: DOROTHY (DOBBIE) R. NICHOLLS loves the insults her classes hurl at her on exam days. ''Nos morituri te salutamus,'' they shout. (We who are about to die, salute you) and ''Dux femina facti.'' (The woman is the leader of the deed.) Mrs.
Nicholls is a teacher of Latin - the so-called dead language that this 43-year-old classics enthusiast has made the ''in'' language at Katonah's John Jay High School.


A TYRANNY OF CLOWNS
LEAD:  ANTHILLS OF THE SAVANNAH  By Chinua Achebe. 216 pp.
New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday. $16.95.


MISS PERA TO WED PETER D. SANDERS
LEAD: The Rev. and Mrs.
George A. Pera of Alexandria, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tracey Pera, to Peter David Sanders, a son of Prof. and Mrs.
David S. Sanders of Claremont, Calif.
A June wedding is planned.


NONFICTION
LEAD: Few Americans have suffered in such a curious manner from distorted public image as have those of Italian background.
The prejudices have been less harsh than those affecting other groups, but no less demeaning.
THE ITALIAN AMERICANS (Macmillan, $49.50), an account by Allon Schoener, a cultural historian, of Italian life in the United States in word and picture, is a more positive testimony to the nature and achievements of these remarkably vibrant people.


WAR-CRIME PLAY PARALLELS HISTORY
LEAD: WHAT makes a regional theater a viable artistic entity is its ability to reach out and challenge audiences with new, developing work.


C-SPAN: Electronic Sunshine
LEAD: Whatever else this presidential campaign is, it is the first in which candidates, prominent supporters and even bit players are now fully wired for sound.


Seat Belts For Trains?
LEAD: AFTER Amtrak's worst passenger train collision, in which 16 people were killed and 178 injured, John Riley, administrator of the Federal Railroad Administration, said he would seek comments from railroads on whether trains in the busy Northeast Corridor should have seat belts.


DANCING ON TOP OF THE WORLD
LEAD:  DOLPO  Hidden Land of the Himalayas.
Photographs by Eric Valli and Diane Summers.
Text by Diane Summers.
Unpaged.
New York: Aperture. $39.50.


Once a Candidate, Always a Candidate
LEAD: To the Editor:


Silence of American Jews Supports Wrong Side
LEAD: To the Editor:


French Arms Merchants
LEAD: To the Editor:


United States Braces For Showdown on Ice
LEAD: The players politely considered the question, which promoted the notion that the game between the United States and West Germany on Sunday night would be hockey's version of World War II.


Jazz: Saxophone, Doug White
LEAD: IN the 1950's and early 60's, after the focus of jazz had shifted from swing to be-bop and before it was buried by the arrival of the Beatles, the guitarist Joe Puma and the bassist Knobby Totah were in the forefront of jazz activity.
Mr.
Puma played with Artie Shaw, Louis Bellson and Lee Konitz and was accompanist to Peggy Lee in the 50's and to Morgana King in the 60's.


RYE RESIDENTS ORGANIZE EFFORT TO BLOCK PLANS FOR AVON SITE
LEAD: AVON Products, makers of women's cosmetics, has been the largest taxpayer in the city of Rye for many years.
Now more than 350 residents have organized in opposition to its expansion and are asking the city to block its plans for two office buildings.


AIDS PANEL WANTS WIDER DRUG TESTS
LEAD: Members of the President's AIDS commission said yesterday that they would strongly recommend greater use of neighborhood doctors and patients to test potential drug treatments for AIDS as a supplement to the government-sponsored tests at academic medical centers.


Joys of Banking
LEAD: An elderly lady stepped up to a teller's window in the Chemical Bank branch at 86th and Columbus the other day.
She unfolded scraps of paper, unearthed cards and finally asked for $200 in cash.


FORDHAM POUNDS FAIRFIELD
LEAD: Joe Paterno scored 18 points and Danny O'Sullivan had 15 as Fordham beat Fairfield, 80-65, yesterday in the Metro Atlantic Conference game at the Rose Hill Gymnasium in the Bronx.
The victory clinched a home-court advantage for the Rams in the first round of the league playoffs.


RONALD HODGE 2D BECOMES FIANCE OF MISS KREITLER
LEAD: Katherine Thayer Kreitler's engagement to Ronald Gray Hodge 2d, the son of Patricia Kues of Morehead City, N.C., and Ronald G. Hodge of Charlotte, N.C., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Hobart C. Kreitler of Southport, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.


Increasingly, Women Are Becoming Veterinarians
LEAD: For Dr.
Becky McCarthy, it was an ordinary day in the life of a country veterinarian, quite different from the dramatic emergencies depicted by James Herriot in his books and television shows.


Governors Take Aim at U.S. Strings That Come Without Money Attached
LEAD: On a side street in one of Philadelphia's poorest and meanest neighborhoods, there sits a vacant stone building that is about to be transformed into a residence for 25 homeless people.
It might serve as a minor monument to the way in which a meddling Federal Government, in the view of governors and mayors, often frustrates local efforts to address many of the nation's urgent domestic ills.


WEST BANK ENMITY TAKES ON THE MARKS OF PERMANENCE
LEAD: THE Department of Public Works announced plans the other day for some new roads on the occupied West Bank.


EMILY DUHAMEL PLANS TO BE WED TO M. C. BROWER
LEAD: Emily Ritchie DuHamel and Montgomery C. Brower, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brock H. Brower of Princeton, N.J., plan to marry in June, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Notley Y. DuHamel Jr. of Montclair, N.J., and Sakonnet, R.I., have announced.


WHAT'S DOING IN TUCSON
LEAD: With Tucson expanding to mountain ranges on all but its south side, it seems only natural that its cultural growth would take shape in its heart rather than on its sleeve.
In the last few years parts of the downtown area, largely abandoned by retail and business enterprises, have undergone a slow and somewhat hesitant rebirth.


LOBBYING GROUPS RATE WASHINGTON DELEGATION
LEAD: WASHINGTON


NANCY CAREY PLANS TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Nancy Elizabeth Carey to Alan P. Goldberg has been announced by Miss Carey's father, Hugh L. Carey, the former New York Governor.
Her fiance is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Theodore F. Goldberg of Swampscott, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.


Postings; Survey Shows Gains: Affordability
LEAD: Housing affordability is at its highest level in over 10 years nationwide, but fewer purchases are being made by first-time buyers, a survey by the National Association of Realtors shows.
It also indicates that those with incomes well over the median dominate the market.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  RAISING YOUR JEWISH/CHRISTIAN CHILD: Wise Choices for Interfaith Parents.
By Lee F. Gruzen. (Weber/Dodd, Mead, $16.95.) Lee Ferguson Gruzen is a Protestant married to Jordan Gruzen, a Jew.
Like all parents in mixed marriages, they had some important choices to make regarding the religious training of their children.


Stars Injured
LEAD: IT was billed as a battle of titans, but the 17,500 fans who jammed the Northlands Coliseum in Edmonton on Friday night didn't get to see much of the two high-scoring stars, Wayne Gretzky, the hometown favorite, and Mario Lemieux of the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins.


TENANTS CARRY THE PROPERTY TAX LOAD
LEAD: ALTHOUGH most New Yorkers live in apartment buildings, the city's property tax system displays a curious political tilt against them and in favor the minority of city dwellers who own one-, two- or three-family homes.


6 Indicted in Attack With Racial Overtone
LEAD: The reputed leader of a Chicago-area white supremacist group called the Skinheads and five others were indicted today for attacking a woman and drawing a swastika on her wall with her blood.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; 'Affordables' at the White Plains Station
LEAD: Downtown White Plains is getting something city officials have wanted for a long time - medium-priced condominiums in the midst of a half-dozen new, large office buildings near the railroad station.


Tropical Storm in Brazil Leaves at Least 65 Dead
LEAD: At least 65 people were killed and some 10,000 were left homeless when a tropical storm struck Rio de Janeiro Friday night, the authorities said today.


South Africa Jets Hit Namibia Guerrillas in Angola
LEAD: The South African Air Force struck two guerrilla bases in Angola today, after a bomb blast in South-West Africa on Friday that killed 18 people.


PAPAL AIDES CITE ORIGINS OF LETTER
LEAD: Pope John Paul II's encyclical letter condemning the superpower rivalry is a highly personal document that reflects his Polish heritage and is characteristically both blunt and meditative, according to senior Vatican officials.


Fixing Up: The Home Show
LEAD: Under the high glass ceiling of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, a complete house is being assembled, landscaped and decorated in preparation for the Greater New York Apartment &amp; Home Show.
It opens next Saturday for a run until March 6 and it promises many informative seminars and displays on ownership, management, renovation and decoration of a home, be it a rental apartment, a pied-a-terre condominium, a family-size co-op or a suburban ranch.


U.S. Skater Narrowly Misses Gold
LEAD: More than any of the other United States speed skaters, Eric Flaim has been hailed as a potential ''Eric Heiden of the future.'' And tonight, his future almost arrived.


HOW TO IMPROVE STATE'S SCHOOLING
LEAD: In his State of the State address, Governor Kean tried to increase or shift the level of mediocrity from one school area to another.


Photography
LEAD: ''The Return of the Hero'' is a group show that asks, then answers, the question: Does Lt.
Col.
Oliver North represent merely the tip of the iceberg when it comes to our current yearnings?
Apparently.
The 13 artists included - not all of them photographers, it should be said - seem to be in agreement that warrior-like appearance and behavior are definitely ''in'' in the late 80's.


Seven Are Reported Detained in Poland as Solidarity Tries to Meet
LEAD: The police have detained at least seven opposition leaders, apparently in an effort to prevent the outlawed trade union Solidarity from convening a meeting this weekend, opposition spokesmen said today.


BETSY WHITEHEAD MARRIED IN JERSEY TO D. F. SEATON 3D
LEAD: St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Essex Fells, N.J., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Elizabeth Margaret Whitehead, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David R. Whitehead of Essex Fells, to Donald Francis Seaton 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seaton Jr. of Mercer Island, Wash.
The Rev.
Dr.
David St.


The Changing World of Alcoholics Anonymous
LEAD: Adapted from ''Getting Better: Inside Alcoholics Anonymous,'' by Nan Robertson, to be published by William Morrow in April.


'BORN YESTERDAY' IS REBORN IN CHICAGO
LEAD: Chicago!
What a perilous, politically-blooded arena in which to revive ''Born Yesterday,'' Garson Kanin's 1945 play about governmental corruption in wartime Washington.
Fixes and graft have long been a form of street theater in Chicago; most citizens' knowledge of municipal deals darker than the century-old bricks of the Steppenwolf Theater building lies as deep in memory as their childhood prayers.


Clinton B.F. Brill, 94, Former Thruway Chief
LEAD: Clinton B. F. Brill, a civil engineer, architect and former chairman of the New York State Thruway Authority, died of a heart attack Feb. 9 at his home in Tallahassee, Fla.
He was 94 years old.


Shultz Stops in Finland
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz, center, and Lieut.
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, left, with President Mauno Koivisto in Helsinki.
Mr.
Shultz is to meet with Soviet leaders today in Moscow.
Page 3. (AP)


WHAT THEY'RE WEARING
LEAD: THE FASCINATION WITH FASHIONS PAT-terned after animal coats comes and goes.
This winter, however, it arrived full force.
Faux pelts have been spotted everywhere.
From skirts to handbags to slipcovers, everything appeared to be more desirable if it had leopards' spots or tigers' stripes.
These beasts' natural markings are carried out in complicated sequin embroideries; printed on silk, satin, denim or cotton, or stenciled on calfskin.


SHE'S THE TOP
LEAD: As a neighbor and friend of Patti LuPone, I remember that Patti was always bursting out with a song, even when she was a little girl (''She's the Top,'' by David Sacks, Jan. 24).
I would be outside, doing my weekend building.
She would be coming down the hill to play with my children.
She would see me and would sing, in her own style: ''Good morning, Mr.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Rhinos Elect The 'Spaceman'


Film, 'Koyaanisqatsi,' With Live Music
LEAD: Tickets go on sale tomorrow at the Beacon Theater, Broadway at 74th Street, for two screenings - on March 18 and 19 at 8 P.M. - of the film ''Koyaanisqatsi'' with live accompaniment by the Philip Glass Ensemble.


After the Primary Primaries
LEAD: Nouvelle Hampshire, The Washington Post called it, and the change can be seen in the old brick factory buildings in Manchester.
Forlorn eight years ago, they now gleam with electronics businesses.
Boutiques abound.
Parking spots do not.


Ex-Teacher Sues School at Harvard Over Tenure
LEAD: A former teacher has filed a lawsuit charging Harvard Business School with denying her tenure because she is a woman and with discrimination in hiring and admissions.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bay Shore  $210,000
51 Bayview Avenue
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, fireplace, sunporch, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
Brightwaters  $212,000
347 North Windsor Street
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; den, basement, fireplace, balcony; taxes $3,000.


Hrudey Gets 2d Shutout
LEAD: It is not every night that a goaltender comes away with a shutout, so Kelly Hrudey of the Islanders had something to celebrate tonight.


THOSE HANDY CLAMPS
LEAD: A MAXIM among woodworkers is that one can't have too many clamps.


Native American Literary History
LEAD: To the Editor:


PEGGY SULERZYSKI MARRIES
LEAD: Margaret D. Sulerzyski, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Sulerzyski of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Evan C. Jensen, the son of Margit Jensen of Monroe, N.Y., and the late Einer Jensen.
The Rev.
Johnnie Nystrom, a Lutheran minister, officiated at the Terrace Restaurant in Manhattan.
The bride, known as Peggy, is a vice president and the director of financial analysis and budgeting for Shearson Lehman Hutton in New York.


NAVY ASKS TO RESTRICT ACCESS TO SHIP BASE
LEAD: THE United States Navy wants to impose a restricted zone across the entire width of the Thames River from Groton to Waterford, encompassing about 200 acres.


KATHRYN O'NEILL TO MARRY WRITER
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. O'Neill of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagment of their daughter Kathryn Mary O'Neill to Nicholas C. Katz, the son of Carol Cambas of New York and Sanford M. Katz of New York and East Hampton, L.I.


'JOURNALISM STINKS,' HE TELLS HER
LEAD:  FAMILY BUSINESS  By Anna Murdoch. 592 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.95.


KAREN LESSALL WEINER TO WED CHARLES GOSS
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen A. Weiner of Sands Point, L.I., of the engagement of their daughter, Karen Lessall Weiner, to Charles A. Goss, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert E. Goss of Piscataway, N.J.


FRENCH ACCENT, L.A. LIGHT
LEAD: CITRUS IS THE SAME IN French and English, conjuring up images of freshness, lightness and zesty flavor.
The year-old restaurant named Citrus in Los Angeles blends French and American cuisines to produce lively and remarkably healthful dishes.


RETRIALS IN MURDER OF SUFFOLK BOY RAISING CRIMINAL-JUSTICE QUESTIONS
LEAD: JOHN PIUS JR. was 13 years old on the night of April 20, 1979, when he was killed in one of the most shocking crimes in Long Island history.
When his body was found the following afternoon, it was buried under a pile of logs and leaves in the woods near a Smithtown schoolyard with six rocks stuffed down his throat.


A GURU ON THE RAMPARTS
LEAD:  TO DWELL IN PEACE  An Autobiography.
By Daniel Berrigan.
Illustrated. 356 pp.
San Francisco: Harper &amp; Row. $19.95.


Concert: Jonathan Haas Puts Timpani Out Front
LEAD: WITHIN the fatness of the symphony orchestra there are always a few thinner soloists longing to get out.
Some instruments do it better than others, the timpani not so well at all.
Yet Jonathan Haas - who plays with the New York Chamber Symphony, at the Aspen Festival, and with a number of smaller groups around New York - has persisted, and surrounded by colleagues, he gave a recital at the 92d Street Y on


THEM AS HAS
LEAD:  THE FOUNDING FORTUNES  A New Anatomy of the Super-Rich Families in America.
By Michael Patrick Allen. 438 pp.
New York: Truman Talley Books/ E. P. Dutton. $22.50.


Last-Place Rangers Struggle
LEAD: James Patrick, who had the misfortune of playing many of the 60 humiliating minutes against the Devils the night before, sat with his head in his hands and his back, appropriately, against the wall.


Silence of American Jews Supports the Wrong Side; Blue and White Cans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dance
LEAD: Dancing is an exhausting profession, and one that leaves little time or resources for providing for an unforeseen problem.
Sunday night the New York City Ballet closes its winter season at the New York State Theater with the Dancers' Emergency Fund Benefit.
Instituted three years ago, the benefit raises money that is used to help resolve sudden crises in the lives of the dancers who bring the City Ballet repertory to life season after season.


THOSE HANDY CLAMPS
LEAD: A MAXIM among woodworkers is that one can't have too many clamps.


GOOD JOURNALISM FOR STUDENTS EXTOLLED
LEAD: In response to Kim Jenkins's Jan. 31 Opinion Page article ''First Amendment: Is It Just for Adults?'':


GABRIEL MARQUEZ ON LOVE, PLAGUES AND POLITICS
LEAD: Gabriel Garcia Marquez is about to publish ''Love in the Time of Cholera,'' a work he calls a novel of manners: the story of two people whose love, thwarted in their youth, finally flourishes when they are close to 80.


A Serene Place To Work, Not a Corporate Spaceship
LEAD: It is a common conceit to de-scribe architecture in terms created for sound - there are buildings that are shrill, and others that are cacophonous.


Contributions To Neediest Used All Year
LEAD: Apologizing for being late, Stuart Price of Manhattan sent $50 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, with the request that his contribution be used to help someone with AIDS.


Mark of Champion
LEAD: It apparently takes more than a broken nose to stop Larry Bird.
Two days after breaking his nose and leaving the game with only 13 points in a Celtic loss to the Denver Nuggets, Bird returned to the Boston lineup for a game against the Trail Blazers in Portland on Friday night, and as near as anyone could tell, the injury did not hamper his play.


Lights! Camera! Easel!
LEAD: What do Edward G. Robinson, Alec Guinness, Daryl Hannah and Dick Van Dyke have in common?
Apart from being artists in the entertainment sense, they have also played artists in the artistic sense.
And as Hollywood and the New York art world move closer together in the 1980's - with their star systems, the big prices and instant fame that awaits hot new discoveries - Hollywood has started to take the art world seriously (or humorously, as the case may be).


The Safest Technique Is to Be Discreet
LEAD: IN October, a chief executive was horrified when his company's confidential boardroom deliberations hit the newspapers.
He called in Corporate Loss Prevention Associates Ltd., whose technicians turned up a bug in the telephone switching equipment.


Pagnol, From the Source
LEAD: More than a decade after the death of Marcel Pagnol, the international triumph of ''Jean de Florette'' and ''Manon des Sources'' introduced millions of people to Pagnol's Provence - as distinctive and enduring a terrain of the imagination as William Faulkner's Yoknapatawpha County.
Contemporary audiences could be pardoned for believing that these picturesquely colored views of Yves Montand making mischief in the arid hills of the Midi - so scrupulously orchestrated by the director Claude Berri - were indeed the real thing.


UNION MAVERICK: Charles E. Bryan; A Struggle Over the Fate of Eastern Airlines
LEAD: SEVERAL days after Frank Lorenzo took control of Eastern Airlines in 1986, Charles E. Bryan, the head of the company's 13,000-member machinists union, sent him a welcoming telegram expressing interest in working together to strengthen the company.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday with an article on the Stay in School Partnership Program misidentified the school where William Ford teaches.
It is John Burroughs Junior High School in Yonkers.


Question Of the Week; What's the Best Winter Olympic Sport?
LEAD: I'm not tremendously educated in the art of figure skating, but I enjoy what I see.
The beauty and physical efficiency of the competitors, the graceful and sophisticated movements, the poise, the confidence, the acrobatic ability that is exhibited is what provides for the most glamorous, yet most difficult of the winter sports events.


Black Whose Death Penalty Was Overturned Is Convicted
LEAD: A black teen-ager sentenced to death at the age of 15 was convicted today of murder in a retrial brought after the state Supreme Court overturned his original conviction by an all-white jury.
The prosecutor said he would not seek the death penalty again.


Japan Seeks Stake In American Tires
LEAD: Bridgestone Tire agreed to pay $1 billion for 75 percent of Firestone in what is believed to be the largest Japanese investment yet in an American manufacturer.
Firestone is the nation's third-largest tire maker, with $2.6 billion of tire sales annually.
But after the deal, its largest business will be 1,500 retail stores that sell tires and other automotive goods and services.


Seton Hall Overcomes B.C.
LEAD: Seton Hall did not try to disguise its intentions against Boston College today.
The Pirates wanted to work the ball inside to Mark Bryant, stop Dana Barros and earn a Big East Conference victory.


LIZA MELTZER PLANS TO WED JOHN FIXX
LEAD: The engagement of Liza Meltzer to John Durling Fixx, a son of Mary Durling Fixx of Oberlin, Ohio, and the late James F. Fixx, has been made known by Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Meltzer of Rochester, the parents of the bride-to-be.
A July wedding is planned.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  RICHARD KENNEDY:  Collected Stories.
Illustrated by Marcia Sewell. 270 pp.
New York: Harper &amp; Row. $14.95. (Ages 6 to 11)


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  The Big Easy  Starring Dennis Quaid, Ellen Barkin, Ned Beatty, Ebbe Roe Smith, Marc Lawrence, John Goodman, Lisa Jane Persky, Charles Ludlam.
Directed by Jim McBride. 1987.
HBO Video. 100 minutes. $89.95.
Rated R.


OLD MACDUFFERS
LEAD: FOR the last century, a ''royal and ancient game'' has been capturing a new land -winning the hearts of a new nation of ''duffers'' and ''pro's,'' threatening church attendance and nonplaying spouses.


COMMUTER TAX: THE JOKE'S ON KOCH
LEAD: Rural life may be a ''joke'' to Ed Koch and the suburbs a ''sterile'' place to dwell, but if the Mayor believes he's about to double the city income tax for commuters, he has another guess coming.


The Judges' Subjective Yardsticks
LEAD: In a world of triple axels, double toe loops, death spirals and sit spins, clocks and yardsticks have no place.


Perspectives: Times Square; A Major Mall in a Broadway Building
LEAD: As large new construction projects move forward on Broadway in the Times Square area, the main unanswered question, amid all the concern over design and scale, is who will occupy the buildings.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE DOUGLAS LETTERS:


Shultz Plans Arms Focus in Moscow
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that he and Soviet leaders would try to ''energize'' their sluggish negotiations on a strategic arms treaty when he holds talks in Moscow Sunday and Monday.
But he cautioned against expecting any breakthroughs.


Family of Mexicans Wins 3-Year Fight To Stay in the U.S.
LEAD: A Mexican family living in Leicester has won a three-year fight to stay in the United States.


Food Inspection Results
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 22 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


About Men; Rights and Choices
LEAD: WHAT CAN A MAN do when the woman carrying the child they both deliberately created has a change of heart?
What can a man do when the woman he loves wants an abortion and he passionately does not?


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: Demand Still Outpaces Room In Soviet Hotels


NEWARK RESIDENTS LOSE FIGHT TO BAN INCINERATOR
LEAD: AS MORE than 100 demonstrators protested, ground was broken last week on Blanchard Street, in the city's Ironbound section, for Essex County's resource-recovery plant.


Sunday Observer; Just for the Record. . .
LEAD: THERE'S TOO MUCH record-breaking going on.
You can't pick up a newspaper or turn on the television any more without discovering a half dozen incredibly uninteresting new records have been set overnight.


INSIDE
LEAD:  2 More Killed in West Bank


Mexican Owner Sells Control of U.P.I.
LEAD: Mario Vazquez Rana, the Mexican publisher who has owned United Press International since 1986, announced Friday that he had sold the right to operate the news service to an investment group associated with Financial News Network, a cable television service.


FOR WINTER READING
LEAD: WEATHER permitting, this is a good season to prune dormant trees especially young apples and pears to strengthen them, but wait until after flowering to prune stone fruits such as peaches, nectarines and cherries.
Grapevines are pruned any time this month and next.
Arrange for tree pruning by arborists if shade or specimen trees have grown too thick and tall or have been weakened by ice or snow storms.


Question Of the Week; What's the Best Winter Olympic Sport?
LEAD: Only ice hockey requires the molding of 18 to 20 individuals into a competitive team.
Moreover, there is a uniqueness in the contrasting styles of play among the Europeans, Canadians and Americans.
And the unpredictable nature of the Olympic ice-hockey tournament adds to the sport's premier status in the Winter Games.


As Greek Cypriots Vote, Reunion Is the Hope
LEAD: As Cyprus prepares for a presidential runoff election on Sunday, the result is far from clear, but the problem that will confront the winner is evident: how to revive efforts to reconcile and reunite the island's Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities.


A GREAT HOSPITAL IN CRISIS
LEAD: Nine years ago, I graduated with the last class of the Cornell University-New York Hospital School of Nursing, one of the very few nursing schools for college graduates seeking a Bachelor of Science degree in nursing (''A Great Hospital in Crisis,'' by M. A. Farber and Lawrence K. Altman, Jan. 24).


They Are Not Non-Persons
LEAD: Some legislators and citizens, and the states of Kansas and Pennsylvania, have brought a suit demanding that illegal aliens not be counted when Congress redistricts after the 1990 Census.
They claim that undocumented aliens in states like New York and California will skew the results and perhaps cost their states a House seat.


AMERICAN COMPANY AND SOVIET AGREE ON SPACE VENTURE
LEAD: For the first time an American company has contracted to have the Soviet Union carry Western commercial payloads into orbit.
The agreement is likely to spur similar moves by other companies, Federal officials said.


Binoculars
LEAD: To the Editor: ''Gifts of Gear and Gadgets'' (Practical Traveler, Nov. 22) by Betsy Wade contains information about the type of binoculars to buy, but there are no specifics on manufacturers, magnification, field, etc.
The price is given as being in the ''several hundred dollar'' range.


Discrimination and the New York Job Market
LEAD: To the Editor:


DATA UPDATE: February 21, 1988
LEAD:  BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Dec. 87
Nov. 87
Dec. 86
New York
3,636
4,215
4,961
New Jersey
3,711
4,161
5,338
Connecticut
1,733
1,918 1,784
(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)  MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago


MERYL JUSTIN PLANS TO WED
LEAD: The engagement of Meryl Sali Justin to Michael Chertoff, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gershon B. Chertoff of Elizabeth, N.J., has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Joshua I. Justin of New York, the future bride's parents.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Justin, an associate in the New York law firm of Schoeman, Marsh, Updike &amp; Welt, graduated from Harvard University and the Harvard Law School.


Kalikow to Solicit New Advertisrs
LEAD: Yesterday's agreement between Rupert Murdoch and the unions at The New York Post sets the stage for another attempt to do what newspaper professionals have long said cannot be done: turn a long-term profit at The Post.


Save a Spot for Amateurs in the Olympics
LEAD: Two weeks before my scheduled participation in the Olympics, perhaps the ultimate dream of every athlete, I was abruptly awoken.
I discovered I was being replaced on the United States bobsled team by a well-known professional football player, Willie Gault of the Chicago Bears.


DRIED FRUITS CAN BRIGHTEN DESSERTS
LEAD: IF you are looking for new ideas for winter desserts, consider dried fruits.
They are at their best during the winter and are a fine alternative to expensive tropical or out-of-season fresh fruit.
You can now get prunes, dried apple rings, apricots, pears, peaches and figs, mostly from California, good enough to eat straight from the package.


H. P. HAVELES JR. WEDS MISS KENT IN MASSACHUSETTS
LEAD: At St.
Paul's Roman Catholic Church in Hingham, Mass., Elisabeth Anne Kent, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. Kent of Hingham, was married yesterday to H. Peter Haveles Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry P. Haveles of Brookline, Mass.
The Rev.
Nicholas Morcone performed the ceremony.


Mildred Seydell; Journalist, 98
LEAD: Mildred Seydell, a journalist who interviewed Mussolini and covered the Scopes trial, died today.
She was 98 years old.


Invitation to a Dance
LEAD: DRIVING along the paved road to Kah-Nee-Ta Lodge at noon on Sundays from May to September, visitors are likely to be caught in a parade of cars, vans and pickups holding American Indian families that have come to dance.
Watching them arrive and settle themselves may be the best introduction to the pleasures of this Indian-owned resort on the Warm Springs Reservation about 60 miles northeast of Bend,


WHY THE COURSE OF AIDS IS DEFYING AFRICA'S PRECEDENT
LEAD: HAVING finally persuaded much of the public that the United States is on the verge of a heterosexual AIDS pandemic, health officials are suddenly reversing their prognosis.
For months, a growing volume of statistics has been showing that HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, is not moving rapidly through the population after all.


54 Economists Back Rise in Minimum Wage
LEAD: Fifty-four economists told Congress today that raising the minimum wage would have little adverse effect on the economy.


BUSINESS FORUM: Are Corporations Less Charitable?; Not Selfish, Sophisticated
LEAD: LAST fall, as the drop in the stock market rattled the financial community, another kind of business downturn spread panic among nonprofit organizations.
The news was that after 15 boom years, corporate philanthropy was about to enter a period of decline.


ROBIN MARIE PUGH, LAWYER, IS MARRIED TO W. G. FILMYER JR., MEDICAL STUDENT
LEAD: At Corpus Christi Roman Catholic Church in New York, Robin Marie Pugh was married yesterday to William George Filmyer Jr. by Msgr.
Myles M. Bourke.
Susannah Pomeroy Scannell and Elizabeth Cancian Rust were the maid and the matron of honor.
Milton Webster Anderson was the best man.


RUMANIA AND HUNGARY LET WAR OF WORDS SLIP OUT
LEAD: Relations between Hungary and Rumania, neighbors and allies in the Warsaw Pact, have worsened to such a degree that they now speak to and about each other only in accusation.


Street Fashion; Snapping Out of the Winter Blahs
LEAD: THERE are many ways to fight the winter blahs, like flying to the Caribbean or to Tahiti, or livening up an outfit with a snappy hat or a flashy accessory.
The latter solution may not be as relaxing as the others, but it's cheaper and will also cheer up other poor souls who can't get away from the land of icy gusts.


U.N. Cuts Lebanon Relief
LEAD: Relief services for about 260,000 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon will be cut to the minimum because the kidnapping of two employees of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency have raised fears over staff safety, the agency said today.
The two employees - Jan Stening, 44 years old, of Sweden, and William Jorgensen, 58, of Norway - were kidnapped Feb.


China
LEAD: To the Editor: Thank you for the informative article by Ross Terrill on his visit to the Liangshan Yi Autonomous Region in China (Travel, Dec. 20).
However, I take exception to a couple of comments the author seems to have accepted at face value from Han Chinese informants.


The Cost of Caring for Elderly Parents
LEAD: AS the baby-boom generation grows older, more children are contributing to the support of their aging parents and looking to basic tax devices to reduce their costs.


RULING THE JET SET
LEAD: In his article, William Safire describes members of the upper class as ''those to the manor born.'' The original phrase, from ''Hamlet'' (Act I, Scene 4), contains, instead, the homophonous manner, and the connotation is quite different.
When Hamlet says ''. . . though I am native here/ And to the manner born .


Missing Out
LEAD: When Dan Jansen fell, it was not from grace.
Last week, hours before he was to compete in the first of two Olympic speed-skating events in which he had high hopes of winning medals, Jansen got word that his sister, Jane Jansen Beres, had died of leukemia.
He was noticeably distraught as he started the 500-meter finals, and tumbled to the ice in the first turn.


Riboud's Lens Is Connected to the Heart
LEAD: ''I owe Cartier-Bresson every-thing.
I learned from him the supreme importance of geometry -the relationship of abstract shapes within a frame,'' says Marc Riboud.
And it was Cartier-Bresson who inspired him with ''the idea of the 'decisive movement,' that instant seized on film which reveals a visual order in the chaos of reality.


I.B.M. Puts Its Cards on the Table
LEAD: NEWLY restructured, hungry and aggressive, I.B.M. is preparing a barrage of new products for its Personal System/2 line of microcomputers.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: After a year as a relief pitcher with the Boston Red Sox, Joe Sambito wants to make a new start with his original major league team, the Houston Astros.
The Astros said that Sambito, who broke in with the club in 1976, would attend training camp as a nonroster player. . . .
Leslie Frazier, a cornerback for the Chicago Bears during the 1985 season, when they won the Super Bowl, has been named the head football coach at Trinity College in Deerfield, Ill., when it fields its first football team since its 1887 founding.


For the Schools: Next Things Next
LEAD: Governor Cuomo has, surprisingly soon, stopped pushing to restructure New York City's Board of Education.
He thinks that current tensions between the Legislature and Mayor Koch make this an inopportune time to press for giving the Mayor control of the central school board.


A CHILD IN AUSCHWITZ
LEAD:  GUNS AND BARBED WIRE  A Child Survives the Holocaust.
By Thomas Geve.
Illustrated. 220 pp.
Illinois: Academy Chicago. $18.95.


VERONICA FIELDING TO MARRY
LEAD: Veronica Lee Fielding and William Charles Petzinger Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Petzinger of Toms River, N.J., plan to marry in April, the future bride's mother, Florence Fielding of South Toms River, N.J., has announced.
Miss Fielding, also the daughter of the late Robert Fielding, is the manager of marketing in the news retrieval division of the Dow Jones Company in Princeton, N.J.


Commercial Property: Downtown Offices; Nonfinancial Firms Fail to Fill Growing Vacancies
LEAD: Shrinking banks and brokerage houses are creating a void in the downtown office market that stronger sectors of the Manhattan economy will offset only marginally in coming years.


Missing Ingredient
LEAD: Deregulation aside, the folks in Washington still insist that a product labeled ''apple juice'' have something in it that came from apples.
Federal prosecutors charged that for several years, executives at the Beech-Nut Nutrition Corporation deliberately ignored such standards and sold as pure apple juice intended for babies a concoction derived mainly from beet sugar and sugar cane syrup.


True Champion Is Recalled
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


BOOT CAMP FOR DELINQUENTS
LEAD:  CASTAWAYS  The Penikese Island Experiment.
By George Cadwalader. 193 pp.
Chelsea, Vt.: Chelsea Green Publishing Company. $17.95.


IF OLD SONGS DON'T FIT, DON'T SING THEM
LEAD: ''What would you like to hear?''


A JUNE WEDDING FOR LAURI LOWELL
LEAD: Lauri Jan Lowell, a daughter of Vivian Lowell of New York and Stanley H. Lowell of Scarsdale, N.Y., and New York, and Isaiah David Cooper plan to marry in June.
The future bridegroom is a son of Florence Cooper of Middletown, N.Y., and the late Paul H. Cooper.


A Rationing of Resources To Handle Super Tuesday
LEAD: With 20 states and American Samoa holding Democratic primaries or caucuses on March 8, and 17 states having Republican contests, it sounds as if there will be 38 separate elections.


Jansen Plans To Continue
LEAD: Dan Jansen said today that he planned to compete in two more international events this season.
Jansen, 22 years old, spoke after the funeral for his sister, Jane Beres, 27, who died of leukemia last Sunday, hours before he competed in the men's 500-meter speed-skating race at the Olympics.


MS. KUEHN AND BANKER WED AT MANHATTANVILLE
LEAD: Stephanie Louise Kuehn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernd Percy Kuehn of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Westerly, R.I., was married in Purchase, N.Y., yesterday to Hans Christoph Vitzthum von Eckstadt 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vitzthum von Eckstadt 3d of New York; Jacksonville, Vt., and Bailleul, France.
The Rev.


HOLOCAUST CENTER: ISSUE OF PRINCIPLE
LEAD: THE fight to remain open in a residential Woodmere community has become more than a zoning issue for the Life Center for Holocaust Studies.
It is a matter of principle and recognition that the study of the Holocaust cannot be separated from the Jewish religion, according to Rabbi Benjamin Kamenetzky.


SENATORS SEEK ABOLITION OF STATE LIQUOR AGENCY
LEAD: THE Commissioner of the State Department of Revenue Services, Timothy F. Bannon, said last week that he was reserving judgment on a proposal to abolish the State Liquor Control Commission and transfer its responsibilities to his department.


The Random House Dictionary
LEAD: To the Editor:


MISS UNTERBERGER WEDS R. D. FINE
LEAD: The marriage of Susan Marcia Unterberger, a daughter of Mrs.
Leon Orsher of Philadelphia, and the late Dr.
Herbert Unterberger, to Robert David Fine, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred M. Fine of Providence, R.I., took place last evening.
Rabbi Theodore Gordon performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in


BRIAN J. MAYER IS ENGAGED TO WED SUZANNE HERZBERG
LEAD: The engagement of Suzanne Ruth Herzberg to Brian J. Mayer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Mayer of Fairfield, Conn., has been announced by Dr. and Mrs.
Walter J. Herzberg of Fair Lawn, N.J., parents of the future bride.
A June wedding is planned.


Allisons Thrive on Respect
LEAD: Joyful anticipation, tinged with perhaps a touch of anxiety, showed on the face of Judy Allison last Sunday as the final laps of the Daytona 500 unwound.
Her husband, 50-year-old Bobby, and son, 26-year-old Davey, were leading the pack on the mad dash for the checkered flag.


BEYOND THE CHANCELLOR'S HONEYMOON
LEAD: DR.
Richard R. Green, who will become New York City's Schools Chancellor on March 1, is preparing for what is likely to be a brief honeymoon in an environment that has been notoriously unfriendly to outsiders.
But he made it clear in an interview last week that without underestimating the difficulty of attempting to reform a system widely considered enormously resistant to change, he feels ready to take on any forces that might think of him as an easily manipulated newcomer.


Paying Damages For a Lynching
LEAD: IT WAS a year ago this month that a Federal jury in Mobile, Ala., decided that when Ku Klux Klansmen commit violence, not only they - but the group to which they belong - can be held liable for damages.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bradford, Conn.  $235,000
26 Riverside Drive
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; landscaping, near river, 0.5 acre; taxes $1,274.
Clinton, Conn.  $142,000
10 Hurdbridge Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old Cape Cod; in-law apartment, pool, 0.50 acre; taxes $1,199.


Arbitration Season Ends
LEAD: After starting slowly, players in salary arbitration finished with a flourish, winning two of the last three cases and five of the last eight.
In the final decisions yesterday, Bob Boone of California and Mark Thurmond of Detroit won, and Tim Burke of Montreal lost.


NEW GROUP OF THE UNEMPLOYED EMERGES
LEAD: FOR 33 years the Senior Personnel Employment Council of Westchester has offered a no-fee employment service for workers older than 55.
The first organization of its type in the nation, it has been replicated many times.
The key ''plus'' that the council offers to workers is the absence of any discrimination because of age: employers list jobs with the full knowledge that we on the council deal only with workers 55 and older.


The Random House Dictionary Down With Astrology
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Britain, Many In the Arts Say Profit and Loss Has Replaced Beauty and Truth
LEAD: After more than eight years, Britain's artists, actors and writers show few signs of being won over by Margaret Thatcher.
Some of their deep-seated animosity toward her recently surfaced publicly as a cultural debate.
A few weeks ago The Sunday Telegraph ran a prominent article that asked the question: Why do the intelligentsia hate her so much?


Music
LEAD: The Lower East Side is still home to some of the most creative rock-and-roll groups in the country.
The area that fostered Blondie, Velvet Underground and Television supports groups that push rock forms to their limits.
The music often winds its way in and around political lyrics; just as often, pop-styled songs with user-friendly melodies grab listeners' attention, only to hit them with odd-angled rhythms, subversive lyrics and crooked harmonies.


Atlantic Record Sought for Speedboats
LEAD: The 150-year-old Blue Riband, a trans-Atlantic speed title claimed two years ago by a powerboat team from Britain, is expected to generate two more multimillion-dollar record attempts this June.


YESTERDAY'S MEDAL WINNERS
LEAD:  Biathlon: Men's 20 km  Gold: Frank-Peter Roetsch, East Germany  Silver: Valeri Medvedtsev, Soviet Union  Bronze: Johann Passler, Italy  Figure Skating: Men  Gold: Brian Boitano, United States  Silver: Brian Orser, Canada  Bronze: Viktor Petrenko, Soviet Union  Speed Skating: Men's 1500 meters


CLASSICAL MUSIC'S FUTURE
LEAD: To the Editor:


To Stay Undercover on Road, F.B.I. Has Bought 5 Toyotas
LEAD: In a departure from longstanding Government policy, a Federal agency has bought five foreign automobiles for use in this country, prompting an outcry from political, industry and labor leaders.


The Coarse and the Sacred Are Fused in Shadow Plays
LEAD: ''When I was a kid,'' the Balinese shadow puppeteer I Nyoman Sumandhi says, ''I loved to play with puppets - but not real ones, just a special kind of leaf.
My father and my grandfather didn't let me play with their puppets, because we call the puppet a kind of sacred thing.''


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Highland Park  $212,000
135 Amherst Street
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 48-year-old colonial; finished basement, 2-zone heating, patio, fenced yard; taxes $2,738.
Howell  $207,000
25 Rimwood Avenue
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; deck, w/w carpeting, pool; taxes $2,751.


Little Washington
LEAD: To the Editor: William L. Tazewell's article, ''A Washington Outside the Beltway'' (Travel, Dec. 27), was read with delight at the recognition the Inn at Little Washington received.
I, too, have been a guest there and thought of it as my little secret.


Preparing for Nepal's Rugged Reality
LEAD: I STOOD before the courtyard of the great Buddhist monastery at Tengboche in Nepal; the festival of Mani-Rimdu was about to begin.
First there were long blasts on the conch shells - an unearthly sound.
Then a procession of monks dressed in robes of deep red, over tunics of yellow, apricot and orange, began to wind around the courtyard.


Japan's Alps: A Refuge for Everyone
LEAD: JAPAN and megalopolis are synonymous in the minds of many travelers, but more Americans are discovering a Japan of mountain wilderness that is accessible to the adventurous visitor.
Most itineraries emphasize visits to shrines, temples and sushi bars, so it can be startling to learn that you can go hiking in the Japanese Alps.


Going to Jerusalem
LEAD: Secretary of State Shultz had the idea years ago of improving the ''quality of life'' of Palestinians under Israeli occupation in the West Bank and Gaza.
By that he meant easing Israel's restrictions on their lives and commerce, building a degree of mutual confidence.


Micro-loans to the World's Poorest
LEAD: WITH the help of 5 of her 12 children and a son-in-law, Maria Alfonsa Lopez braids rope in La Colonia Independencia, one of the western hill barrios of Tegucigalpa, Honduras.
It is an occupation her family has pursued for generations.


Killer Tells of Requests for His Help in Crimes
LEAD: John Wayne Hearn, a convicted murderer whose classified advertisement in Soldier of Fortune magazine led to a suit against the publication, says most of the people who answered the ad were seeking help in crimes like bombings, assaults, jailbreaks and murders.


More Than the White House Is Up for Grabs
LEAD: THOUGH voting in the Presidential primary contest is just beginning, the candidates' scramble has long been under way.
But members of Congress also have long been engaged in the enterprise that will preoccupy most of them until Election Day - campaigning for re-election and the election of others in their own party.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: FEBRUARY 21, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
DESTINY, by Sally Beauman. (Bantam, $4.95.)
The 30-year romance of a couple with diverse
backgrounds and ambitions.
2
4
OUTBREAK, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.)
Tracking down a deadly disease that
ophthalmologists pass on to their patients.


Democratic Group Said to Agree on $25 Million Package of Aid for Contras
LEAD: A task force of 15 House Democrats representing liberal, moderate and conservative wings of the party has tentatively agreed on a $25 million aid package for the Nicaraguan rebels, according to Congressional aides.
Jim Wright, the House Speaker, hopes to bring the proposal to the House floor for a vote on


DRIED FRUITS CAN BRIGHTEN DESSERTS
LEAD: IF you are looking for new ideas for winter desserts, consider dried fruits.
They are at their best during the winter and are a fine alternative to expensive tropical or out-of-season fresh fruit.
You can now get prunes, dried apple rings, apricots, pears, peaches and figs, mostly from California, good enough to eat straight from the package.


A GREAT HOSPITAL IN CRISIS
LEAD: On Feb. 20, 1983, my 25-year-old daughter died at New York Hospital.
I was convinced that her death was the result of gross negligence on the hospital's part, and sought a reasonable explanation.
Instead of receiving sympathy and cooperation, I was stonewalled by administrators and doctors alike.
Eventually, I felt


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.55
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.33
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.76
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
11.07
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
13.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
18.25


AMANDA ZINSSER PLANS TO WED JAMES MOFFAT
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Zinsser Jr. of New York and West Cornwall, Conn., have announced the engagement of Mr.
Zinsser's daughter Amanda Locke Zinsser to James Matthews Moffat, the son of Mrs.
Daniel G. Quigley of Bedford, N.Y., and John Moffat of Cooperstown, N.Y.
An April wedding is planned.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  HOUSE TOURS


N.Y.U. Names Vryonis Head of Onassis Center
LEAD: Dr.
Speros Vryonis Jr., an expert on the effect of Hellenism and Byzantine culture on Asia Minor and the Balkans, has been named the first director of the Onassis Center for Hellenic Studies at New York University.


What's This? A Lot of Hot Air
LEAD: The Super Maine, a huge hot air balloon, rose 50 feet over frozen Sebago Lake several times today, carrying as many as 60 people at a time, though it was firmly tied to the ground.
The designers, builders and supporters of the 210-foot-high, 168-foot-wide balloon simply wanted to make a balloon larger than the Virgin Atlantic Flier, which crossed the Atlantic last summer.


THERE ARE FOUR SIDES TO EVERYTHING
LEAD:  MAMA DAY  By Gloria Naylor. 312 pp. New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $17.95.


HERE, SMALL STEPS OF HOPE
LEAD: FROM Bayberry Avenue in the courthouse-complex country of Garden City, the long, low building across the iced front lawn could have been any Long Island school.
The visitor watched buses arriving to discharge small passengers for a day of what might be, elsewhere, such minor miracles as spelling a word correctly or grasping one more of the arcane mysteries of arithmetic, or the like.


Swaggart Is Silent on Inquiry
LEAD: The Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart, who accused Jim Bakker, the ousted PTL leader, of sexual misconduct, had no comment today on reports that the Assemblies of God church was investigating similar allegations against him.


As Important As Anyone In His Generation
LEAD: Categories are conven-ient; they allow us to relate one thing to another, to set up connections between events that might otherwise (we fear) fly apart into a myriad of fragments in a mad, dissociated universe.
So there's probably no harm in calling John Zorn's latest album, ''Spillane'' (Nonesuch 9-79172, all three formats), a pop record.


Under the Clock: Church to Offices
LEAD: A former 24-pew Methodist church in Warwick, N.Y., is being converted into a 14,000-square-foot office building.
While New York City has its cathedral of commerce - the gothic Woolworth Building - and its Limelight discotheque - once the Church of Holy Communion - the Orange County project is one of the rare altars-to-office conversions.


THE DRAWBACKS OF PLAYING FAVORITES
LEAD: BEING known for a favorite defense is a two-way street.
If you are really good with it, you will intimidate many an opponent and score victories against listless play.
Yet no matter how good you are with it, it does point the opponent toward what he has to prepare when he comes up against you.
And there are opponents who cannot be intimidated.


Girl, 17, Slain in South Bronx
LEAD: A 17-year-old girl was shot to death early yesterday in front of a grocery store in the South Bronx, the police said.
Two men were held in the slaying.
The victim, Bertha Smith, of 990 East 181st Street in the Morrisania section, was shot once in the abdomen about 4 A.M. in front of 938 East 180th Street, said a police spokesman, Sgt.


INCEST VICTIMS: NO MORE MARTYRS
LEAD: In regard to the Jan. 10 article ''Incest Victims Get Sympathy but Little Help,'' I would like to say I agree with the statements that our current laws concerning the rights of abused children are considerably lacking in defending those rights.


Recalling Blitzstein
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE WORLD'S MAJOR SPORTS EVENTS ARE THE TOPIC
LEAD: THE final set in Canada's Winter Olympic Games series features alpine skiing, figure skating, luge and curling.
The four sports epitomize the speed, grace and precision of winter sports.
Curling is not a medal event, but a demonstration sport.


PRISON PRAYER EDICT UNDER APPEAL
LEAD: FIVE members of the Nation of Islam (also known as the Black Muslims) are appealing a Federal District Court ruling that upheld the New Jersey prison system's right to prohibit them from praying together during recreation in the prison yard.


MIRROR IMAGES
LEAD: BOTH OF THE SMALL glass jars have colored filaments swirling through them; both are sold with little plastic paddles, one pink and the other green.
One is Estee Lauder's Eyzone Repair Gel, the other is Revlon's Anti-Aging Firming Eye Gel.


Skiing Weekend Ahead, Diaster Down the Track
LEAD: Most people in the first coach car were trying to sleep in the wee hours this morning when the California Zephyr pulled into the small station here to pick up passengers.


On the Alert for A Bad Ice Cube
LEAD: WHEN we visited our son when he was in college in Bogota 10 years ago, I asked with some embarrassment about drinking the water.
He snorted and said the water at the Hilton was as safe as at home.
Since his arrival there, he had not reported being ill, so I followed his lead.
But when we traveled to San Andres Island, Colombia, he took one look at the tap in the hotel room there and said: ''Not this water.


COIFFEUR TO STARS HELPS TROUPE
LEAD: THE Trenton Civic Opera's production of ''The Sound of Music'' next Sunday will mark the culmination of months of work by dedicated amateurs, with one exception - the hairdresser and wig and hat designer.


Outdoors; New York Plans Action on Neversink Land
LEAD: The controversy over New York State's effort to establish a park, the Neversink River Unique Area, in the river's magnificently wild gorge in Sullivan County has entered a new phase.
On Feb. 4, Thomas C. Jorling, commissioner of the Department of Environmental Conservation announced that his office would seek to accomplish that end by eminent-domain proceedings.


At Braintree's Only University, Higher Education in Doughnuts
LEAD: The day before their final exam, the students at this town's only university were cramming for the grueling, eight-hour test.
Julie Eringis had been at it for hours, but she still worried that her cake doughnuts might turn out too greasy on the big day.
Allan Gunn had studied 18 hours a day for the past week, but he was nervous too.


Yugoslavia
LEAD: To the Editor: I'd like to add to a Q. &amp;A. answer on Medjugorje, the Yugoslav village that has become a popular place of religious pilgrimage.





Boitano Wins First Gold Medal for U.S.
LEAD: With the performance of his life tonight, Brian Boitano won the Olympic gold medal in figure skating, the first gold won by the United States in the XV Olympic Winter Games.


Social Events
LEAD: Having Fun, Aiding Others  SoHo Dinner-Dance  Feb. 24 - The Yorkville Common Pantry, which expects to supply 54,000 meals to the needy this year, is holding a benefit at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street, at Houston Street.
Cocktails and jazz at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and an auction.


Silence of American Jews Supports the Wrong Side; Waking Up
LEAD: To the Editor:


Of Frozen Pizzas And Labels
LEAD: YOU buy a frozen pizza in the supermarket.
Should the food processor tell you in a prominent label whether you're getting real cheese?


'88 WINTER OLYMPICS: Sports of The Times; Falls From Olympus
LEAD: Judging by what's happening to too many athletes here, the XV Olympic Winter Games are in the wrong city.
They should be in Great Falls, Mont.
Sadly, almost incredibly, Dan Jansen, the American speed skater from West Allis, Wis., fell not only in the 500-meter sprint but also in the 1,000-meter sprint.


TERRI LYNN LIEBOWITZ PLANS MAY WEDDING TO S. K. FELD
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Liebowitz of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Terri Lynn Liebowitz, to Sanford K. Feld, the son of the late Edith Feld and the late Albert Feld of Sands Point, L.I.
The couple plan to marry in May.


AT THE BEN SHAHN, SURREALISM'S LEGACY
LEAD: IF THE beginnings of Dada were ''disgust,'' as one of its leaders, Tristan Tzara, said, the beginnings of Surrealism might be called organized disgust.


Olympics Viewer Feels Frustrated
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Broken Marriage and Brawl Test a Cohesive Caste
LEAD: After five years of marriage, Ganga walked out on her husband the other day, announcing that she would no longer submit to his beatings.
She then returned to her parents in another part of this northern Indian village.


RUSSIA AND THE JEWS: PHOTOS OF A TURBULENT PAST
LEAD: The photographs, all in black and white and many very rare, have been mounted on illustration boards and arranged in neat piles on long tables, hundreds of photographs, waiting to be put up on the gallery walls of the Jewish Museum for the exhibition on Russian and Soviet Jewry opening Thursday.
Looking up at me from one of the photographs is the dreamy-eyed face of the young Marc Chagall.


Lawyers for Brawley Halt Aid in Inquiry
LEAD: Contending that the New York State Attorney General, Robert Abrams, ''is aligning himself with the culprits,'' lawyers for a black teen-ager who says she was kidnapped and sexually attacked by six white men broke off cooperation with Mr.
Abrams yesterday.


Westernization and Empires
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jersey Doctor Accused Of Fraud in Drug Tests
LEAD: A New Jersey doctor who is the former chairman of a hospital board has been indicted on charges of defrauding pharmaceutical companies of nearly $2 million by falsifying test results on experimental drugs.


On Language; The Player's The Thing
LEAD: THIS IS TO REPORT the promotion to field-grade officer of a locution that had previously been a mere vogue word in the ranks.


Did Ives Fiddle With the Truth?
LEAD: In the pantheon of American heroes there is no more appealing figure than Charles Ives, the iconoclastic Yankee insurance man and spare-time composer who, though supposedly unaware of avant-garde developments in European music, anticipated many innovations credited to Debussy, Mahler, Scriabin, Stravinsky, Schoenberg and Hindemith.


AS AMERICA GOES, SO DOES A BUSINESS
LEAD: A MILLION DOLLAR yearly phone bill would send most companies into shock, but to Michael H. Wellner, president of the Kemwel Group in Harrison, it is an indication that business is good.
The Kemwel Group includes a number of related companies, specializing in the vacation travels of Americans, primarily to


WESTCHESTER OPINION
LEAD:  NEARBY RAFTING  North American Whitewater Expeditions Inc., based in Hamden, Conn., offers what it believes is ''some of the best whitewater rafting in the East'' beginning in March and continuing through early May.
An eight-mile stretch of the upper Housatonic River, starting at Bull's Bridge Gorge in western Connecticut, provides a course through rapids that drop 90 feet in the first mile, then rushes through steep chasms, over large waves and difficult ledge drops.


A Lengthy Test for Jade Hunter's Speed
LEAD: If Mr.
Prospector were a better sire of grass horses, this season's handicap racing in Florida would be much poorer, because Jade Hunter would be wintering in Europe.


Opera: 'Tristan and Iseult' Opera: Medieval Version Of 'Tristan and Iseult'
LEAD: IT seemed like a good idea, maybe, and there were some occasionally pleasing musical performances.
But by and large the Boston Camerata's newly cobbled medieval-operatic version of ''Tristan and Iseult,'' which received its world premiere Thursday night at Merkin Concert Hall before performances in Boston and at


Home, Smart Home
LEAD: Does the world offer a more beautiful sight than the crimson stare of a burglar alarm?
Not to people who live by themselves, or with small children, or who are not named Rambo.
There it is, the watchdog that doesn't have to be walked, ready to roar if anyone so much as tries to jimmy a window.
If millions of


U.S. Ice Dancers at Full Strength
LEAD: When Scott Gregory and Suzanne Semanick won their second straight United States ice dancing title last month, they were operating at less than full strength.
Because Gregory suffered a herniated disk last November, he could not lift his partner.


Iris Murdoch's England
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; What's the Best Winter Olympic Sport?
LEAD: Downhill skiing.
Even those who haven't struggled to get on a chair lift, or stood at the top of the smallest slope and wondered, ''How am I going to get to the bottom?'' can appreciate the guts, skill, power and lunacy it takes to defy death and ski down an icy slope at speeds exceeding 80 miles per hour.


FOCUS: Akron, Ohio; A Pivotal Mixed-Use Project
LEAD: There are positive signs for the economy of Summit County.
Akron's population of 227,000 has been stable over the past few years and unemployment among the county's 508,000 residents has dropped from its peak of 12.3 percent in 1983 to 7.5 percent last year.


Cable TV
LEAD: An impressive array of performances by women brightens the cable movie week.
Joan Crawford, Ginger Rogers, Jennifer Jones, Sophia Loren and Glenda Jackson are all Oscar-winners.
For dessert?
A surprisingly vivacious stint by ice skater Sonja Henie.


A Golf Birthday
LEAD: Just in case anyone needs a reminder of why Feb. 22 is a very special date, a group of golfers will gather at the St.
Andrews Golf Club in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., this afternoon for a ceremony, one day early, marking what the organizers are calling ''the centennial of golf in America.'' To put a finer point on it, they are marking the 100th anniversary of the first game of golf reliably known to have been played on an


34 Die in Punjab in 2 Days Of Bombings and Ambushes
LEAD: At least 34 people have been killed in 24 hours in bombings and ambushes by Sikh separatists in Punjab, news reports said today.


Focus: Akron, Ohio; Mixed-Use Project Pivotal For Economy
LEAD: When officials at GenCorp withdrew plans to build a corporate headquarters in Bath Township, nine miles northwest of downtown Akron, Ohio, in 1981, development prospects were uncertain for the 358-acre parcel near Interstate 77.


Question Of the Week; What's the Best Winter Olympic Sport?
LEAD: What's the best Winter Olympic sport?
Contemplating spring training.
FRED LANDES  New York


Western Fund Set Up to Aid Polish Farmers
LEAD: With help from David Rockefeller and encouragement from the Polish authorities, a foundation has been set up in Poland to stimulate the lagging agriculture and food industries.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending Feb. 6  MANHATTAN  Murray Hill  $400,000  127 East 36th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar, duplex co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,700, 59% tax-deductible (Broker: B.J. Gottesman)  Gracie Mansion Area


ANNA T. PETITE IS WED TO THOMAS GREEFF LEE
LEAD: At the Reformed Church in Bronxville, N.Y., Anna Tobey Petite, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Clinton Petite of Bronxville, was married yesterday to Thomas Greeff Lee, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry C. Lee of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
C.
Carter Via performed the ceremony.


PAMELA PHILLIPS, A TEACHER, IS MARRIED
LEAD: The marriage of Pamela Jillson Phillips, the daughter of Patricia B. Phillips of Fairfield, Conn., and William A. Phillips of Greenwich, Conn., to Richard Bernard Noonan, a son of Robert W. Noonan of Osterville, Mass., and the late Frances E. Noonan, took place yesterday at the Second Congregational Church in Greenwich.


SCHOOL PRINCIPAL PLAN DRAWING FIRE
LEAD: OPPOSITION to a key aspect of a plan to revise certification standards for school principals is intensifying.


BETSY DAVIDSON IS MARRIED
LEAD: The marriage of Alice Elizabeth Davidson and John Morrison Pickering, the founders and partners of Pickering Associates, a literary agency in New York, took place yesterday at the home of the bride's mother, Joan K. Davidson of New York.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, Dean of the Cathedral of St.


MET ON A GREAT BATTLEFIELD
LEAD:  THE GENERALS  Ulysses S. Grant and Robert E. Lee.
By Nancy Scott Anderson and Dwight Anderson. 523 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Missing Colonel
LEAD: In Lebanon, where kidnapping is a cottage industry, the abduction last week of an American Marine, Lieut.
Col.
William R. Higgins, created more than the usual stir: Two apparently different groups of Islamic militants took credit for the kidnapping and a third Moslem militia undertook to rescue him.


RIDERS HUFF AND PUFF AT RAIL SMOKING BAN
LEAD: ON the New Haven line trains last week, grumbling was in the air where smoke had once been.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Red Wings Win Third Straight: Shawn Burr scored twice and Glen Hanlon stopped 23 shots yesterday as the Red Wings won their third straight game by beating the Chicago Blackhawks, 6-1, in Detroit.
Burr's first goal, 10 minutes 50 seconds into the second period, increased Detroit's lead to 2-0.


Tomba Moves Into Spotlight
LEAD: The Swiss bickered among themselves.
The skiers, in general, complained about the wind and lack of snow.
The ticket-holders arrived at this winter resort about 65 miles west of Calgary, not knowing whether they would see a race, much less which one.
Still, nothing that happened during the first week of the Alpine events here at Mount Allan has caused as big a stir as Alberto Tomba of Italy is likely to when he begins competing Sunday.


D'Amato Criticizes G.O.P. Rules Governing Primary in New York
LEAD: Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has attacked the Republican Presidential primary voting system in New York as ''onerous'' and ''a stain on the party.''


CONCERTS AT COLLEGES, CONSERVATORIES
LEAD: YOU needn't be a parent to enjoy back-to-school events next weekend, because several of our county colleges and conservatories have scheduled concerts of high promise.
The first is on Thursday, when the resident Sarah Lawrence Woodwind Quintet offers music by Telemann, Danzi, Barber and Francaix at its 8 P.M.


THE NUCLEAR AGE AND ITS PROBLEMS COME TO THE STAGE
LEAD: When two arms negotia-tors, the American Paul Nitze and the Russian Yuli Kvitsinsky, took a walk in the woods just outside of Geneva during the summer of 1982, they forged an original and provocative nuclear-weapons agreement.
While it would later be rejected by their respective Governments, their proposal eventually ignited a groundswell of hope for what might still be achieved.


Sweetening the Deals in a Soft Market
LEAD: Taking a cue from anxious developers, Leonard D'Andrea stirred some flash into the strategy for selling his home in Stamford, Conn.
Besides posting a competitive price on the two-bedroom condominium, he is offering to pay the buyer's $160-a-month maintenance fee for six months.


At Home The Story's Different
LEAD: Because most theatrical movies made in any year are instantly disposable, without any aspirations beyond being amusing for a limited span of time, it's not easy to argue that movies are debased when they show up on television, reduced in size and clarity, in what is, in effect, their second run.


Pinstripe Suits With Kevlar Vests
LEAD: THE shooting of a Merrill Lynch stockbroker by a distraught investor during the October market collapse sent shivers throughout corporate America.
Fearful that violence could increase if the economy sours, a growing number of companies are hiring ''executive protection security personnel,'' or bodyguards, for top executives.


Alternative to Prison in New York: Six Months of Counseling and Tutoring
LEAD: If he were a head shorter, Maximo Blake said, he would have probably ended up in trouble with the law instead of working with the law-enforcement authorities to give young offenders fresh starts.


It's Not Easy to Speak Audio
LEAD: In a recurrent fantasy, I envision George Orwell reading a hi-fi catalogue.
His gaunt gray face looks puzzled.
The great champion of clarity and integrity in language - the man who skewered newspeak, cant and blather -frowns at the jargon of audio.


Suburb of Washington At Odds Over Evictions
LEAD: In the early days of World War II, the owners of many of the stately homes in this Washington suburb were asked to rent their spare rooms to help accomodate the influx of military and civilian workers into the capital.


DATA BANK: February 21, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
IV Q'87
III Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,870.0
$3,835.9
$3,702.4
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.2
4.3
1.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$141.9
$134.5
$130.2


A NEED TO STIR INTEREST IN ENGINEERING
LEAD: MANY people say that young Japanese students went into engineering while ours thronged into law, that the products developed by one of these groups found eager buyers around the world while the product of the other found none.


Court Rules Against Succession Rights in Apartments
LEAD: In a decision that could affect hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers, a state appeals court has ruled that rent-stabilized apartments cannot be passed on to a live-in relative after the tenant named on the lease dies or moves out.


Canada and Sweden Reach Medal Round
LEAD: Canada, which had scored six goals in its first three games, got seven in the first period today and clinched a medal-round berth with a 9-5 hockey victory over France.


CLASSICAL MUSIC'S FUTURE
LEAD: To The Editor:


Senior Boxing Remembered
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


William Dempsey, 81, Former F.C.C. Counsel
LEAD: William J. Dempsey, former counsel of the Federal Communications Commission and a communications lawyer, died of heart failure Tuesday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 81 years old and lived in Washington.


Socialist Individual
LEAD: 'Everyone deserves the opportunity to make an independent assessment of reality - and make a critical evaluation as well.
In this situation the ideals and values of socialism can be established not by implantation but by the free will of an individual mind. '


The Bay Islands of Honduras
LEAD: AS predictably as sunset burnishes the half-moon coves and secluded cays of the Bay Islands, off Honduras's Caribbean coast, visitors begin to wonder how long the islands can escape the kind of large-scale tourist development that has both benefited and blighted so many other tropical beauty spots.


LISTEN CAREFULLY TO THE MILK
LEAD:  MUCH DEPENDS ON DINNER  The Extraordinary History and Mythology, Allure and Obsessions, Perils and Taboos, of an Ordinary Meal.
By Margaret Visser. 351 pp.
New York: Grove Press. $19.95.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  The Volubility of Tongue  There have always been minimalists, people who distrust language, as if it had a will of its own and could trick us out of ourselves.
This is Thomas Sprat, a 17th-century historian, quoted in ''One Culture: Essays in Science and Literature,'' edited by George Levine (University of


Going 'Home' to Africa
LEAD: ON a trip to the Cape Verde Islands off West Africa, I met my great-grandaunt, Maria Nharita.
She was a vivid reminder of my African ancestry.
She lived in a hut.


JULIA A. KOSASKY TO WED IN MAY
LEAD: The engagement of Julia Anne Kosasky to William Lane Hallisey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Hallisey of Riverside, Calif., has been made known by the parents of the bride-to-be, Dr. and Mrs.
Harold J. Kosasky of Chestnut Hill and Falmouth, Mass.
The couple plan to marry in May.


Michigan Jury Rules Libel Over False Arrest
LEAD: A jury has ruled that The Battle Creek Enquirer libeled a man in reporting that he was arrested in a rape investigation but not that he was never charged with the crime.
The jury awarded him $1 million.


THOSE HANDY CLAMPS
LEAD: A MAXIM among woodworkers is that one can't have too many clamps.


A GREAT HOSPITAL IN CRISIS
LEAD: You refer, in the article on New York Hospital, to an ''almost palpable anxiety . . . about how the institution looks from the outside, especially to . . . philanthropists.''


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''This makes it all the more likely that Texaco will be a drastically changed company in a few months.''


Silence of American Jews Supports the Wrong Side; Demonstrate in Amman
LEAD: To the Editor:


DRIED FRUITS CAN BRIGHTEN DESSERTS
LEAD: IF you are looking for new ideas for winter desserts, consider dried fruits.
They are at their best during the winter and are a fine alternative to expensive tropical or out-of-season fresh fruit.
You can now get prunes, dried apple rings, apricots, pears, peaches and figs, mostly from California, good enough to eat straight from the package.


DEATH CAMPS IN EVERY VILLAGE
LEAD:  HAING NGOR  A Cambodian Odyssey.
By Haing Ngor with Roger Warner.
Illustrated. 478 pp.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $19.95.


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


The Guerrilla Fight in Mozambique Also Takes a Toll on Zimbabwe
LEAD: As the crippling war in Mozambique spills over into Zimbabwe, the Government of Executive President Robert G. Mugabe is increasingly faced with competing pressures over this country's military involvement in the conflict.


Putting On the Pressure
LEAD: AT the top of the game, those who are thought of as great bidders are rarely perceived to be great dummy players and vice versa.
There is a psychological reason for this, which is unconnected with any absolute standard of performance.


Social Climbing on Mount Halla
LEAD: In this Island there is a Mountain of a vast Height all cover'd with woods and several small Hills which are naked, and enclose many Vales abounding in Rice . . .  - Hendrick Hamel, 1668, ''The Description of the Kingdom of Corea''


Princeton and the Met Joining on American Art
LEAD: In a major art-world job switch, John Wilmerding, the deputy director of the National Gallery of Art and a leading figure in the study and exhibition of American art, has been appointed to a new, fully endowed professorship at Princeton University and will become a visiting curator at the Metropolitan Museum of


Sale of The Post Winding Down To Last Details
LEAD: With the hard bargaining past and a rescue package for The New York Post in place, only a few details remained yesterday for the completion of Rupert Murdoch's $37.6 million sale of the newspaper to the real-estate developer Peter S. Kalikow.


Brian Dennehy Masters a Classic Role
LEAD: An enormous hulk of a man, Brian Dennehy is probably better known for such stereotypically macho movie roles as the sheriff who made the grave error of jailing Rambo in ''First Blood'' and television parts like Buffalo Bill Cody than for classics of the stage.


Joyner-Kersee Is on Course For Even Greater Conquests
LEAD: WHEN Jackie Joyner-Kersee was growing up in East St.
Louis, Ill., she made the mistake one night of losing track of the time.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I do not plan in any way to whitewash my sin.
I do not call it a mistake, a mendacity.
I call it a sin.''  The Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart, television evangelist  [ A1:1. ]


SPAIN PLANS TALKS WITH SEPARATISTS
LEAD: The Spanish Government has agreed to open formal peace talks with the radical Basque group that has waged a violent campaign for autonomy in northern Spain.





Cabbie Found Fatally Shot
LEAD: A cab driver who had been fatally shot in the neck was found slumped over the steering wheel of his car last night in Harlem, the police said.
The driver, identified as Attillo Pena, 41 years old, was found at 8:55 P.M. at the corner of West 147th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, where his car had been pulled over to the curb, according to Sgt.


Foreigners' Investing: A Warning
LEAD: Clayton K. Yeutter, the United States trade representative, has privately warned an international conference of government ministers and business executives that the surge of foreign investment in the United States was creating a backlash here.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  COMMITTEE ON PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE: SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL SUBCOMMITTEE - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON U.N.
CHARTER -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Isabel Bishop, Painter, Dies at 85; Work Celebrated Women's Lives
LEAD: Isabel Bishop, a painter and printmaker, died of Parkinson's disease Friday at her home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
She was 85 years old.


Outdoors: Hunting in Winter
LEAD: NOW that waterfowling has ended throughout the nation, including the bonus seasons for scaup and Canada geese in some portions of the Northeast, only a handful of hunters are abroad.


F.D.I.C. Finds Ways to Sell Ailing Assets
LEAD: Federal regulators are employing novel ways to sell billions of dollars in troubled banking assets, including the sale of so-called dirty banks.


Gromyko Says Mao Wanted Soviet A-Bomb Used on G.I.'s
LEAD: The Soviet President, Andrei A. Gromyko, reports in his forthcoming memoirs that Mao Zedong sought Soviet cooperation in 1958 for a plan to lure United States troops into the interior of China, then attack them with Soviet nuclear weapons.


Rangers Fall to Canucks
LEAD: Pity Brian Leetch.
His dream snuffed out in Calgary, he now gets to join a nightmare in full progress.


Baseball; A Familiar Position for Clark
LEAD: For most of the morning, as it poured rain outside, Jack Clark lay quietly on his back in the trainers' room at Fort Lauderdale Stadium and read the Sunday newspaper.
He wore a Yankee cap pushed back off his forehead, and he seemed genuinely oblivious to both the attention that was being paid to his right ankle and the small horde of reporters that waited patiently near his dressing stall in the crowded clubhouse.


Economic Calendar
LEAD:  Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday


Big East Will Confer On Fighting Sanctions
LEAD: In the wake of Saturday's game-ending, bench-clearing brawl between Georgetown and Pittsburgh, Dave Gavitt, the commissioner of the Big East Conference, has called a special meeting of the league's executive committee.
The purpose of the meeting, which will be held today or tomorrow, is to formulate tough, uniform policies for controlling fights and punishing those players who participate in them.


On Return, Post Employees Join in Ritual of Relief
LEAD: It was quiet yesterday outside The New York Post building in lower Manhattan.
Inside, about two dozen reporters and editors gathered in a ritual of relief.


Mine Sinks a French Trawler
LEAD: A French fishing boat hit a mine in the English Channel today and sank when the mine exploded, but all four crew members were rescued, the coastal authorities said.
An official at the search and rescue headquarters in Cherbourg said the trawler hit the mine early this morning about 30 miles north of the Normandy coast.


Horse Racing; Jade Hunter Rallies To Win by a Nose
LEAD: When Jade Hunter held off Cryptoclearance by a length in the Donn Handicap Jan. 30, the runner-up's backers began looking forward to the prospect of a rematch in the Gulfstream Park Handicap.
The latter race would be a furlong farther, and Cryptoclearance would surely get up in time.


William W. Eagles, Military Officer, 93
LEAD: Maj.
Gen.
William W. Eagles, a decorated infantry commander who led the 45th Infantry Division in the battle for the Anzio beachhead in Italy, died Friday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
The retired officer, who lived in Washington, was 93 years old.


SYSTEM TO TREAT MENTAL PATIENTS IS OVERBURDENED
LEAD: Overcrowding at municipal psychiatric wards in New York City has reached record levels, according to city doctors, who say they fear that the mental-health system is heading for a collapse.


Heavy Schedule of Financings This Week
LEAD: A fairly heavy calendar of Treasury financings are scheduled for this week, including today's sale of three- month and six-month bills.
On Wednesday, $8.75 billion in two-year notes will be auctioned, followed on Thursday with a regular monthly sale of five-year notes totaling $7.25 billion.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, FEBRUARY 22, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Dance: Balanchine Work From Los Angeles Ballet
LEAD: First there was the Los Angeles Ballet, and now there is the Ballet of Los Angeles.
John Clifford has begun anew.
In 1973, Mr.
Clifford - at that time, a dancer and choreographer with the New York City Ballet - returned to his native Los Angeles to found the Los Angeles Ballet, which he directed until 1985, when economic troubles closed it down.


For San Antonio and Its Mayor, an Emergence Is Envisioned
LEAD: From the air as he tours San Antonio in a helicopter, Henry G. Cisneros envisions a new city unfolding below him.


Chairman Is Chosen At National Education
LEAD: H. David Bright, who was instrumental in reviving the National Education Corporation, was named chairman of the nation's largest network of vocational schools last week.


P.L.O. PULLS BACK ON ATTACK THREAT
LEAD: Under pressure from its Arab backers, the Palestine Liberation Organization has withdrawn its threat to revive attacks on Israelis outside Israel and the occupied territories, according to Cairo-based diplomats and Palestinian officials.


Dance: 'Pawn Shop Blues'
LEAD: THE Washington Square Repertory Dance Company accurately called its Friday night program ''Dances From the Home Front: Choreography With American Themes, Music and Images.'' Unfortunately, despite its strong subject matter, each item on this concert at the University Theater of New York University was deficient in some way.


Video Cassettes Pushing Books Off Shelves
LEAD: Barely a decade after the video cassette recorder began its relentless march into America's living rooms, a new type of home library - filled with dozens, or even hundreds, of videotapes - is rapidly emerging.


3 Reputed Mafia Figures Retried In Slaying of Detective in Queens
LEAD: For the second time in a year, the execution-style slaying of a New York City police detective is being relived in a Queens court.


Teamsters Let Deadline Pass For a Strike Against Pan Am
LEAD: Teamsters union members reported to work at Pan American World Airways yesterday despite the expiration of a strike deadline and a breakdown in contract talks.
But a union representative threatened to strike the airline ''at whatever time will hurt them most.''


Sports World Specials; 4 Legs to 2
LEAD: When Dave Johnson speaks, his voice has an instant effect on a stranger.
It is clear and crisp, almost perfect.
If it is a voice that sounds familiar to the ear, it's because most sports fans have heard Johnson's utterances before.


Gena Cohen and R. J. Moses Are Married in Washington
LEAD: The marriage of Gena Cohen, an associate at the Washington law firm of Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin &amp; Kahn, and Robert Jeffrey Moses, an associate at the law firm of Epstein, Becker &amp; Green in Washington, took place yesterday.
Rabbi Avis Miller officiated at the Arts Club in Washington.


Corporate Loan Demand Is Strong at Many Banks
LEAD: Judging by corporate loan demand at banks across the nation, the nation's economy remains strong, if spotty, with many smaller businesses particularly robust.


TV Review; 'Television With Edwin Newman
LEAD: ''TELEVISION,'' the eight-part series that examines the medium and all its wondrous effects, looks tonight at television news.
In 40 years, it has moved from simple illustrated lectures to global instant replay.
Where will it go next? ''Point of View,'' the fifth part in the series, doesn't say, but it does express a cautionary note.


Campaign Trail
LEAD: Babbitt's Little Problem


Advertising; Sherwood &amp; Schneider
LEAD: Consumers Digest, a Chicago-based magazine that sizes up products ranging from automobiles to zoom lenses, has tapped Sherwood &amp; Schneider to handle its consumer and trade advertising, after a three-way competition.
The budget is somewhere in the $1 million to $1.2 million range.
The former agency is Jameson Advertising.


Unfinished Work on a Genocide Treaty
LEAD: After 40 years, Congress is moving toward the final step on an international convention against genocide.
The Senate gave its approval to the treaty in 1986, and it only remains for Congress to pass implementing legislation to amend the criminal code.


Tocchet's 3 Goals Spark Flyers, 5-3
LEAD: Rick Tocchet scored three goals for the first time in his National Hockey League career today to lead the Philadelphia Flyers to a 5-3 victory over the Detroit Red Wings.


Ballet: 'Snow Maiden' at Olympics
LEAD: If there is one gold medalist in Calgary during the Winter Olympics who differs from all others, it is Vadim Pisarev of the Soviet Union.
The 23-year-old Mr.
Pisarev has won his unusually large collection of gold medals at international ballet competitions - in 1986 in Jackson, Miss.; in 1985 in Moscow; in 1984 in Helsinki and Paris.


Churches, Politics and Money
LEAD: Without the black church, the civil rights movement would have been impossible.
So would the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's Presidential campaign, which has its base there.


Motorists Protest Rates for Insurance
LEAD: About 100 motorists drove to the state capital yesterday to protest high auto insurance rates and demand that lawmakers address the problem.


Cycling; 2-Continent Race Coming to Florida
LEAD: A multi-stage professional bicycle race spanning two continents rolls into its North American segment this week with six days of road-racing events crisscrossing Florida.


Something About a Veto
LEAD: There must be something about Californian governors to make them such fans of the line-item veto.


A Touch of Havana Brings Life to Union City
LEAD: It is early on a Saturday morning on Bergenline Avenue, the main commercial strip here, but moving about is already difficult.
Amid throngs of shoppers, merchants are setting out goods, cars are double-parked and children are skipping down the sidewalk.


Teeing Off With Plastic Club Head
LEAD: The golf purist who remains loyal to persimmon wood may cringe at what technology has wrought: a solid-plastic club head.
There is no wood, metal or graphite in the mix.
The head has the color and sheen of the inside of an oyster shell.


Brain-Dead Baby Allowed to Die; No Recipients Found for Organs
LEAD: A brain-dead baby boy was taken off life-support machines Saturday after no recipients could be found for his organs, but another baby, also born without a brain stem, was on a respirator today in hopes of saving her organs for transplant.


Nasser Son Reportedly Plans To Return for Trial in Egypt
LEAD: The self-exiled son of Gamal Abdel Nasser has reportedly said he will return to Cairo to face trial on terrorism charges.


Question Box
LEAD: QUESTION: Has a major league pitcher ever been voted the Rookie of the Year Award, the Cy Young Award and the Most Valuable Player Award in his career?


Praise and Pity Heard in Bronx For Rep. Biaggi
LEAD: The essence of Mario Biaggi, said Peter Fata, a Bronx resident, is not in the legal trouble that has brought him to the brink of expulsion by his colleagues in the House of Representatives.


Cuomo Rejects Call to Discuss Brawley Case
LEAD: Governor Cuomo has turned down a request to meet today with two clergymen to discuss the case of a black Dutchess County teen-ager who says she was abducted and attacked by six white men, a spokesman for the Governor said yesterday.


Market Place; Big Gold Loan's Effect on Prices
LEAD: ONE of the oldest anti-gold arguments used by monetarists, those who would sever any link between bullion and paper money, is that gold is a ''sterile investment.'' Why?
Because gold does not yield interest or dividends; its value is largely dependent on investor concerns about other assets.


Profit-Sharing Record at Ford
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said Friday that it would distribute $635 million to its United States employees in what it said was the largest profit-sharing payout ever made by an American company.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Feb. 21, 1988:
MONDAY
Century Tel Ent
FPL Group Inc
Conn Natural Gas
United Illuminating
Crane Co
TUESDAY
Angelica Corp
Kellwood Co
Bausch &amp; Lomb
Longs Drug Stores
Gap Inc
Merck &amp; Co
Ipalco Enterprises
Philip Morris Cos
WEDNESDAY
Amer Bank Conn
NL Industries
Belding Hemingway
Pacific Scientific
Cigna Corp
Pennsylvania Pwr &amp; Lt
Deere &amp; Co
THURSDAY
Arvin Industries
Springs Industries
Bank of Boston
Unisys Corp
Bowater Inc
FRIDAY
Aetna Life &amp; Casualty
Dexter Corp $


On Your Own: Tennis; How Important Is First-Serve Success Rate?
LEAD: IF you watch tennis on television, the most common statistic you'll hear commentators mention during the course of a match is first-serve percentage: how many first serves a player connects on.
In the recent Australian Open men's singles final, for example, the winner, Mats Wilander, successfully put into play 77 percent of his first serves, compared with just 61 percent for his opponent, Pat


Haitian Puzzle: Where Will President Take Nation?
LEAD: According to an axiom making the rounds in Haiti, for at least the next hundred years, each time a president takes office Haitians will be thrown into an anxious fit trying to divine if the new regime will be as tyrannical as the reign of Francois (Papa Doc) Duvalier, whose family controlled the country for three decades.


Music: A Retrospective Of Works of John Cage
LEAD: FOR nearly a half century, John Cage has been picking away with his perceptive, gentle wit at the conventions of the serious music scene.
It is a sign of how entrenched those conventions remain that Mr.
Cage's music continues to surprise and humor listeners three and four decades after it was written, as was the case on Saturday evening in Alice Tully Hall, where


Bridgestone's New U.S. Challenge
LEAD: If the Bridgestone Corporation of Japan can perform the kind of magic at the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company's tire plants that it has performed at its own plant here, one thing appears certain: The American tire business will become even more competitive.


PAUL S. LURRIE IS WED TO WENDY ANN MILLER
LEAD: At Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I., Wendy Ann Miller, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Maurice H. Miller of Lawrence, L.I., was married yesterday to Paul Scott Lurrie, a son of Eileen Lurrie of Glen Oaks, Queens, and the late Lawrence Lurrie.
Rabbis Morris Friedman and Gilbert Klaperman and Cantor Marcus


Bush's Home Is Where the Primary Is
LEAD: George Bush, the cowboy, came out tonight in this flat, dusty town north of San Antonio.


Prosecutors Are Critical Of Plan for Rights Unit
LEAD: Several district attorneys in New York State are expressing concern about Governor Cuomo's proposal to set up a civil-rights unit in the State Attorney General's office, fearing that the new unit might take over bias investigations they originate.


Power Level Reduced At Weapons Reactor
LEAD: The Department of Energy has ordered a further reduction in the power level of its last remaining plutonium-producing reactor in an effort to assure that the reactor operated within the capacity of its emergency cooling system, a departmental official said tonight.


Metro Matters; One Year Later And Cuomo's No Still Means No
LEAD: Fully a year has gone by since Mario Cuomo formally said no, and the Governor insists he has no regrets.


'Structures Of Sin'
LEAD: By issuance of his 20,000-word, personally written encyclical, ''The Social Concerns of the Church,'' Pope John Paul II risks becoming known as the foremost political-moral relativist of our time.


Corrections
LEAD: The De Gustibus column in The Living Section on Wednesday misidentified the owners of Le Bernardin in New York.
The restaurateurs are Gilbert and Maguy Le Coze.


Gore Lashes Out at Rivals and Image
LEAD: Everywhere he traveled this weekend, from San Francisco to Los Angeles to Las Vegas to the nation's capital, Albert Gore Jr. was asked about Garry Trudeau.


Bruins' Lemelin Stops Devils
LEAD: The Devils created plenty of chances this afternoon and played with enough intensity, but they were denied by a hot goaltender and one of the better teams in the league.


Japan Construction Talks
LEAD: A senior United States official said Saturday that little progress had been made in negotiations to open the Japanese construction market to foreign companies.
Japan allows only companies with construction experience here to bid on new projects, and the restriction has become a major trade issue between the nations.


Experts Say Plants Used Spill as Cover To Dump Pollutants
LEAD: One or more industries seem to have taken advantage of a fuel spill last month and dumped their own chemicals into the Ohio River, chemicals that are more dangerous pollutants than the fuel that spilled, water quality experts say.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; A Real Estate Collector Seeks a Soapbox
LEAD: Philip Pilevsky thinks big thoughts, about international peace and brotherhood, about disarmament and terrorism, but as a collector of shopping centers he doesn't have much opportunity to exercise them. ''You don't need a Ph.D. to make money in real estate,'' he said.


USG Stock Speculation
LEAD: Stock in the USG Corporation rose further Friday on speculation that Desert Partners L.P., which holds a 9.9 percent stake in the construction-materials company, had obtained financing for a buyout offer.
USG shares gained $1.50 Friday on the New York Stock Exchange to close at $32.875, adding to Thursday's gain of $2.375 a share.


Post for Strauss
LEAD: Robert S. Strauss has told his partners at Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer &amp; Feld that he expects to be named chairman of the National Economic Commission.
There is talk that Mr.
Strauss, a former Democratic national chairman who was United States Trade Representative in the Carter Administration, will have a


Underground Newspapers
LEAD: New York's Metropolitan Transportation Authority seems intent on making life harder for countless New Yorkers who wouldn't think of boarding a subway car without a newspaper or magazine in hand.


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Charcuterie Tour Eiffel, which sells pates and delicatessen meats to supermarkets and specialty stores, to Image Concepts, Paramus, N.J.


Shortage of Nurses and Catch-22 on Foreigners
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brazil's Reversal of Debt Strategy
LEAD: When a slump in hard currency reserves forced Brazil to suspend most payments on its $113 billion foreign debt last February, the Government felt confident that the moratorium would serve as a weapon for extracting a dramatically better deal from its creditors.


Music: Juilliard Orchestra In Stravinsky Symphony
LEAD: REPEATEDLY ambushed over the past 75 years, neither Romanticism nor the Romantic symphony orchestra have been that easy to kill off.
Lowell Liebermann, for example, is only 27 years old, but he has already composed a big symphonic work interesting enough to be featured at the Juilliard Symphony's concert at Alice Tully Hall on Friday night.


Fitness; Exercising Safety With Home Videos
LEAD: JANE FONDA is dressed in tights and she smiles. ''Set those shoulders on fire,'' she cries, waving her arms energetically. ''Make it burn.''


Corrections
LEAD: An article Sunday about a New York State appeals court decision that the right to a rent-stabilized apartment is not automatically passed on to a relative incorrectly identified the court and the territory covered by the ruling.
The ruling was made by the First Department of the Appellate Term of the State Supreme Court,and while it is expected to establish a precedent for the entire city, it is binding only in Manhattan and the Bronx.


Woman Says President Kennedy Used Her as a Conduit to Mobster
LEAD: A California woman says John F. Kennedy had her arrange meetings between him and a Chicago mob boss, Sam Giancana, while she and Kennedy were having an affair in the time surrounding his election to the Presidency, according to a published report.


F.B.I. Sought 'Terrorism' in the Wrong Place
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chief of Rail Agency Faults Congress on Safety Matters
LEAD: The Federal Railroad Administrator has criticized Congress for failing to improve rail safety in the year since 16 people died in an Amtrak crash in Maryland.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, FEBRUARY 22, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-9  The topic of human rights prevailed during Secretary of State George P. Shultz's first day of talks in Moscow.
He made human rights a theme of his discussions with Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze and met with leading rights campaigners.
Page A1


Sports World Specials; Shipboard Shots
LEAD: For gym rats, extended periods of time away from basketball can be excruciating.
John Hillin is a gym rat, and last year he was faced with 170 consecutive days without any contact with the game.
Hillin refused to accept this fate.


Ruling Due on Bhopal Plea
LEAD: A judge said Friday that he would rule March 7 on the Union Carbide Corporation's appeal of a court order that it pay $270 million in interim relief to victims of the Bhopal gas leak.


Islanders Complete Winning Weekend
LEAD: Winning twice at the expense of the Hartford Whalers, a team with a season-long scoring problem, the Islanders picked up 4 points in the standing this weekend.


The Dance: Risa Jaroslow in 'Nahual'
LEAD: RISA JAROSLOW is a performer of great though quiet eloquence.
And that gift was evident in two pieces presented by Risa Jaroslow and Dancers on Friday at the Marymount Manhattan Theater.


Catching the Moment's Ups and Downs
LEAD: THERE is a moment in victory, or defeat, when your face tells the story.
Writers spend their cash advances wearing out typewriter ribbons to try to capture that instant.


Piccard Steals Super-G Show From Zurbriggen and Tomba
LEAD: This was supposed to be the Mount Rushmore of Alpine skiing, where Pirmin Zurbriggen of Switzerland and Alberto Tomba of Italy would etch their profiles in the Olympic snow.
But since Zurbriggen won the downhill last Monday with a spectacular run down Mount Allan, he and others among the world's more renowned male and female skiers have found the slick, icy slopes to be unforgiving.


A Much-Tangled Story: Getting Maigret on TV
LEAD: Of all the detectives in crime fiction, Chief Inspector Jules Maigret of the Surete is perhaps the most doggedly persistent.
Arthur Weingarten is a lot like that.


Woolridge, Gone a Day, Will Meet With Nets
LEAD: Orlando Woolridge, the high-scoring Nets' forward whose whereabouts were unknown to the team for more than 24 hours, will meet with team officials today and might participate in the morning workout, the Nets said yesterday.


Hospital, Criticized, Wins Accreditation
LEAD: The Nassau County Medical Center, criticized by the State Health Department for the quality of its patient care, has received full, three-year accreditation.


Advertising; Sun-Diamond Goes to Y.&amp;R.
LEAD: Young &amp; Rubicam, San Francisco, will no doubt be toasting its 10th anniversary this month with glasses of prune juice.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Track and Field  Remigino Takes 800-Meter: Mike Remigino, a freshman at Manhattan College and son of a former Jasper, Lindy Remigino, the 1952 Olympic 100-meter gold medalist, captured the 800-meter run in 1 minute 54.04 seconds yesterday at the Reebok/Metropolitan Athletics Congress indoor championships at West Point, N.Y.


Sports of The Times; '88 Winter Olympics; The Russian Classic
LEAD: IN the University of Calgary bookstore, the end of the line was over among the shelves with the Greek and Latin classics.
Eventually the autograph seekers wound through the aisles to a Russian classic.
No, not Tolstoy or Solzhenitsyn, not even a book in hard cover or paperback.


Strange Money
LEAD: The S.D.R. may rise again.
The Special Drawing Right is a form of money, but not the kind that people use to buy a loaf of bread.
Consumers have never seen one.
It is money managed not by the United States Treasury but by the 151-government International Monetary Fund.
Only governments use it, to pay their bills.


Economy On Brink In Panama
LEAD: The festivities at the traditional pre-Lenten carnival here recently seemed more subdued than usual, and no one needed to ask why. ''There's not a cent for dancing in the streets or any other fun,'' one newspaper complained on its front page.


The Big Picture
LEAD: In the era of movie cassette rentals and closet-sized theaters, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has lavished Oscar nominations on the biggest, widest, tallest movies of the year.
Epics like ''The Last Emperor,'' ''The Untouchables'' and ''Empire of the Sun'' are marvelous.
But where does


Save Vanderbilt Statue
LEAD: To the Editor:


Medical Care Sought by Arbitrager Held on Gun Charges
LEAD: John A. Mulheren, the arbitrager arrested last Thursday on charges of illegal weapons possession, spent the weekend in a county jail in New Jersey and will seek to be hospitalized this week, according to people familiar with his case.


Dollar's Depreciation Isn't Devaluation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Coalition Seen In Belgium
LEAD: A new coalition of French and Belgian shareholders in Societe Generale de Belgique is forming to thwart the raid of Carlo de Benedetti, according to analysts who follow the company.


No Medal for American Hockey Team
LEAD: Karl Friesen, the West German goalie, stopping a shot by Stephen Leach of the United States last night in Calgary, Alberta.
The Germans' 4-1 victory advanced them to the medal round of the tournament and ended American hopes for a medal.
SportsMonday, page C1. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


Business and the Law; Unclaimed Assets In State Disputes
LEAD: STATE treasurers are closely watching a recent lawsuit against the State of New York that could decide who can lay claim to abandoned property that rests in the hands of scores of businesses and banks.


William C. Hayes Jr., NASA Official, 63
LEAD: William Claiborne (Red) Hayes Jr., the official of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration who greeted John Glenn after his history-making flight in 1962, died Saturday.
He was 63.


2 More Palestinians Killed In Protest Over Shultz Visit
LEAD: Two more Palestinian protesters were slain today in demonstrations called to protest the visit of Secretary of State George P. Shultz, while other Palestinians were seeking permission from the Palestine Liberation Organization to meet with Mr.
Shultz during his stay here this week.


The Really Latest Returns
LEAD: The CBS television affiliate in the Washington area mistakenly began its ''Face The Nation'' broadcast today with last week's preview of the New Hampshire primary.


College Basktball; Temple Smothers N. Carolina
LEAD: Despite coming to the University of North Carolina campus as the topranked team in the nation, the Temple Owls knew they had something to prove.
Critics had pointed to their schedule, which had included only two ranked opponents, as an unreliable indication of the Owls' strength.


Music: Bach Highlights Duo's Recital
LEAD: BEAUTIFUL, fluid Bach playing, full of vitality and color, was the highlight of the violin and harpsichord recital given by Joseph Swensen and John Gibbons Friday night at Weill Recital Hall.
The pairing had looked odd in prospect, as Mr.
Swensen is a rising young violinist on the standard-repertory concerto circuit and Mr.


Phoenix Journal; At Shelter, Homeless Monitored By Police
LEAD: Every night, each homeless person who arrives at a shelter a few blocks south of downtown is asked to give his name and Social Security number.
And every night, the list is turned over to the police, who try to match names on it with those on arrest warrants.


U.S. and Soviet Plan Theater-Dance Studies
LEAD: The American Council of Learned Societies and the Soviet Theater Union have established the U.S.-U.S.S.R.
Commission on Theater and Dance Studies, a group that is to study theater and dance history, theory, criticism and practice.


Blacks Pressing A Rent Boycott In South Africa
LEAD: The one area of black resistance that the South African Government has been unable to break under its nationwide state of emergency is a 20-month-old rent boycott by blacks in Soweto, South Africa's largest black township.


Ethiopian Rebels Seize Europeans
LEAD: Six medical relief workers from Ireland, Belgium and the Netherlands were abducted by a rebel group in the Ethiopian province of Tigre, officials here said today.


Yesterday's Medal Winners
LEAD: Alpine Skiing: Men's Super G Gold: Franck Piccard, France Silver: Helmut Mayer, Austria Bronze: Lars-Boerje Eriksson, Sweden Alpine Skiing: Women's Combined Gold: Anita Wachter, Austria Sivler: Brigitte Oertli, Switzerland Bronze: Maria Walliser, Switzerland  Cross-Country: Women's 20-km Relay Gold: Gavriliuk, Reztsova, Nagueikina, Tikhonova (Soviet Union) Silver: Jahren, Wold, Dybendahl, Dahlmo (Norway) Bronze: Maatta, Matikainen, Savolainen, Kirvesniemi (Finland)


Brass Quintet in Premiere
LEAD: The American Brass Quintet is to give the world premiere performance of ''Colchester Fantasy'' by Eric Ewazen and the New York premiere of Milton Babbitt's ''Fanfare,'' Thursday evening at 8 in the Juilliard Theater, 155 West 65th Street.
The program includes Two Sonatas by Bertali, a 17-century Suite of Dances by Simpson and Brade, Contrapuncti III and VII from Bach's ''Art of the Fugue,'' ''Serenade for Brass'' by Starer and Venetian Songs by Bartolini, Guami and Gabrieli.


State Rates and Benefits Have Also Been Altered
LEAD: Many taxpayers, including residents of New York State, will discover in this filing season that their state returns have undergone revisions almost as major as those on their Federal returns.


Earl Morse, Official In the Food Industry And Jewish Affairs
LEAD: Earl Morse, a food industry executive, art collector and former chairman of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, died after a long illness Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old.


One Way to Shore Up Filipino Democracy
LEAD: Two years after the triumph of ''people power'' in the Philippines, the future of democracy in the ''Pearl of the Orient Sea'' still hangs in the balance.


Koch Ends Boycott Over Movie Tickets
LEAD: Mayor Koch says he is ending his campaign to boycott Manhattan movie houses that charge a $7 admission.
He said he was giving it up because of a lack of support from moviegoers.


Pause and Protests in Bobsled
LEAD: The final two heats of the two-man bobsled were postponed midway through today's racing because of deteriorating track conditions aggravated by wind-blown sand.


SHULTZ IS FOCUSING ON RIGHTS ISSUES IN MOSCOW TALKS
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz made human rights a major theme of his first day of talks in Moscow today, meeting with leading rights campaigners and devoting most of his morning discussions with Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze to the topic.


Greek Cypriots Elect as President A Leftist Who Offers Unity Talks
LEAD: A millionaire businessman who had the backing of the powerful Communist Party defeated a conservative opponent to become President of Cyprus in a runoff election held today.


Sports News Briefs; Trump Ends Bid for Patriots
LEAD: Donald Trump decided yesterday to drop out of the bidding for the New England Patriots franchise, a spokesman said.


'Other Guy' in Hurricane Carter Case: Troubles Are Not Over
LEAD: For 21 years, John Artis says, he has been the neglected ''other guy'' in the Rubin (Hurricane) Carter murder case.


Official of Amtrak Disputes State on Cause of Train Fire
LEAD: An Amtrak official disagreed today with state officials on the cause of a fire in a crew car on Amtrak's California Zephyr that killed one man, and he defended the crew's handling of the emergency.


Publisher Takes Glossy Resume to Post
LEAD: Peter O. Price, who has spent much of his life in such successful and lustrous enterprises as Princeton University, Time Inc. and Avenue magazine, will bear much of the burden of attempting to turn around The New York Post, widely acknowledged to be the grittiest and most vulnerable newspaper in New York City.


Swaggart Says He Has Sinned; Will Step Down
LEAD: The Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart, who last year condemned a fellow television evangelist, Jim Bakker, as ''a cancer on the body of Christ,'' today confessed to sins of his own and begged to be forgiven.


Nicaragua Impasse: Who Will Bend?
LEAD: Peace talks between anti-Sandinista guerrillas and the Nicaraguan Government have become deadlocked in what is essentially a debate over the legitimacy of the Sandinista revolution and those who oppose it.


DR. LEAH GRUSS IS WED TO DR. JOEL SPIELMAN
LEAD: Dr.
Leah P. Gruss, a radiology resident at the Mount Sinai Medical Center, and Dr.
Joel H. Spielman, an orthopedic surgery resident at the Montefiore Medical Center, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Samuel Orenstein performed the ceremony at the New York Hilton.


Bakker's Parents Lose Jobs
LEAD: The parents of Jim Bakker, the former president of the PTL television ministry, have applied for unemployment benefits after being dismissed from their jobs as greeters at PTL's Heritage USA religious theme park.
Raleigh Bakker and his wife, Furnia, both 81 years old, still live at the resort.
PTL, which is involved in Federal bankruptcy proceedings, has cut 1,800 jobs since 1985, a spokeswoman said.


West Germans End U.S. Medal Hopes in Hockey
LEAD: In the end, all of its youth, enthusiasm and infatuation with goal scoring wasn't enough as the United States Olympic hockey team was convincingly knocked from medal contention by a sturdy contingent from West Germany.


Courtenay Journal; Survival on France's Bleak but Abundant Earth
LEAD: At first glance, it seemed that the long arm of the European Community had reached Remi Guinebault and Philippe Follet on their 300 acres amid the verdant flatlands between the Yonne and Loire rivers.


The Real U.S. Commitment on Afghan Pullout
LEAD: To the Editor:


Maple Leaf Coin No. 1
LEAD: Canada's Maple Leaf has regained its position as the world's most-purchased gold coin, overcoming the upstart United States Eagle in 1987.
Official figures will be released next month, but a spokesman for the Royal Canadian Mint said Friday that 1987 sales ranged between 1.3 million and 1.5 million ounces.


The Sweetest Time of the Year
LEAD: Bill Rudy heading into the sugar bush with empty pails to collect the sap of maple trees at Lenoir Preserve in Yonkers.
Holes are drilled into the trees, and the clear liquid tapped is boiled down to a rich, golden syrup.
It takes 35 to 50 gallons of sap to make a gallon of syrup. (NYT/Suzanne DeChillo)


Brief Period of Stability Seen for Interest Rates
LEAD: Continuing a consolidation phase after the sharp declines registered in January, interest rates are likely to move in a relatively narrow range for the next week or so, credit market analysts said.
But they added that a further drop in yields seemed quite probable before the quarter ends.


Fewer Young Adults Using Cocaine: Why?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Better Cooperation Urged in Europe
LEAD: With America's appetite for imports slowing and West Germany's reluctance to stimulate its economy growing, European policy makers are desperately seeking ways to break the continent's long cycle of torpid growth.


Sports News Briefs; Steelers' Webster Changes His Mind
LEAD: Mike Webster, the center who surprised the Pittsburgh Steelers on Friday by announcing his retirement, surprised them again today by saying he would return next season.


Sports World Specials; Drag-Race Rent-a-Car
LEAD: Last July, Richard Shaw watched the National Hot Rod Association Summernational drag races in Old Bridge, N.J., from the grandstands.
Earlier this month, the 30-year-old fashion industry executive had a different perspective on the action at the Winternational event at Pomona, Calif.
Shaw watched it from behind the canopy of an 800-horsepower gas dragster, as he became the first winner in a new race series that permits drivers to rent rides rather than entering their own cars.


Foe Who Also Lost Church Urges Prayers for Swaggart
LEAD: A subdued congregation in a New Orleans suburb wept along with its pastor, Marvin Gorman, who cried aloud this morning after offering prayers and sympathy for his former colleague, and current adversary, the Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart. ''My heart has been deeply saddened by the news of the past few days,'' said Mr.


Advertising; Pacific Bell's Mini-Series Campaigns
LEAD: THE story of Garland, Lawrence and Mary Ellen unfolded over 12 episodes.
As boys during the 1920's, Garland and Lawrence became fast friends.
During the 1930's, they helped each other through the Depression and vied for the affections of Mary Ellen.
They went off to war, and when they returned, Lawrence's heart was broken when Mary Ellen chose to marry


Life, Industrialized
LEAD: Item: The National Academy of Sciences last week advocated a $3 billion project to work out the full chemical data base of human genes.


Safety at Sea
LEAD: Congress has spent hours debating airline safety, train safety, highway safey, but it has yet to tackle what have been called the most dangerous and unregulated crafts of them all: commercial fishing vessels.


Several Leaders of Solidarity Held Over Weekend Are Free
LEAD: The authorities today released several opposition leaders who had been detained over the weekend in an apparent effort to prevent them from attending a meeting of the outlawed trade union Solidarity.


Lakers Top Pistons After Trailing by 16
LEAD: Mychal Thompson scored a 3-point play with 41 seconds left today and Wes Matthews added 5 points in the last 30 seconds as the Los Angeles Lakers came back from a 16-point deficit to defeat Detroit, 117-110.


Sports News Briefs; Player Suspended
LEAD: John Johnson was suspended indefinitely from the University of Viginia basketball team Saturday after failing a drug test, the university announced.


Allegheny Files Under Chapter 11
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc., the maker of Sunbeam and Oster appliances and Northern electric blankets, filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code during the weekend.


Rock: Throwing Muses
LEAD: THROWING MUSES have unlearned just about everything rock songwriters take for granted.
The four-member band from Boston, which performed Thursday at Drums, rejects concise melodies, conventional chord sequences, naturalistic singing, narrative lyrics and just about anything else that might suggest symmetry or surface clarity.


Brazil Investigating 'Loss' of $8 Million Sent From New York
LEAD: Varig Airlines of Brazil, the Brink's security company, a local cargo concern and the federal police are still referring to the ''loss'' of two bags containing $8 million.
They were being shipped from the Federal Reserve Bank in New York to Buenos Aires this month.


Straying TV Preachers Jar Followers' Faith
LEAD: The acknowledgment of moral lapses yesterday by the Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart was only the latest in a series of scandals among television evangelists in recent years that have rocked their supporters, depressing donations and creating public distrust.


Baseball; Wilson Still Wants A Trade
LEAD: Mookie Wilson, the ''other'' center fielder on the Mets and the man most likely to be traded by the Mets, conceded today that ''there are a lot of things worse in the world than sitting on the bench in New York.''


Blueprint for Trouble: A Child's Life in Welfare Hotels
LEAD: Calvin Watkins cannot afford a lamp or even a flashlight, so as he rummaged through a plastic bag of family photographs the other day, the only light in his room in a Brooklyn welfare hotel came from the fast-fading sun.
From the tattered bag he drew a picture of his son James.
Mr.
Watkins has 19 children, but it is


INSIDE
LEAD:  U.N.
Cuts Back in Lebanon  Some United Nations operations in Lebanon have been curtailed sharply since the kidnapping of a United States Marine officer and other United Nations personnel.
Page A3.
Palestinians Seek Talks  As two more protesters were slain, a group of Palestinians sought permission from the Palestine Liberation Organization to meet with Secretary of State George P.


Boycott Threat Blocking Sale Of Abortion-Inducing Drug
LEAD: While a new abortion-inducing drug is expected to be sold in France, China, England and other countries, opponents of abortion are blocking sale of the drug in this country.


Boitano Kept to Goal in Final
LEAD: With seconds to go in his freestyle program Saturday night, Brian Boitano let the world know exactly how he felt about his performance.
His smile seemed to stretch from one side of the Saddledome to the other; his fists were clenched at his heart in triumphant joy.


An Off-Duty Officer Is Shot While Intervening in Dispute
LEAD: An off-duty police officer was shot in Brooklyn early yesterday when he intervened in a dispute, the police said.
The officer suffered minor wounds when a passer-by, trying to help, shot him accidentally.


Southland to Sell Unit
LEAD: The Southland Corporation has agreed to sell its Dairies Group to Morningstar Foods Inc. for an undisclosed amount.
Morningstar, an affiliate of the Houston-based investment firm of Duncan, Cook &amp; Company, will buy 10 regional dairies throughout the United States, along with 25 plants and distribution points.


Lifting of Secrecy Reveals Earthy Side of Justices
LEAD: The Supreme Court has long been shrouded in secrecy and inaccessibility, hindering public understanding of its role while perhaps enhancing its mystique.


After Kidnappings, U.N. Curtails Its Operations in Lebanon
LEAD: Some United Nations operations in southern Lebanon have been curtailed sharply since the kidnapping of a United States Marine officer and other United Nations personnel this month.


New Law Will Warn Californians Of Chemical Risks of Modern Life
LEAD: Starting Saturday, life will change for the 24 million residents of California.
Almost daily, they will receive pointed reminders about the chemical risks of the good life of the 20th century in the nation's largest state.


F.B.I. Sought 'Terrorism' in the Wrong Place; When Death Is O.K.
LEAD: To the Editor:


James Baldwin Tribute To Take Place at N.Y.U.
LEAD: A two-day tribute to the author James Baldwin - comprising screenings, interviews and a jazz performance - is to be held on Feb. 29 and March 1 by New York University.
The writer died in December.
On Feb. 29, a daylong screening of films featuring appearances by Mr.
Baldwin or adaptations of his works will begin at 9 A.M.


Ruing Fixed Opinions
LEAD: Justice Antonin Scalia says one thing has disappointed him since he joined the Supreme Court in 1986: the absence of give and take among the Court's members when they meet in conference to discuss and vote in cases they have heard.


Books of The Times
LEAD: HOT MONEY. By Dick Francis. 324 pages.


Volcker Urges Cut in Deficit
LEAD: Paul A. Volcker, the former Federal Reserve Board chairman, warned today of financial chaos and recession unless the United States reduced its dependence on foreign savings by reducing the Federal budget deficit.


Bridge: The Negative Double Can Be Too Much of a Good Thing
LEAD: The negative double, developed as part of the Roth-Stone system 40 years ago, was a major step forward in bidding theory and has been adopted by almost all serious players around the world.


Notebook; Polish Hockey Star Is Banned
LEAD: The International Olympic Committee announced today that Jaroslaw Morawiecki, Poland's best hockey player, has been banned from these Olympics after testing positive for steroids.
It was the first penalty for drug use at the XV Olympic Winter Games.


Peter J. Robotti, 87; Owner of Restaurant
LEAD: Peter J. Robotti, longtime owner of Le Chateau Richelieu, a French and Continental restaurant on the East Side of Manhattan, died after a brief illness at his home on Thursday.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.


University Seeks King Tapes
LEAD: Lawyers for Boston University have asked a judge to order Coretta Scott King to release tapes of conversations between her husband, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., and others recorded secretly by Federal investigators.


Doorman Shot in Back As Woman Is Robbed
LEAD: A 61-year-old doorman was shot in the back, and a woman was then robbed of jewelry valued at $15,000 in the elevator of an apartment building on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, the police said.


For Lacroix's Owner, a Fashion Empire Is in the Making
LEAD: The fashion world is waiting to see how Christian Lacroix will fare with his first ready-to-wear collection, part of which made its debut yesterday in New York as part of the pre-fall showings.


City Ballet: Benefit for Dancers' Fund
LEAD: The Fourth Annual Dancers'


NAVY CHIEF QUITS, ASSAILING CARLUCCI OVER BUDGET CUTS
LEAD: Navy Secretary James H. Webb Jr. resigned today, sharply criticizing Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci's plan to cut the Navy's fleet and his approach to managing the Pentagon.


DAKOTA STRATEGY PROVES A SUCCESS
LEAD: When the South Dakota Legislature shifted the state's Presidential primary to February from June, political leaders hoped to make the state an important - and more widely noticed - arena for Republican and Democratic contenders.


WAINOCO OIL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WAINOCO OIL (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,498,000
7,580,000
Net inc
1,255,000
b4,237,000
Share earns
.06
-
Yr rev
33,933,000
37,552,000
Net inc
24,523,000
b19,953,000
Share earns
1.50
-


Criminal Trial Is Postponed For Gov. Mecham of Arizona
LEAD: A judge today ordered that the start of Gov.
Evan Mecham's trial on criminal charges of concealing a $350,000 campaign loan be delayed until March 22.


Galanos: Perfection, and Lots of It
LEAD: Since 1951, James Galanos has been designing beautiful, expensive clothes in California.
It's a one-man job: he picks the fabrics and sells the clothes as well as designing them.
This is as close to couture as ready-to-wear can get, and the clothes seem to be getting better and better.


Soviet Spacecraft Will Use Laser to Examine Moon of Mars
LEAD: A PAIR of Soviet spacecraft scheduled to set out for Mars in July will carry a laser gun with which scientists expect to discover information about the solar system in its infancy, more than 4 billion years ago.


Henley Request To Santa Fe
LEAD: In another move to increase its stake in the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation, the Henley Group asked Santa Fe to revise its plan to issue about $780 million in pay-in-kind debentures in favor of issuing buy $780 million of new Santa Fe common stock, which Henley would acquire at $17.50 a share.


Bryant's Best Game Carries Seton Hall
LEAD: It's been a long time since a local basketball crowd at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena was filled with this sort of jubilation.


Music Noted in Brief; A Guitar Recital By David Russell
LEAD: David Russell, a Scottish guitarist of Spanish upbringing, gave a short and expert recital at Merkin Concert Hall Saturday evening.


Drexel Warns Of Charges
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. has publicly acknowledged for the first time that the staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission has recommended filing civil charges against the investment firm and some of its employees.
In addition, Drexel confirmed yesterday that it has been under investigation by a


NATIONAL PRESTO INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL PRESTO INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
36,512,000
42,301,000
Net inc
5,472,000
5,193,000
Share earns
.74
.70
Yr sales
101,700,000
108,543,000
Net inc
16,889,000
16,799,000
Share earns
2.28
2.27


AIDS Patient Wins Decision In Rights Case
LEAD: An administrative law judge for the New York City Commission on Human Rights ruled yesterday that the agency had the power to investigate complaints against health-care workers who refused to treat people with AIDS.


Simon and Kemp Pin Hopes On Caucuses in Minnesota
LEAD: Stragglers in both parties are trying to use the Minnesota Presidential caucuses Tuesday night to bolster their floundering campaigns and attract a new infusion of energy and money heading into the major southern primaries two weeks from now.


DATA SWITCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA SWITCH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
27,406,000
11,722,000
Net inc
2,240,000
1,054,000
Share earns
.21
.10
Yr rev
96,886,000
42,177,000
Net inc
2,286,000
2,794,000
Share earns
.21
.27


New Site for Mamet Play
LEAD: David Mamet's ''Speed-the-Plow'' will move to the Royale Theater on Broadway after its initial run in March and April at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center.
The new play, which is being staged by the Lincoln Center Theater director, Gregory Mosher, stars Madonna, Joe Mantegna and Ron Silver.


LIFE TECHNOLOGIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIFE TECHNOLOGIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
29,623,000
24,388,000
Net inc
2,373,000
1,668,000
Share earns
.18
.13
Yr rev
120,912,000
98,332,000
Net inc
11,087,000
3,724,000
Share earns
.82
.29


Surge of Violence in Capital Linked by Police to Narcotics
LEAD: The illicit drug scene in the nation's capital has become one of the most violent in the country, according to law-enforcement officials.


Gabon Keeps Strong Links With France
LEAD: In the late 1950's, as the winds of independence swept across Africa, Gabon was the only one of 14 French colonies in Africa to vote to join France as a department.


Pupils No Match for Kasparov, Even Simultaneously
LEAD: The world chess champion, Gary Kasparov, opened every game with the same move: king's pawn to E4.
Then he slowly circled the children who had packed the gymnasium.
He stared intently at each board for about 10 seconds, made a move and went on to the next.


DOLE CAMP HIRES A NEW AD AGENCY
LEAD: The Presidential campaign of Senator Bob Dole hired a new advertising agency today, the latest phase of a debate over television strategy that some aides said had persuaded Mr.
Dole not to respond to Vice President Bush's last-minute offensive last week in New Hampshire.


Bond Prices Inch Up Cautiously
LEAD: Bond prices rose slightly in very slow trading yesterday.


What the Kidnappers Want in Lebanon
LEAD: By kidnapping an American colonel in Lebanon, a Lebanese faction backed by Iran does more than attack America, the Great Satan that Iran so loves to hate.
It attacks the stabilizing United Nations presence in southern Lebanon and attacks Amal, the mainstream Shiite militia that welcomes the U.N.
If such acts of terror succeed in diminishing the U.N.


Notebook; '88 WINTER OLYMPICS; Barred Polish Athlete Protests
LEAD: Jaroslaw Mirowiecki, the Polish hockey star who failed a drug test at the XV Olympic Winter Games last week, proclaimed his innocence today.
He was supported by Polish officials who said they were turned down when they requested another test.


SYNERGEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYNERGEN INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,697,400
1,810,100
Net inc
1,800
b106,100
Yr rev
9,448,700
7,910,500
Net loss
121,400
c428,400
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net loss and includes a loss of $31,300 from the reversal of tax credits.


Rig Count Up in Week
LEAD: The number of oil and gas rigs engaged in exploration in the United States rose by 10 last week, to a total of 978, Baker Hughes Inc. announced today.
A year ago the count was 839.
The rig count is the most widely watched industry index of drilling activity.


Piano: Mitsuko Uchida
LEAD: MITSUKO UCHIDA'S elegant Mozart recordings scarcely prepare us for the headlong passion she brought to Chopin at the Frick Collection on Sunday Afternoon.
The ubiquitous B flat minor Piano Sonata is not exactly a welcome item on the program of so interesting a musician, but one was struck by.
Miss Uchida's broad rubato in the first movement and a fury in the second that stretched both the music and her excellent technique to their limits.


Your Taxes
LEAD: How should taxpayers adjust their finances to take advantage of the new tax system, with its fewer deductions and lower rates?
Wading through the maze of tax changes to file a return by April 15 can provide some guidelines.


CLC OF AMERICAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLC OF AMERICAN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
24,551,000
22,921,000
Net inc
3,119,000
2,920,000
Share earns
.32
.30
Yr rev
89,768,000
76,875,000
Net inc
b3,174,000
c4,847,000
Share earns
.32
-


Marines Are Said to Suspend Alleged Lesbians
LEAD: The Marine Corps investigating homosexuality among women at the Parris Island boot camp and plans to court-martial or discharge up to 10 women, according to three women who said they are being investigated.


Music: Meyerbeer's 'Robert le Diable' at Carnegie
LEAD: IS a Meyerbeer revival possible? The composer who dominated


Missing Speaker
LEAD: A long-planned series at the Smithsonian Institution on life in South Africa has had to be modified after at least one of the speakers was denied a travel permit by the South African Government.


New Cyprus President Urges End to Enmities
LEAD: President-elect George Vassiliou called today for fresh efforts to heal the scars between the island's Greek and Turkish communities, separated for nearly 14 years by barbed wire and minefields.


STOP &amp; SHOP COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STOP &amp; SHOP COMPANIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,212,616,000
1,094,777,000
Net inc
30,200,000
b12,900,000
Share earns
1.11
.47
Yr sales
4,343,012,000
3,872,419,000
Net inc
55,700,000
b38,400,000
Share earns
2.01
1.38


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Richard Voehl has been named executive vice president, creative director at Widmann &amp; Company.


Isolated Aged Parents Need More Than Pity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kodak Shares Fall On Polaroid Claim
LEAD: Eastman Kodak Company shares dropped $1.50 yesterday, to $40.75, as investors responded to the the Polaroid Corporation's request for $5.72 billion from Kodak to settle an old dispute over instant photography patents.
Polaroid's stock jumped $2.50, to $30.
Both were among the 10 most active issues on the New York Stock


Outlook: Dueling PC's
LEAD: The stage is set this year for a tumultuous showdown between I.B.M.'s year-old PS/ 2 series of microcomputers and the ''industry standard'' PC's that I.B.M. spawned and then abandoned.
No matter who wins, the average PC user can expect a shower of rewards, although they will probably precipitate from a cloud of confusion.


PHOTO-MARKER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHOTO-MARKER
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,066,305
2,368,727
Net loss
134,164
183,106
6mo sales
4,146,776
4,921,331
Net loss
104,158
161,052
The company said it agreed in principle to acquire H.F.
Ross &amp; Associates Inc., Anderson, S.C., an industrial chemical manufacturer.


Chambers Trial Is Told of Loss Of Blood Clues
LEAD: A blood-spotted skirt and blouse found on Jennifer Levin's body were so badly mishandled by pathologists that the bloodstains could not be analyzed for evidence, a forensic expert testified yesterday.


PSYCHIATRIC BIOSCIENCE reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PSYCHIATRIC BIOSCIENCE (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,100,000
6,000,000
Net inc
436,000
b569,000
Share earns
.15
-
b-Net loss  The company said its board approved the change of the corporate name to Princeton Diagnostic Laboratories of America Inc.


Government Posts Surplus
LEAD: The Federal Government posted a rare $16.09 billion surplus last month, primarily because Social Security checks for January were mailed early, the Treasury Department said today.


A New Hope for Koreas
LEAD: Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, said today that Roh Tae Woo, the in-coming president of South Korea, intends to offer to meet with the president of North Korea, Kim Il Sung.
Samaranch said that he was ''guessing'' that an attempt of ''rapproachment'' to Mr.


Dollar Moves Downward; Gold Prices Finish Mixed
LEAD: The dollar drifted lower against most other currencies yesterday in listless trading that analysts said reflected uncertainty about the outlook for the United States economy and interest rates.


CASTLE, A M &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CASTLE, A M &amp; CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
101,886,000
80,362,000
Net inc
1,763,000
b181,000
Share earns
.46
-
Yr sales
376,109,000
322,895,000
Net inc
6,624,000
122,000
Share earns
1.74
.03


GENERAL PARAMETRICS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL PARAMETRICS (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,527,000
5,585,000
Net inc
b970,000
980,000
Share earns
.12
.11
b-After a gain of $250,000 from an accounting change.


ALLEGHENY &amp; WESTERN ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEGHENY &amp; WESTERN ENERGY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
50,130,000
66,383,000
Net inc
2,466,000
5,979,000
Share earns
.31
.75
6mo rev
66,318,000
94,915,000
Net loss
115,000
b8,510,000
Share earns
-
1.06


Castro Rebuts Robertson
LEAD: Fidel Castro, in an interview published today in USA Today, denied Pat Robertson's charge that the Soviet Union had nuclear missiles in Cuba.
President Castro said there ''is not even a semblance of a Soviet missile in Cuba - not one.
I repeat, not one.'' Mr.
Robertson, a candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination, said recently that 25 intermediate-range Soviet SS-4 and SS-5 missiles, armed with nuclear warheads, were in Cuba.


KULICKE &amp; SOFFA INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KULICKE &amp; SOFFA INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,231,000
16,450,000
Net inc
10,000
b1,566,000
b-Net loss


Lack of Vote Doesn't Deter Delegate From Guam
LEAD: Ben Garrido Blaz enjoys virtually all the perquisites of a member of Congress except one: as Guam's delegate to the House of Representatives, Mr.
Blaz cannot take part in a floor vote.


Advertising; Mullen Will Handle Account for Timberland
LEAD: Mullen Inc., previously known as Mullen Advertising, has brought the Timberland Company account back to New England.


PATTERNS
LEAD: Classic From Kawakubo


CHURCH'S FRIED CHICKEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHURCH'S FRIED CHICKEN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
120,581,000
138,695,000
Net inc
1,819,000
1,467,000
Share earns
.05
.04
Yr rev
401,294,000
480,529,000
Net inc
9,506,000
17,283,000
Share earns
.26
.46


Sandpoint Journal; Children's Love Follows Caribou Into the Wilds
LEAD: For many years, the vast herds of caribou that once roamed the mountain wilderness of northern Idaho have been gone, the forgotten victims of encroaching civilization and overhunting.


Acid Spill Threatens Missouri Town's Water
LEAD: Eleven cars of a 133-car Union Pacific Railroad freight train derailed Sunday and spilled an acid solution into a creek, threatening the water supply for thousands of people, the authorities said.


AUTOTROL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUTOTROL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
7,103,232
6,415,612
Net inc
268,148
b825,111
Share earns
.14
-
Yr net inc
1,228,156
b3,163,397
Share earns
.63
-
b-Net loss and includes losses from discontinued operations $2,101,173 and $3,008,135 for the quarter and year, respectively, and a gain of $1,835,310 from the termination of a pension plan for both the quarter and year.


Larry Shay, Composer And Music Coach, 90
LEAD: Larry Shay, a composer and music coach for such greats as Al Jolson, Jimmy Durante and Sophie Tucker, died of lung cancer and emphysema on Monday.
He was 90 years old.


Sports People; Expletives Deleted
LEAD: During a radio network broadcast Sunday from the locker room of the Missouri Tigers, after a 90-72 victory over Oklahoma State, Coach Norm Stewart of the Tigers erupted into an expletive-filled tirade - primarily against the news media - that caused the program to be pulled off the air by KMOX in St.


'I Could Not Give Her Health, but I Could Give Her Rest'
LEAD: Following is the essay in the Jan. 8 issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association that has become the subject of a dispute with prosecutors in Chicago:  It's Over, Debbie


Blair Captures 500-Meter Gold In Record Time
LEAD: In just 39.10 seconds tonight, Bonnie Blair of Champaign, Ill., gave the United States speed-skating team an Olympic gold medal at last.


1985 Pipeline Memo to Meese Said Peres Party Would Profit
LEAD: A memo written to Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d in 1985 said ''a portion'' of the proceeds from a projected Arab oil pipeline would ''go directly'' to the Israeli Labor Party.
A copy of the document was made public today by Mr.
Meese's lawyers.


77th Precinct Officer Sentenced to 2 1/2 Years
LEAD: The officer who faced the most charges in the 77th Precinct scandal in Brooklyn was sentenced yesterday to 2 1/2 to 7 1/2 years in prison as part of a plea agreement with the state.


Sports People; Spring Training
LEAD: Some baseball players with medical question marks took their first tentative steps yesterday as the first full week of spring training began.
Dennis (Oil Can) Boyd and Bruce Hurst threw for 10 minutes each at the Boston Red Sox camp in Winter Haven, Fla.
Dr.
Arthur Pappas, the Boston team physician, said that Boyd, who underwent right shoulder surgery last August after appearing in seven games, ''threw well, feels comfortable and has no discomfort.


A New 'Fast Lane' in Computers
LEAD: When Andreas V. Bechtolsheim, a Stanford University graduate student, could not find a computer that would satisfy his needs, he built his own, a machine that used standard microprocessors and software and easily connected to other computers.


Nissan Considers Expansion in U.S.
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Manufacturing Corporation said it might expand production at its assembly plant in Smyrna, Tenn.
Jerry L. Benefield, president of the American manufacturing subsidiary of the second-largest Japanese auto maker, said he would recommend that engines, axles and bumper assemblies be added to the components now made in Smyrna.


Concert: Orpheus Group
LEAD: ORPHEUS brought a strongly played, well-conceived concert to Carnegie Hall Saturday night.
The American chamber orchestra, which operates with rotating concertmasters and without conductors, used Haydn's F minor Symphony, ''La Passione,'' to start and ended with the ''Short Symphony'' by Aaron Copland.


Chess: Despite Early Loss, Karpov Wins Event at Wijk-aan-Zee
LEAD: Despite a crushing second-round loss to the Yugoslav grandmaster Predrag Nikolic, Anatoly Karpov fought back to capture first prize in the 50th Hoogoven International Tournament in Wijk-aan-Zee, the Netherlands.
The former world champion displaced the Swedish grandmaster Ulf Andersson from the lead in Round 12 and the two drew in the final round.


FARM HOUSE FOODS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FARM HOUSE FOODS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
170,440,000
184,559,000
Net loss
3,647,000
b2,579,000
Share earns
-
.30
9mo rev
580,706,000
606,917,000
Net loss
3,304,000
b4,118,000
Share earns
-
.48


Spain's Communist Party Elects New Leader
LEAD: The Spanish Communist Party elected Julio Anguita as its Secretary General today amid hopes the southern politician can restore the party's influence and reverse a decline in membership.


Hint of Spring in the Air
LEAD: As the temperature reached 48 degrees yesterday, second graders from the Ethical Culture Elementary School doffed their coats as they played in Central Park near 63d Street and Central Park West.
The temperature may top 50 today, but an afternoon shower is expected. (NYT/Dith Pran)


Quest for Fastest Computer Chip: International Contest Intensifies
LEAD: THE race for dominance in making semiconductors, the tiny chips that carry electronic circuits, is entering a new phase as scientists convinced they have almost exhausted the present technology strive to use X-rays to make chips that are faster and more powerful.


Hawaii Chooses Spaceport Site
LEAD: THE state of Hawaii, encouraged by President Reagan's policy to encourage the commercial space industry, is moving ahead with plans to create a private spaceport for launching commercial rockets into space.


Safeway Selling Postage Stamps at Discount
LEAD: A supermarket chain has found a way to slash the price of a little item that almost everyone buys and always at full price: United States postage stamps.


2 Lonely Governors
LEAD: Is anyone out there listening?


Reagan Plans News Session
LEAD: President Reagan will hold a news conference, his first in four months, at 8 P.M.
Wednesday, the White House announced today.
Marlin Fitzwater, the chief White House spokesman, said the news conference was not ''issue oriented,'' but it would be held less than a week before Mr.
Reagan travels to Brussels for a NATO meeting March 2 and 3.


STIFEL FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STIFEL FINANCIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 29
1988
1987
Revenue
17,139,000
23,936,000
Net inc
122,000
1,236,000
Share earns
.03
.32
6mo rev
36,728,000
46,939,000
Net loss
1,403,000
b2,878,000
Share earns
-
.77


U.S. Fires a Warning in Gulf
LEAD: A United States warship, arriving in the Persian Gulf today as the newest addition to the Navy's escort squadron, fired machine-gun warning shots to chase away two fishing boats that ventured too close.


TEXFI INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEXFI INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 29
1988
1987
Sales
39,838,000
31,847,000
Net inc
b2,329,000
b2,018,000
Share earns
.28
.26
b-Includes tax credits of $812,000 and $1,324,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.Why does skin wrinkle after a bath or swim?


FIRST ESSEX BANCORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST ESSEX BANCORP
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
4,492,000
6,113,000
The company converted to stock form on Aug. 11, 1987.


Axel A. Johnson, Swedish Industrialist, 77
LEAD: Axel Axelsson Johnson, a Swedish industrialist and head of the Johnson Line, died of heart failure on Friday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 77 years old.


Texts of Documents Involving Meese, Peres and a Proposed Iraqi Pipeline
LEAD: Following are the texts of documents made public today by lawyers for Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d on a proposed Iraqi pipeline project.
The first letter is from Shimon Peres, then the Israeli Prime Minister, to Mr.
Meese on Sept. 19, 1985; the second letter is from Mr.
Meese to Mr.
Peres on Oct.


Full Court Sets New Arguments in 2 Cases
LEAD: In an action apparently prompted by the arrival of Anthony M. Kennedy as its newest Justice, the Supreme Court said today it would hear a second round of arguments in two cases: one of great importance to military contractors and the other a death penalty case.


Lack of Nurses Impedes New York AIDS Care
LEAD: Efforts to increase the capacity of hospitals in New York City to deal with the worsening AIDS crisis are being thwarted by acute staff shortages, primarily among nurses, according to state officials and city hospital administrators.


Human Rights Promise, and Promises
LEAD: The new winds keep blowing in the Soviet Union, now in the direction of human rights.
Secretary of State Shultz this week got the Kremlin's word that a big barrier to emigration will soon come down.
And Mikhail Gorbachev promises a remarkable step, a Communist Party meeting devoted to the unsettling question of the rights of nationality groups in the Soviet


Music: A Foss Concerto
LEAD: THERE'S a dreamlike quality to the Renaissance Concerto for Flute and Orchestra by Lukas Foss.
A wispy, intangible spirit floats through the work's four movements, each of which presents music of the Renaissance filtered through the composer's modernist sensibility.


Scientists Admit AIDS Identification Error
LEAD: HARVARD AIDS researchers have acknowledged a laboratory error, clearing up confusion about AIDS-related viruses that infect humans and monkeys in Africa.
As some other scientists previously suggested, cells studied in the Harvard laboratory became contaminated with a monkey virus that was mistakenly identified as a human virus.


LINCOLN FOODSERVICE PRODCTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LINCOLN FOODSERVICE PRODCTS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,028,000
11,330,000
Net inc
589,000
390,000
Share earns
.17
.10
Yr sales
46,513,000
49,519,000
Net inc
2,478,000
3,398,000
Share earns
.67
.97


Aftermath of a Bronx Fire: Desperate Quest for Housing
LEAD: For most of the 45 families who were burned out of their apartments on Beech Terrace in the South Bronx last month, the grief of losing their homes is compounded by the realities of searching for new ones.


CANDIDATES URGED TO STIFLE CRITICISM
LEAD: Concerned about the safety of a kidnapped United States marine in Lebanon, the White House admonished political candidates today not to make hostage-taking an issue in the Presidential campaign.


NEWPORT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWPORT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,889,000
10,122,000
Net inc
1,549,000
1,038,000
Share earns
.18
.11
Shares outst
8,623,000
9,415,000
6mo sales
24,757,000
21,209,000
Net inc
3,085,000
2,319,000
Share earns
.35
.25
Shares outst
8,916,000
9,410,000


BUSINESS DIGEST: TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 23, 1988
LEAD: THE ECONOMY  The I.R.S. is giving incorrect information to people who call for help with their returns at least 25 percent of the time, the agency concedes.
The G.A.O. says the bad information is offered in response to 39 percent of the questions.
The telephone assistance program is more important than ever because most provisions of the monumental Tax Reform Act of 1986 take effect this year.


NATO Naval Force Visits New York Harbor
LEAD: An aerial view of a North Atlantic Treaty Organization destroyer heading into Pier 90 on the Hudson River yesterday.
The ship is one of five vessels of the NATO Standing Naval Force Atlantic visiting the city. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)


Computer's Sale Studied
LEAD: The Reagan Administration confirmed today that it was investigating accusations that a United States computer system that could help determine optimal targets for nuclear missiles had been illegally shipped to the Soviet Union.


Ethics Panel Won't Ask Felon to Be a Witness
LEAD: When the New York State Commission on Government Integrity holds hearings next week on the influence of politics on the judiciary, it will not call an expert on the subject.


Stage: 'Twelfth Night'
LEAD: THE young Shakespeare Stage Company has dedicated itself to fidelity to Shakespeare's text and language as well as to ensemble acting - consummations devoutly to be wished in an age when such fidelity is often honored in the breach.
Although the company's new production of ''Twelfth Night'' rarely takes poetic wing, its spirits are almost as high as its intentions, at least when it is clowning around.


Church Orders 2-Year Rehabilitation for Swaggart; NATURE OF INCIDENT UNCLEAR
LEAD: The 52-year-old Mr.
Swaggart has often faced criticism for the opulence of his life style and the flamboyance of his ministry, but until now has not been subjected to serious scrutiny about his sexual behavior.


V BAND CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*V BAND CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,543,000
8,234,000
Net inc
2,290,000
1,216,000
Share earns
.34
.18


INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTING
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
13,158,000
2,417,000
Net loss
644,000
b5,431,000
Share earns
-
3.32
Shares outst
2,263,000
1,638,000
b-Net income and after net from discontinued operations of $4,957,000 and an extraordinary gain of $506,000.


Plunge in Cotton Prices Tied To End of March Contract
LEAD: Prices of cotton futures collapsed on the New York Cotton Exchange yesterday in a selloff linked to the impending expiration of the March contract.


Subtle Clues Are Often The Only Warnings Of Perilous Aneurysms
LEAD: FOR months, maybe even years, Senator Joseph Biden Jr. of Delaware carried a silent time bomb in his head.
Two weeks ago it almost killed him.
For some time, he had suffered from neck pain attributed to a pinched nerve and a viral infection.
Mr.
Biden, a Democrat and chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, wore a neck brace in January during hearings on the nomination of Anthony M.


Hyundai to Fight Canadian Ruling
LEAD: The Hyundai Corporation said it would continue to sell its cars in Canada despite a Canadian ruling that the auto maker was dumping its product by selling it at a lower price than it charged in South Korea.
Hyundai officials also said the auto maker will finish an assembly plant, now under construction in Bremont,


Dance: Felicia Norton
LEAD: SOMETIMES at a dance concert, the program as a whole seems greater than the sum of its parts.
But at the concert of music and dance on Sunday night at the Emanu-El Midtown Y, each separate part somehow seemed stronger than the program as a whole.
This was because a strained and unnecessary attempt was made to have the parts add up.


GRUBB &amp; ELLIS COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRUBB &amp; ELLIS COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
96,615,000
105,172,000
Net inc
343,000
1,539,000
Share earns
.02
.10
Yr rev
337,020,000
319,799,000
Net inc
b250,000
c1,780,000
Share earns
.02
-


The Reading Scores For New York City Schools
LEAD: Following are the scores released by the New York City Board of Education on the reading tests given in the city's public elementary schools and junior high schools in May 1987.


ELDON INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELDON INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
22,511,000
19,182,000
Net inc
1,724,000
1,349,000
Share earns
.31
.24
Yr sales
84,181,000
72,831,000
Net inc
6,193,000
4,954,000
Share earns
1.12
.90


Books of The Times
LEAD: SHORES OF REFUGE.
A Hundred Years of Jewish Emigration.
By Ronald Sanders. 673 pages.
Illustrated.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $27.95.


U.S. Faults Bahamas on Drug Effort
LEAD: Despite excellent official cooperation between the United States and the Bahamas on drug enforcement efforts, narcotics-related corruption remains a ''serious problem'' in the Bahamas, a senior State Department official said today.


GRUMMAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRUMMAN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
947,288,000
930,639,000
Net loss
b42,363,000
c24,823,000
Share earns
-
.72
Yr sales
3,375,260,000
3,501,911,000
Net inc
b35,650,000
d78,690,000
Share earns
.94
2.32


Rhoden Is Hoping To Hurl 200 Innings
LEAD: It has been five months since Rick Rhoden last threw a pitch and saw his season end on a mound at Exhibition Stadium in Toronto.
When he looked back today, he saw a season of injury and unfulfilled expectations, a season that might have pleased others but left him mostly empty.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


Dance: Desrosiers in Calgary
LEAD: In the world of Robert Desrosiers's dances, a fish that floats on stage and into the air is apt to convince us that we are in a fishbowl along with it.
With his brilliant ability to blur the lines between the fantastic and the real, the Toronto-based choreographer was the perfect choice for a major commission from the Olympic Arts


O'Rourke Lists Rebuilding Plan In Yearly Speech
LEAD: County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke stressed the ''rebuilding and renewing'' of Westchester in his sixth State of the County address today.
But he also touched, for the first time, on allegations of mismanagement in his administration.


Nofziger Files Motion To Void Convictions
LEAD: Lyn Nofziger's defense attorneys filed motions today to set aside the former Presidential aide's illegal lobbying convictions on the grounds that prosecutors failed to prove he violated the law.


Bill Is Voted to Revamp U.S. Nuclear Agency
LEAD: Legislation to replace the five-member Nuclear Regulatory Commission with a Nuclear Safety Agency headed by a single administrator was approved today by a Senate subcommittee.


MERCURY GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MERCURY GENERAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b3,253,000
c5,701,000
Share earns
.24
.42
Yr net inc
b21,188,000
c16,502,000
Share earns
1.57
1.22
b-After realized investment gains of $88,000 for the quarter and $634,000 for the year.


Soviet Couple Leading
LEAD: Natalya Bestemianova and Andrei Bukin, the world champions, got one perfect 6.0 score and easily won the original set pattern portion of ice dancing tonight.


Sports People; Tarkanian Review
LEAD: The United States Supreme Court agreed yesterday to review a Nevada court ruling that barred the National Collegiate Athletic Association from suspending Jerry Tarkanian, the basketball coach at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.
A two-year suspension of Tarkanian was ordered in 1977 by the N.C.A.A.


Cuomo Won't Remove Abrams in Brawley Case
LEAD: Two clergymen traveled here today to demand that Governor Cuomo remove State Attorney General Robert Abrams as the special prosecutor in the Tawana Brawley case.
But Mr.
Cuomo refused, saying ''we've done everything we can reasonably do'' until Ms.
Brawley cooperates with state investigators.


Advertising; Magazine Supplement Devoted to Ireland
LEAD: AS part of the celebration of the 1,000th birthday of Dublin, the advertising partnership of the Irish Tourist Board and Aer Lingus will be running a high-toned Sunday newspaper insert on May 1 to reach the most affluent consumers in their four best tourist markets.


New Seven-Up Soft Drinks
LEAD: The Seven-Up Company announced today that it would introduce two new soft drinks - 7-Up Gold and Diet 7-Up Gold.
They will be amber in color and have a spice flavor and will be marketed to appeal particularly to men between the ages of 18 and 34.


CHAMPION PARTS REBUILDERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAMPION PARTS REBUILDERS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
33,424,000
29,385,000
Net inc
b418,000
c290,000
Share earns
.13
.12
Shares outst
3,204,012
2,475,234
Yr sales
118,124,000
110,012,000
Net inc
b963,000
c613,000
Share earns
.31
.25
Shares outst
3,065,176
2,469,025


Sports of The Times; Candlestick Park North
LEAD: THE first clue was the vivid orange headquarters alongside the Trans-Canada Highway, reminding a visiting Yank of something equally windy, something equally ill-conceived.


ANALOG DEVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANALOG DEVICES (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
101,207,000
80,967,000
Net inc
6,362,000
2,783,000
Share earns
.13
.06
Shares outst
47,695,000
46,432,000


Author Cites $100,000 Fee for Kennedy Article
LEAD: Judith Campbell Exner, who told People magazine she arranged more than 10 meetings between John F. Kennedy and Sam Giancana, the Chicago mob boss, in the early 1960's, was paid about $50,000 for the interviews, the author of the magazine article said today.


Pearson Chairman Returns To U.S. to Oversee Purchase
LEAD: Lord Blakenham, the chairman of Pearson P.L.C., has returned to the region of his college days to oversee the purchase of the American textbook publisher Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, based in Reading, Mass.


Business and Health; Honeywell's Push To Track Doctors
LEAD: FOR some doctors, the name Honeywell may soon seem about as appealing as malpractice suits and hypochondriacs.
The Minneapolis company is one of a small number of American employers that have decided to become pushy in dealing with the medical community that cares for their employees.
If these companies are successful, a lot of employers might decide they have been passive too long and use them as models.


AMPCO-PITTSBURGH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMPCO-PITTSBURGH CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
74,732,000
81,757,000
Net inc
b688,000
c41,778,000
Share earns
.07
-
Yr sales
320,426,000
335,320,000
Net inc
b10,220,000
c46,294,000
Share earns
1.07
-


Former Paper Official Joins Fashion Business
LEAD: Richard Leeuwenburg, a paper and forest products executive, is now getting a firsthand look at California's influence as a fashion trendsetter.


FISCHER &amp; PORTER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FISCHER &amp; PORTER CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
59,371,000
50,472,000
Net inc
2,985,000
b1,671,000
Share earns
.65
.36
Yr sales
200,560,000
176,670,000
Net inc
3,009,000
2,438,000
Share earns
.58
.46


PRIVATE BRANDS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIVATE BRANDS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,882,650
4,470,750
Net inc
302,006
251,015
Share earns
.03
.03
Share net in the latest first quarter is after $82,850 in preferred dividend requirements; there were no preferred dividend requirements a year ago.


U.S. Takes Holiday Off Ice
LEAD: On Sunday night, they were knocked from medal contention in an unflattering loss to West Germany.
Today they took a break from hockey and toured the Olympic pagaent.
And on Tuesday they will begin preparing for a match against Switzerland to decide seventh place in the tournament.


By Design; Color Coordination
LEAD: A tricolor scheme is a great way to coordinate a wardrobe.
Every element is in one, or a combination, of the three colors, in both solids and patterns.
A fast-moving woman can mix the elements to create any number of looks, and her accessories always key in.
She can also pack in a jiffy.


I.B.M.'s New Strategy Worries the Industry
LEAD: Less than a year after introducing their newest personal computer line, the PS/2, officials at the International Business Machines Corporation are now planning an overhaul of the line that will distance the company from advancing clone makers.
The move is creating concern among industry executives who fear a sharp round of price-cutting and a flurry of new products could cause enough confusion to stall the industry's healthy recovery.


CATALYST THERMAL ENERGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CATALYST THERMAL ENERGY
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
31,701,000
8,297,000
Net inc
3,641,000
b814,000
Share earns
.25
.07
Shares outst
14,400,000
12,000,000
Yr rev
89,220,000
28,003,000
Net inc
3,314,000
b321,000
Share earns
.26
.03


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Hiram Walker to Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws, Chicago, for Irish Mist Liqueur assignment.


Shultz Is Upbeat on Prospects for Afghan Accord
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that the United States and the Soviet Union were generally in accord on terms for ending the war in Afghanistan but that ''delicate and tense'' negotiations would be required to complete a peace agreement.


Writing Music Electronically
LEAD: Until six years ago, Andy Goldmark, a successful 36-year-old New York songwriter and producer, composed on an acoustic grand piano.
But now, with abstract electronic sound becoming an ever-more-important ingredient of pop records, he and other enterprising songwriters for hire have for the most part abandoned the piano and become musical engineers.


CBI INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CBI INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
318,095,000
325,737,000
Net inc
6,046,000
b1,406,000
Share earns
.21
-
Yr rev
1,159,734,000
1,166,395,000
Net inc
14,111,000
c15,848,000
Share earns
.38
.71


PHOTON TECHNOLOGY INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHOTON TECHNOLOGY INTERNATIONAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,430,000
742,000
Net loss
481,000
62,000
6mo rev
2,550,000
1,400,000
Net loss
739,000
55,000


Phoning I.R.S. With Tax Queries? 39% of the Replies May Be Wrong
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service is giving incorrect answers to 39 percent of the questions posed by people who call for help with their tax returns, according to the General Accounting Office.


Lieberman Begins Bid To Win Weicker's Seat
LEAD: Attorney General Joseph I. Lieberman, stressing family and consumer issues and such statewide concerns as high housing costs, today formally announced his campaign to unseat Republican Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr. ''Connecticut needs a Senator who will put Connecticut first,'' Mr.
Lieberman said, standing in freezing temperatures on the steps of the Connecticut Supreme Court


Indictment in Kick Death
LEAD: A part-time stagehand accused of killing a man with a karate kick last month near a Broadway bar was indicted yesterday in the case.
The stagehand, Robert Wallace, 20 years old, of 565 West 192d Street was indicted on charges of second-degree murder and first-degree manslaughter in the death on Jan.


Ban on 'Nonlethal' Aid
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bulgaria Resort Fire Kills 6
LEAD: Six people, including two Dutch tourists, were killed today when fire swept through a hotel in the ski resort of Borovets, the official Bulgarian press agency said.
The resort is about 30 miles south of Sofia.


The Stage: 'Tony 'n' Tina's Wedding'
LEAD: AS well-wishers stood on the sidewalk outside the Washington Square Church, throwing rice at Tony and Tina Nunzio, an elderly passer-by inquired what was going on.
Told that it was a show about a wedding, she stared in disbelief and said flatly, ''No, it couldn't be.'' Noticing that the bride and groom were smoking while posing for pictures, another observer said, ''It must be a cigarette commercial.


John B. Buckley, 64, Lawyer and Executive
LEAD: John B. Buckley, a lawyer and an executive in the pharmaceutical industry who served as a special assistant to the United States Attorney General in the 1950's, died of cancer Thursday at St.
Joseph Medical Center in South Bend, Ind.
He was 64 years old.


Prague Journalists Try for Independent Voice
LEAD: Citing precedents in the Soviet Union, a group of Czechoslovak journalists is negotiating with the Government in an effort to register an independent newspaper.


High Court To Rule on Phone Tax
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to judge the validity of a 5 percent tax Illinois imposes on all telephone calls charged to in-state numbers.
The Court said it would study arguments that the tax interfered impermissibly with interstate commerce.


Sports People; Montana Has Surgery
LEAD: Joe Montana, the San Francisco 49ers' quarterback, underwent surgery in Redwood City, Calif., for an inflamation of the right elbow.
Dr.
Michael Dillingham, the team physician who performed the operation, described it as minor and said, ''The elbow looks real healthy.'' Montana is expected to be able to begin throwing again soon after a splint comes off, which will be in 8 to 10 days.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Vancouver Canucks, apparently unable to arrange a trade for their disgruntled goaltender, Richard Brodeur, assigned him yesterday to their Fredericton, New Brunswick, farm team of the American Hockey League. . . , Andre Dawson, the National League's Most Valuable Player of 1987, was honored yesterday by Florida A&amp;M University in Tallahassee, where he starred for three seasons in the early 1970's.


Witness Says Supremacists Sought to Avenge Death
LEAD: The chief prosecution witness against 14 white supremacists testified here today that the death of a tax protester, killed in a gunfight with law-enforcement officers, led to a plot to kill a Federal judge and a Federal agent.


Special School in Harlem Tops New York in Reading
LEAD: A school for gifted children in Harlem scored highest among New York City's public elementary and junior high schools in a reading test administered last spring, according to figures released yesterday by the Board of Education.


Inquiries Rise on Drug Use by Correction Officers
LEAD: About 200 uniformed correction officers were seated for roll call yesterday afternoon at the Correctional Institution for Women on Rikers Island.
Martin Levy, the warden, was making routine announcements.


College Basketball; Hawkins Scores 63 In Bradley Victory
LEAD: Hersey Hawkins scored a career-high 63 points tonight to lead Bradley to a 122-107 victory over the University of Detroit.


Isolated Aged Parents Need More Than Pity; A Lack of Caring
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quandaries Of Timing On Infant Organs
LEAD: Last week, the Loma Linda University Medical Center for the first time carried out its policy of keeping certain brain-dead infants on respirators so their organs could be transplanted.
But the effort ended in a sad anticlimax.


ROSPATCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROSPATCH CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
37,802,600
36,250,000
Net inc
1,403,500
c2,649,000
Share earns
.56
-
Yr sales
143,452,200
105,061,500
Net inc
b2,492,700
c1,207,900
Share earns
.60
-


Only a Stop Sign
LEAD: Lyn Nofziger, the former White House political director, has shown few signs of repentance since he was found guilty of illegal lobbying, a conviction he compared to ''running a stop sign'' under a Federal ethics law that he dismissed as ''lousy.''


Tie With Sweden May Haunt Canada
LEAD: Both needed a victory, but both were uncomfortable with taking risks that could cause a loss.
And because they were unwilling to gamble, Canada and Sweden skated to a 2-2 tie this afternoon.


KYSOR INDUSTRIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KYSOR INDUSTRIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
56,863,000
52,982,000
Net inc
2,410,000
3,803,000
Share earns
.35
.57
Yr rev
226,907,000
173,231,000
Net inc
12,577,000
8,824,000
Share earns
1.82
1.33


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday with an article about Brian Dennehy's performance in ''The Cherry Orchard'' carried an incorrect identification, provided by the Brooklyn Academy of Music, of the actress shown with him.


No Changes for Time Being, U.P.I.'s New Managers Say
LEAD: The new managers of United Press International plan no hirings, firings or changes in service for at least two months while they study the company's future, the news agency's new president said today.


Plan Urged For Markets
LEAD: Several key members of Congress have requested that Federal regulators formulate a contingency plan to handle future crises in the stock and futures markets.


BMC INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BMC INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
42,20,000
33,054,000
Net inc
b2,822,000
c4,944,000
Share earns
.54
-
Yr sales
146,853,000
123,391,000
Net inc
4,509,000
c5,204,000
Share earns
.85
-


Kidnapped Colonel Seen on Videotape
LEAD: The kidnappers of a United States Marine officer released a videotape today in which he appealed to Washington to meet his abductors' demands.


Foodmaker to Acquire Chi-Chi's Restaurants
LEAD: Foodmaker Inc., an operator of fast-food restaurants, said today that it would pay $10.50 a share in cash, or $230 million, to acquire Chi-Chi's Inc., topping two competing bids for the chain of family-style Mexican restaurants.


Austria Can Keep Waldheim
LEAD: Millions of Austrians wanted Kurt Waldheim for President.
They knew what he was and they elected him.
Austrians who voted for him, knowing, should stick with him.


First Restore Order in Gaza and West Bank
LEAD: To the Editor:


PAXAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAXAR CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,528,000
8,059,000
Net inc
b496,000
cd604,000
Share earns
.18
-
Yr sales
42,673,000
30,890,000
Net inc
b1,995,000
c792,000
Share earns
.71
.28
b-Includes losses of $47,000 for the quarter and $85,000 for the year from discontinued operations.


College Hockey Notebook; Concentration Falters; Harvard Loses 2
LEAD: Because the college hockey season lasts from October to March, some coaches say it is just about impossible to keep a team sharp for every game.


CARMIKE CINEMAS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARMIKE CINEMAS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,118,000
14,795,000
Net inc
467,000
b106,000
Share earns
.09
-
Yr rev
83,276,000
58,459,000
Net inc
3,009,000
806,000
Share earns
.55
.17
b-Net loss


REALIST INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REALIST INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,264,000
3,072,000
Net inc
b201,000
81,000
Share earns
.32
.13
Yr sales
13,818,000
12,350,000
Net inc
b946,000
18,000
Share earns
1.53
.03
b-Includes a gain of $74,000 and $390,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Roger J. Williams Is Dead at 94; Biochemist and Nutrition Expert
LEAD: Roger J. Williams, an internationally known biochemist and nutritional scientist who discovered the growth-promoting vitamin pantothenic acid, died of pneumonia Saturday at the Four Seasons Nursing Home in Austin, Tex.
He was 94 years old and a longtime resident of Austin.


2 Specialists Lose Role on Some Stocks
LEAD: As part of a continuing series of sanctions following the stock market collapse in October, the New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that two specialist firms - La Branche &amp; Company and Lawrence, O'Donnell &amp; Company - had been asked to stop making markets in several stocks.


European Farm Pact Completed
LEAD: European Community foreign ministers agreed today on a final set of farm spending limitations, clearing the way for a huge cash injection for the community over the next five years, a spokesman said.


Bridge: Sometimes, a 'Superstition' Has a Valid Technical Basis
LEAD: A player who has a two-way guess for a queen will usually have a technical or psychological reason for a particular course of action.
The bidding or the early play will often offer a clue, perhaps based on distribution or the location of known high cards.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Firestone Tire &amp; Rubber Co.
$30,000,000
-26.8
Grumman Corp.
(42,400,000)
-
Medtronic Inc.
21,600,000
+18.7
Nordstrom Inc.
33,300,000
+26.6
PHM Corp.


Making the Best Use of Judges' Time in New York Civil Cases
LEAD: To the Editor:


Walsh Team Hears Blandon
LEAD: Jose Blandon, a former top aide to Panama's strongman, met with Iran-contra prosecutors today.
Mr.
Blandon has testified that the Panamanian leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, agreed to provide training for Nicaraguan rebels after receiving a request in 1985 from Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, a former National Security Council official who is a target of the Iran-contra investigation headed by Lawrence E.


Big Arbitrager Still in Custody
LEAD: Despite efforts by lawyers for John A. Mulheren to transfer him to a hospital, he remained yesterday in the Monmouth County Correctional Institution in New Jersey, according to his lawyers.


Yesterday's Medal Winners
LEAD:  Alpine Skiing: Women's Super G  Gold: Sigrid Wolf, France  Silver: Michela Figini, Switzerland  Bronze: Karen Percy, Canada  Bobsled: Two-man  Gold: Kipours, Kozlov (Soviet Union)  Silver: Hoppe, Musiol (East Germany)  Bronze: Lehmann, Hoyer (East Germany)  Cross-Country: Men's 40K relay  Gold: Ottosson, Wassberg, Svan, Mogren (Sweden)  Silver: Smirnov, Sakhnov, Deviatiarov, Prokurorov (Soviet Union)  Bronze: Nyc, Korunka, Benc, Svanda (Czech.)


TIE COMMUNICATIONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIE COMMUNICATIONS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
59,066,000
63,866,000
Net loss
b6,277,000
c45,718,000
Yr sales
250,172,000
298,154,000
Net loss
b10,648,000
c56,593,000
b-Includes a pretax writedown and restructuring charges totaling $37,097,000 and $37,997,000 for the quarter and year, respectively; the year also includes a tax credit of $472,000.


Comic-Book Fantasies
LEAD: MANY computer games already look like translations of comic books, as indeed some of them are.
Now one publisher is making the connection explicit.


Shamir Threatens to Break Up Coalition in Israel
LEAD: Vowing not to give up occupied territory, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir today threatened to force early elections unless the Government agrees on a stand before Secretary of State George P. Shultz arrives this week with new American peace proposals.


ENDEVCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENDEVCO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
32,772,000
22,297,000
Net inc
389,000
b2,263,000
Share earns
.06
-
Yr rev
118,481,000
114,319,000
Net inc
1,589,000
117,000
Share earns
.22
.02
b-Net loss


Skin Is Found to Be Surprisingly Active
LEAD: SCIENTISTS are finding that human skin, far from being just an elegant waterproof wrapper, is a surprisingly complex organ that produces or remodels hormones, enzymes and other substances that may have vital effects throughout the body.


TV Review; 'Battles in War on Cancer,' on 'Nova'
LEAD: ''NOVA'' is worthwhile tonight. Indeed, it's superb.


R. W. Miller, 93, Dies; Was U.N. Consultant
LEAD: Raymond W. Miller, a consultant to the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations and a lecturer and writer on public relations, died of Parkinson's disease Friday at the Althea Woodland Nursing Home in Silver Spring, Md., where he lived.
He was 93 years old.


Woolridge Offers His Account Of Absence
LEAD: Orlando Woolridge was at Byrne Meadowlands Arena today to explain why his whereabouts were unknown to the Nets for more than 24 hours Friday and Saturday.
He told the club that he was injured in an accident on the New Jersey Turnpike.


STANHOME INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STANHOME INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
131,916,000
115,788,000
Net inc
13,197,000
10,121,000
Share earns
1.26
1.01
Yr sales
433,154,000
380,501,000
Net inc
32,711,000
25,648,000
Share earns
3.16
2.35


The Editorial Notebook; Health 'Oasis' for Homeless Kids
LEAD: Paul Simon, the singer and composer, reasoned that if he couldn't change the world for New York's homeless, he might at least make sure their children got the kind of medical care that most American families take for granted. (About all welfare hotel families can take for granted is a rotten room, a balky elevator, junk food and shouts in the corridor.) That's why today he's the founder and major funder of The New York Childen's Health


Essay on Mercy Killing Reflects Conflict On Ethics for Physicians and Journalists
LEAD: An anonymous essay in The Journal of the American Medical Association, describing the killing of a cancer patient by a resident physician, has astonished doctors and touched off a struggle between local prosecutors and the American Medical Association, which has vowed to protect the author's identity.


Head of National Security Agency Plans to Retire
LEAD: Lieut.
Gen.
William E. Odom, the director of the National Security Agency, said today that he planned to retire Aug. 1.
Earlier, the Joint Chiefs of Staff had unanimously recommended against extending his tenure beyond the typical three years accorded his predecessors.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
British Petroleum Co. said that Lord Barber would retirefrom its board on March 31 and that James H. Ross would be appointed president and chief executive of its BP America subsidiary in Cleveland.


HACH CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HACH CO
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
11,226,000
9,537,000
Net inc
609,000
348,000
Share earns
.20
.11
9mo sales
34,068,000
30,105,000
Net inc
2,035,000
1,382,000
Share earns
.66
.45


Democrats Stress Campaign Financing
LEAD: Setting the stage for a partisan battle over campaign financing, Governor Cuomo and Assembly Speaker Mel Miller held a news conference today to back legislation for public financing of political campaigns and to press the Republican-controlled State Senate to agree.


UNIVATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVATION INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,042,530
1,559,510
Net inc
30,205
b322,951
b-Net loss  The latest quarter net equals less than 1 cent a share.


Dole Endorsed by Thurmond
LEAD: Senator Strom Thurmond, the grand old man of the Republican Party in South Carolina, endorsed Senator Bob Dole for President today but acknowledged that Mr.
Dole was running third as his state's March 5 primary approaches.


American Woman Wins Olympic Gold Medal
LEAD: Bonnie Blair of Champaign, Ill., as she won the women's 500-meter speed-skating event yesterday at the Olympic Winter Games in Calgary, Alberta.
Her time, 39.10 seconds, was a world record.
Page A25. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


3 in the Loud Family To Be in TV Seminar
LEAD: Members of the Loud family, subjects of an acclaimed 1973 public television series, ''The American Family,'' are to appear today at a Museum of Broadcasting seminar to celebrate Channel 13's 25th anniversary.
Craig Gilbert, who produced the series, is also to participate.


Scientists Gain Full Picture of Cancer Protein
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have determined the complete three-dimensional structure of the product of an important human oncogene, an aberrant gene believed to play a role in causing cancer.
The new picture of the oncogene product, a protein, should add to the understanding of how oncogenes work and might someday lead to the design of drugs that could change malignant cells back to normal.


Hanover Stock Rises; Takeover Rumors Denied
LEAD: Shares of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation rose strongly yesterday, partly as a result of rumors that West Germany's Deutsche Bank was planning to acquire the giant New York bank holding company.


Not So Bright A Future
LEAD: No one should be surprised - it may even be salutary - that some Americans have confessed to poll takers that they no longer believe the nation's future will be better than its present or its past.
These Americans were only acknowledging what has long been happening - but too many of us have refused to perceive or believe.


Advertising; Chiat/Day Unit Lures Wunderman Executive
LEAD: Chiat/Day, now that it is in the $550 million-in-billings class, is acting just like a mega-agency.
Not only does it have offices in Los Angeles, New York and San Francisco, but now it also has a direct marketing subsidiary.
Created after many months of work by Robert Perkins, with the agency for four years and now the subsidiary's president and chief executive, the division has finally come into being thanks to the acquisition of a veteran creative man.


Market Place; Earnings Strong In Waste Control
LEAD: RISING profits for pollution control stocks have made them consistent winners on Wall Street.
Standard &amp; Poor's index for this group showed price gains of 67 percent in 1985, 52 percent in 1986 and 28 percent in 1987, compared with gains of 26 percent, 14 percent and 2 percent in the S.&amp;P. 500-stock index.


BRIEFS
LEAD: Debt


Rio Grande Filing
LEAD: Rio Grande Industries Inc. filed an application with the Interstate Commerce Commission to acquire the Southern Pacific Transportation Company for $1 billion from the Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation.
Rio Grande, which would combine the Southern Pacific with the Denver &amp; Rio Grande Western Railroad, said that if the acquisition succeeds, it planned to sell a 25 percent stake in the merged railroads to Morgan Stanley Limited Equity Fund, a limited partnership affiliated with the Morgan Stanley Group.


MIDLAND CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDLAND CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
34,478,000
31,104,000
Net inc
2,518,000
2,420,000
Share earns
.74
.71
Yr rev
127,998,000
120,831,000
Net inc
10,689,000
7,171,000
Share earns
3.12
2.10


FIRESTONE TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRESTONE TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
976,000,000
846,000,000
Net inc
b30,000,000
c41,000,000
Share earns
.94
1.07
Shares outst
32,494,000
38,638,000
b-Includes an extraordinary tax credit of $2 million.


Big East to Discuss Fighting
LEAD: For many coaches, the bench-clearing brawls in the South Carolina-Louisville and Georgetown-Pittsburgh games on Saturday underlined the fact that college basketball, with its emphasis on speed and aggressiveness, has become more physical than ever.


Style Distinguishes Top Figure Skaters
LEAD: She is the undisputed queen of these Olympic Games, famous enough to join Ali, Pele, Reggie and Martina among those athletes recognized by one name only.


Careers; Wider Skills Needed in Accounting
LEAD: LAST July Price Waterhouse, the big accounting firm, startled the profession when it announced an increase in salaries of beginning accountants to at least $29,000 from $23,000.


ZONDERVAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZONDERVAN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
35,631,000
31,673,000
Net inc
b1,953,000
c19,000
Share earns
.48
-
Yr sales
105,783,000
103,492,000
Net inc
b859,000
c2,173,000
Share earns
.21
.52


Struggling Rangers Still in It
LEAD: Michel Bergeron spent yesterday morning watching films of his team's 6-4 loss Sunday night to the Vancouver Canucks.
Remarkably, the coach of the Rangers emerged from the screening feeling only mild chagrin.


From Filing Maze, Financial Insight
LEAD: Wading through the maze of tax law changes is likely to be a confusing and anguishing ordeal for most Americans, but in the process taxpayers will gain a much better insight as to what they need do to adjust their financial lives to this radically new tax system of fewer deductions and lower rates.


EVANS &amp; SUTHERLAND COMUTER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EVANS &amp; SUTHERLAND COMUTER CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
43,014,000
35,801,000
Net inc
5,197,000
4,577,000
Share earns
.61
.56
Yr sales
134,415,000
109,264,000
Net inc
14,745,000
10,877,000
Share earns
1.72
1.33


U.S. Examines First Republicbank
LEAD: The Comptroller of the Currency tried today to ease concerns about the financial stability of the First Republicbank Corporation, the largest banking institution in Texas.


OLD DOMINION SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OLD DOMINION SYSTEMS
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,487,753
1,308,142
Net inc
36,055
b279,726
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Supernova Remnants
LEAD: Pulsars, stars that emit rapid and highly regular pulses of energy, have puzzled astronomers ever since the first was discovered in 1967.
Initially dubbed ''Little Green Men,'' pulsars were suspected for a time of harboring intelligent beings that might be trying to communicate across interstellar space using precisely timed, pulsed signals.


UTILICORP UNITED reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UTILICORP UNITED (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
176,742,000
150,971,000
Net inc
9,378,000
7,508,000
Share earns
.50
.44
Yr rev
594,860,000
595,805,000
Net inc
b30,450,000
29,732,000
Share earns
1.74
1.79


INSIDE
LEAD: Hostage Videotape Issued  The kidnappers of a marine in Lebanon released a videotape in which he appealed to Washington to meet his abductors' demands.
Page A3.
Setback for Evangelicals  The High Court won't hear an appeal from parents who say their children should not have to read schoolbooks offensive to their beliefs.


FAMOUS RESTAURANTS reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAMOUS RESTAURANTS (OTC)
13wks to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,932,000
14,480,000
Net inc
b149,000
c12,427,000
Share earns
.02
-
53wk rev
71,380,000
60,285,000
Net inc
b2,285,000
c11,445,000
Share earns
.36
-


Heidegger Had Ritual Of Giving Nazi Salute
LEAD: To the Editor:


CARLISLE COS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARLISLE COS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
135,212,000
115,139,000
Net inc
4,452,000
4,699,000
Share earns
.54
.53
Yr sales
542,791,000
466,075,000
Net inc
18,799,000
19,672,000
Share earns
2.25
2.16
Shares outst
8,355,000
9,115,000


ALLEGHANY CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALLEGHANY CORP (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,097,200,000
547,000,000
Net inc
b61,100,000
b79,500,000
Share earns
9.55
12.36
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $5.1 million for the latest year and $2.5 million for 1986.


U.S. AND SOVIET SAY PROGRESS IS MADE ON STRATEGIC ARMS
LEAD: The Soviet Union and the United States announced today that progress had been made in two days of negotiations on a treaty reducing long-range nuclear weapons.


DUPLEX PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DUPLEX PRODUCTS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
68,133,000
63,561,000
Net inc
2,651,000
2,390,000
Share earns
.35
.31


Results Plus
LEAD: N.B.A.
Rockets 119, 76ers 106: Eric (Sleepy) Floyd scored 20 points, leading seven Houston players in double figures last night as the Rockets sent the 76ers to their 15th straight road loss.
Buck Johnson tied his season-high with 19 points for Houston, which has won 10 of its last 12.(AP)  Nuggets 100, Bullets 87: Danny Schayes led Denver in scoring for the first time this season with 21 points, and Alex English scored 7 straight points in the fourth quarter for the Nuggets.


Theater Prize to Churchill
LEAD: Caryl Churchill, the British playwright who wrote ''Serious Money,'' has won the 10th Susan Smith Blackburn Prize, which is awarded annually ''to a woman who deserves recognition for having written a work of outstanding quality for the English-speaking theater.'' Elizabeth Diggs, an American playwright, was runner-up for her play ''St.


John Allegro, 65; Aided Deciphering of Dead Sea Scrolls
LEAD: Dr.
John Allegro, who was renowned for his work in deciphering the Dead Sea Scrolls but ridiculed for his theories that Western religions were based on the worship of mushrooms, died Wednesday.
He was 65 years old.


HANCOCK FABRICS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANCOCK FABRICS (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
73,816,000
71,151,000
Net inc
5,569,000
6,590,000
Share earns
.43
.51
Yr sales
297,979,000
289,940,000
Net inc
19,600,000
19,172,000
Share earns
1.53
1.49


British Stand on Ulster Police Reopens the Rift With Dublin
LEAD: Ever-fragile relations between Britain and Ireland have slipped into a new cycle of erosion in the face of Britain's refusal, on the ground of national security, to prosecute police officers found to have perverted justice in Northern Ireland.


Winners in First Presidential Tests Gain National Support, Poll Finds
LEAD: After major campaign tests in Iowa and New Hampshire, a majority of the public is now paying attention to the Presidential race and throwing more support to three of the early winners, Michael S. Dukakis, Richard A. Gephardt and Bob Dole, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.


Astronomers at Work: Stressful Nights at Kitt Peak
LEAD: THE moon was rising, so the bright-time people were on the mountain.


Music Noted in Brief; Munir Bashir of Iraq Plays Oud Recital
LEAD: Perhaps not since Paderewski has a musician parlayed his art into political power in the way Munir Bashir has managed to do.
The Polish pianist became Prime Minister of his country after World War I. Several generations later, Mr.
Bashir - who is a virtuoso on the oud - enjoys enormous authority over the cultural affairs of Iraq.


PRETORIA AIRCRAFT DOWNED IN ANGOLA
LEAD: The military announced today that a South African plane had been shot down in southeastern Angola and that three more of its soldiers had been killed in combat.


Knicks Fall Short As Bird Prevails
LEAD: In the first half tonight, the Knicks had visions of ending their club-record 17-game road losing streak.
But in the end, Larry Bird brought the Knicks back into the world of reality as the Celtics scored a 95-93 victory at the Hartford Civic Center.


International Trade Official Resigns at Commerce Dept.
LEAD: S. Bruce Smart Jr. resigned today as the Commerce Department's top international trade official.


PANSOPHIC SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PANSOPHIC SYSTEMS
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
43,608,000
34,607,000
Net inc
7,702,000
6,197,000
Share earns
.41
.35
9mo rev
114,663,000
79,705,000
Net inc
14,504,000
12,134,000
Share earns
.78
.69


PHM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHM CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
310,041,000
362,510,000
Net loss
9,249,000
b9,173,000
Share earns
-
.35
Yr rev
1,130,564,000
1,238,464,000
Net inc
37,239,000
20,738,000
Share earns
1.42
.79


ROCKAWAY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROCKAWAY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,737,000
13,802,000
Net inc
606,000
c201,000
Share earns
.09
-
Yr rev
60,119,000
54,960,000
Net inc
b5,771,000
4,185,000
Share earns
.84
.61
b-Includes the cumulative effect of a change in accounting of $633,000.


HAVERTY FURNITURE COS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAVERTY FURNITURE COS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
56,477,000
52,337,000
Net inc
2,286,000
2,303,000
Share earns
.39
.39
Shares outst
5,863,000
6,016,000
Yr sales
217,467,000
188,715,000
Net inc
8,702,000
7,250,000
Share earns
1.47
1.21


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.75
6.66
6.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.66
5.66
5.43
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.92
5.94
5.46
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.01
8.05
7.02
30-YR. TREAS.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Refuse to Hear Tennessee Case on Bible and Textbooks
LEAD: The Supreme Court refused today to hear the last appeal of seven evangelical Christian families who say Tennessee public schools violated their children's religious freedom by requiring them to read textbooks that contradict their beliefs.


Isolated Aged Parents Need More Than Pity; Respect as a Person
LEAD: To the Editor:


KNOWLEDGE DATA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KNOWLEDGE DATA
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,483,000
1,947,000
Net loss
809,000
b32,000
b-Net income


MEDTRONIC INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MEDTRONIC INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
167,303,000
121,782,000
Net inc
21,583,000
18,157,000
Share earns
1.61
1.30
9mo sales
464,117,000
358,102,000
Net inc
63,518,000
53,763,000
Share earns
4.60
3.82


The Latest Word From Lacroix
LEAD: Christian Lacroix is determined to win acceptance for his ready-to-wear just as he has for his couture clothes.
And it looks as if he has made it.
He plays by the rules.
The rules say that in February, before the March showings in Paris, a good proportion of the fall ready-to-wear collection should be ready to be shown to store buyers in New


Emotion Is Key to Swaggart Church
LEAD: The Assemblies of God church, once again enmeshed in a scandal involving a prominent television evangelist, offers a highly personal, emotional approach to religion that has made it the fastest-growing major Christian denomination in the United States.


Report Faults Biaggi for 'Criminal Conduct'
LEAD: In a report released today, the House Ethics Committee said Mario Biaggi was guilty of ''criminal conduct of a most serious nature going to the heart of his representation responsibilities.''


U.S. Plans Big Cut in Funds to U.N. Food Agency
LEAD: The Reagan Administration plans a 50 percent cut in its contribution to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization as part of an economy drive aimed at international organizations that are deemed not to serve American interests, according to United States diplomats and United Nations officials.


Land-Rover Strike Begins
LEAD: About 6,000 employees began a strike today at Land-Rover.
It was the first walkout against the state-owned auto maker in six years and the second strike in the British auto-making industry this month.
Production resumed at the Ford Motor Company today after a two-week stoppage.


Angie Debo, Oklahoma Historian, 98
LEAD: Angie Debo, who came to Oklahoma in a covered wagon and wrote 13 books and hundreds of articles about Indian and Oklahoma history, died Sunday at a hospital in Enid.
She was 98 years old and lived in Marshall, a small town in central Oklahoma.


DNA PLANT TECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DNA PLANT TECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,725,000
1,809,000
Net loss
388,000
b22,000
Yr rev
7,138,000
6,606,000
Net loss
1,048,000
b130,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income and includes tax credits of $7,000 for the quarter and $46,000 for the year.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about overcrowding in New York City psychiatric wards described New York State's plans incorrectly.
While the state intends to eliminate 7,000 psychiatric beds in upstate communities over the next 10 years, it has no plans to close hospitals.


How Good Is West Point Leadership Training?
LEAD: To the Editor:


ABC Still Going for the Gold
LEAD: NOW what for ABC - and us?
The American kids are gone from the Olympics hockey scene except for a consolation game.
Does that mean a return to the television mainstream: ''The Equalizer,'' Vanna White, Morton Downey Jr., Andre the Giant?


Justices to Decide Constitutionality of Special Prosecutor Law
LEAD: The Supreme Court said today it would decide whether the Constitution bars the appointment of special prosecutors not under the control of the President to investigate possible crimes by high Government officials.


WARWICK INSURANCE MANAGERS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WARWICK INSURANCE MANAGERS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,080,590
c655,607
Per share
.28
.17
Yr net inc
b4,684,306
c3,052,958
Per share
1.24
.90
b-Includes realized investment losses of $356,661 and $24,063 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Gwyda DonHowe Service
LEAD: A memorial service will be held for Gwyda DonHowe, an actress, on Friday at 4 P.M. at the Edison Theater, 240 West 47th Street.
Miss DonHowe died on Jan. 15.


Campeau Extends Bid for Federated
LEAD: After failing to obtain acceptance by Federated Department Stores Inc. of its takeover offer of $66 a share, the Campeau Corporation extended the bid, which was to have expired at midnight Sunday, until Friday.
As before, the proposal was conditioned on obtaining a definitive merger agreement from Federated for all shares.


Trial of Larry Davis Goes to the Jury
LEAD: A Bronx jury is to begin deliberations today in the trial of Larry Davis, who is charged with murdering four suspected drug dealers in the South Bronx 16 months ago.


Music Noted in Brief; Olaker and Hester Offer Four Centuries of Music
LEAD: For a program entitled ''Cords and Strings'' at Weill Recital Hall on Sunday afternoon, Charlae Olaker and Daryl Hester presented music for soprano, lute and guitar that spanned four centuries.
Ms.
Olaker sang works by Campion, Handel, Britten, Villa-Lobos and others.
She was terrific.
Mr.
Hester accompanied and performed selections for solo lute and guitar.


The Minimum-Wage Illusion
LEAD: It's small wonder that politicians like the idea of raising the minimum wage: improving the lot of the lowest-paid workers seems virtuous, at no apparent cost to the public.
But the rationale is half-true at best, and the free price tag is false.


Austrian Wins In Skiing
LEAD: The critics back home should be placated now.
In a sport in which rivalries are fueled by nationalism, the Austrian skiers had fallen in disfavor as the neighboring Swiss had become all the rage of the Alpine set in the past two World Cup seasons.
While the Swiss collected medals, the Austrians lived on memories of Franz Klammer's almost death-defying downhill run for the gold in the 1976 Winter Olympics in Innsbruck,


Johnson Welcome to Stay, Mets Say
LEAD: The Mets, who announced five months ago that Dave Johnson would not return as manager in 1989, opened spring training today with a bit of a blockbuster: Johnson may return next year, after all.


SBE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SBE INC
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,843,000
1,993,000
Net inc
b215,000
b244,000
Share earns
.01
.01
b-Includes extraordinary credits of $76,000 in the latest quarter and $96,000 for the year-ago period.


UNITED HEALTHCARE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED HEALTHCARE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
113,198,000
73,183,000
Net loss
4,209,000
b1,553,000
Share earns
-
.10
Yr rev
440,035,000
216,246,000
Net loss
15,801,000
b7,241,000
Share earns
-
.47


SOCIALISTS ASSERT WALDHEIM MUST GO
LEAD: Chancellor Franz Vranitzky's Socialist Party said today that the continuing furor over Kurt Waldheim's wartime record made it impossible for Mr.
Waldheim to continue as Austria's President and called for talks aimed at replacing him.


Our Towns; Art on Demand: A Quick Pastel At the Busy Bee
LEAD: Peter Paul Rubens could make a nice living painting Queen Marie de' Medici being delivered to Marseilles by Neptune, but there's not much demand for that kind of thing at the Busy Bee Mall.
Doris Pryor finds that to survive as a mall portrait artist she must be sensitive to Busy Bee shoppers' artistic demands.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I can only conclude that the decision to reduce the elvel of our fleet to a point that it may never reach the 600-ship goal was motivated by other than military and strategic reasoning.''  - James H. Webb Jr., Navy Secretary  [ A1:3. ]


INGREDIENT TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INGREDIENT TECHNOLOGY CORP (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
104,235,000
91,718,000
Net inc
996,000
1,496,000
Share earns
.67
1.02


BERRY PETROLEUM reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BERRY PETROLEUM (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
28,327,000
6,172,000
Net inc
13,748,000
6,096,000
Share earns
1.54
.69
Shares outst
8,946,000
8,860,000
Yr rev
57,628,000
32,378,000
Net inc
19,475,000
12,695,000
Share earns
2.19
1.33
Shares outst
8,906,000
9,569,000


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ACA Joe Inc., San Francisco, said it had received default notices on $9 million of bank loans and $9.5 million of term notes, including accrued interest.


Actions of Brawley Lawyers Raise Troubling Questions
LEAD: The legal stalemate over the case of Tawana Brawley, a black Dutchess County teen-ager who says she was abducted and sexually assaulted by six white men, has raised troubling questions about the conduct - and ultimate objectives - of the girl's lawyers, Alton H. Maddox Jr. and C. Vernon Mason.


Savings Group to Get L.F. Rothschild
LEAD: In its third venture into investment banking in the last 15 months, the Franklin Savings Corporation, of Ottawa, Kan., agreed yesterday to buy L. F. Rothschild Holdings Inc., the financially troubled 89-year-old investment house.


Moore McCormack
LEAD: Southdown Inc., an energy and cement concern, said it would offer $31 a share, or a total of about $177 million, for Moore McCormack Resources Inc.
Southdown, based in Houston, also filed suit in United States District Court against Moore McCormack's chairman, Paul R. Tregurtha, contending that he and the board had violated their fiduciary duties by illegally trying to prevent shareholder consideration of the tender offer.


G-R-I CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*G-R-I CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
22,270,000
22,569,000
Net inc
1,225,000
2,034,000
Share earns
.54
.91
Yr rev
82,374,000
75,978,000
Net inc
2,122,000
1,251,000
Share earns
.94
.56


LEECO DIAGNOSTICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEECO DIAGNOSTICS INC
Qtr to Dec 20
1987
1986
Revenue
1,701,017
1,181,975
Net inc
151,722
b10,171
Share earns
.07
-
6mo rev
3,169,150
2,308,246
Net inc
199,728
b126,378
Share earns
.09
-
b-Net loss


NORDSTROM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORDSTROM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
601,172,000
519,877,000
Net inc
33,306,000
26,287,000
Share earns
.40
.32
Yr sales
1,920,231,000
1,629,918,000
Net inc
92,733,000
72,939,000
Share earns
1.13
.91


Sun Equities' Stake
LEAD: The Sun Equities Corporation said it had increased its holdings in Computer Memories Inc. to 25 percent by buying 1.7 million shares previously owned by the Intel Corporation for $3 million.
The Far Hills, N.J., investment concern headed by Paul and Natalie Koether plans to solicit proxies to elect its own nominees to the board of Computer Memories, based in Chatsworth, Calif.


Church Orders 2-Year Rehabilitation for Swaggart
LEAD: The television evangelist Jimmy Swaggart, who has been the subject of reports of sexual misconduct, was ordered tonight by the hierarchy of the Assemblies of God Church in Louisiana to immediately begin a two-year rehabilitation period that will limit his preaching and place him in counseling, an official said.


CBS Records' Dispute Seen
LEAD: A dispute is emerging over the price that the Sony Corporation will pay for CBS Records, someone close to the negotiations said yesterday.


ZENITH ELECTRONICS CORPORATION OF INDIANA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ZENITH ELECTRONICS CORPORATION OF INDIANA (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
685,600,000
597,100,000
Net inc
4,700,000
400,000
Share earns
.18
.02
Yr sales
2,362,700,000
1,892,100,000
Net loss
19,100,000
10,000,000


QUAKER CHEMICAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QUAKER CHEMICAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
39,833,000
32,201,000
Net inc
2,520,000
2,155,000
Share earns
.39
.33
Yr sales
147,555,000
128,059,000
Net inc
10,423,000
8,530,000
Share earns
1.58
1.26


Douglaston Windmill Burns
LEAD: A century-old windmill that was being restored by residents of Douglaston, Queens, burned to the ground last night in the Alley Pond Environmental Center.
The tower of the windmill was moved to the center in November 1986, from its original site on Arleigh Road, in Douglaston.
Pat Juviler, the chairman of the Committee to Save the Windmill, said that despite the fire, the community would ''continue with its plans to restore the windmill.


Aid Group Says Rebels Released 6 in Ethiopia
LEAD: Six European relief workers who were abducted by rebels in Ethiopia have been released, a medical aid official said today.


Doubleday Plans an Imprint in Britain
LEAD: Doubleday announced yesterday that it will establish an imprint in Britain next year.
It also announced that Nan A. Talese, editor in chief of Houghton Mifflin's adult-trade division, will become publisher and editorial director of her own line of books for Doubleday's flagship publishing company in New


NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 23, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-15


School Will Not Waive Rules For Talks on Racial Tension
LEAD: The chancellor of the University of Massachusetts today rejected calls to excuse students from classes for two days so they could discuss racial tensions at the school.


Mob Figure Gets 15 Years; He is Also Fined $820,000
LEAD: The convicted underboss of the Gambino crime family - who last December chose to go to jail rather than renounce any criminal affiliation - was sentenced yesterday to 15 years in Federal prison and fined $820,000.


Gustavia Journal; On Hushed St. Barts, a Loud Echo From Wall St.
LEAD: A lot of Americans with deep pockets think of this tiny French island as paradise.
It is uncommonly neat and tidy.
The hotels are small and quietly elegant.
The food is exquisite and everywhere the eye turns there is natural beauty.


Home Sweet Home As Knicks Prevail
LEAD: The Knicks committed 26 turnovers last night.
Earlier in the season that would have spelled almost certain defeat.
But these are different Knicks.
They still do not have any player they can count on to give them a big game, but they have learned to cover up for their errors with outstanding defense and they have learned to win consistently on their home court.


ODYSSEY ENTERTAINMENT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ODYSSEY ENTERTAINMENT
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,142,753
-
Net loss
576,754
272,019
9mo rev
1,142,753
-
Net loss
1,405,229
703,692
The company had no revenue in the year-ago quarter and 9 months.


Attorney General Clouseau
LEAD: Edwin Meese has not been shown to violate criminal laws, but newly released correspondence shows the Attorney General again behaving like Peter Sellers's Inspector Clouseau in the ''Pink Panther'' movies - a bumbler unable to detect mischief before his very eyes.


ENERGY CONVERSION DEVICES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENERGY CONVERSION DEVICES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,449,000
3,189,000
Net loss
10,456,000
7,528,000
6mo rev
5,022,000
5,401,000
Net loss
15,769,000
15,513,000
Latest quarter and 6 months includes a one-time charge of $5,276,000 from the settlement of a lawsuit.


Advertising; In Richmond, A Shop Tests Path to Fame
LEAD: LAST night was a big one for the Richmond advertising community.
The Advertising Club announced the winners of its Addy Awards at a black-tie-optional banquet at the Marriott.
Everybody who is anybody was there.


About New York; Moishe's Rise: From Sneakers To Moving Vans
LEAD: Six years ago this month, a 25-year-old Tel Aviv University law school dropout named Moishe Mana was living in an abandoned building in Brooklyn and selling gloves, scarves, socks and sneakers on the sidewalks of Manhattan.
Next month he is moving from a Chelsea studio to a $650,000, two-bedroom condominium on the Upper East Side, surroundings that better befit a man who founded a company that grosses $12 million a year.


CTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CTS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
70,824,000
65,534,000
Net inc
b3,306,000
c18,353,000
Share earns
.59
-
Yr sales
261,083,000
245,547,000
Net inc
b11,480,000
c13,148,000
Share earns
2.03
-


'88 Winter Olympics; East German Wins 2d Gold in Biathlon
LEAD: Frank-Peter Roetsch of East Germany won the 10-kilometer biathlon today and became the first man ever to sweep the individual Olympic biathlon events.


In Budget War, Some Fall Amid Din and Others Go in Silence
LEAD: James H. Webb Jr. and James R. Ambrose could not be more different, but the nation's troubled military budget has woven a fateful common thread into their final weeks at the Pentagon.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD: E.A.T. Adds an Oven


THE PIPELINE DRAMA: 5 ACTORS
LEAD:  Edwin Meese 3d: A longtime associate of Ronald Reagan who became counselor to President Reagan in 1981, and Attorney General in February 1985.
Backers of the pipeline project sought his aid in obtaining United States Government support for their plans.
Bruce Rappaport: A Swiss businessman based in Geneva, who has close ties to officials in Israel, including Shimon Peres.


DYCOM INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DYCOM INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
35,606,494
14,741,321
Net inc
957,653
651,354
Share earns
.22
.16
6mo rev
60,338,791
28,921,798
Net inc
1,912,052
1,246,309
Share earns
.43
.32


Kodak-Fuqua Deal Blocked
LEAD: A Federal judge has issued a temporary injunction blocking the Eastman Kodak Company's deal to merge its photofinishing operations with those of Fuqua Industries of Atlanta.
United States District Judge


BRE PROPERTIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRE PROPERTIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,770,000
b5,391,000
Share earns
.48
.68
6mo net inc
6,875,000
b9,057,000
Share earns
.87
1.15
b-Includes a gain on sale of investments of $1,353,000, or 17 cents a share, for both the quarter and 6 months.


PARK OHIO INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PARK OHIO INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
34,891,000
34,076,000
Net loss
735,000
2,917,000
Yr sales
134,586,000
138,561,000
Net loss
3,076,000
7,749,000


'88 Winter Olympics; 'And the Last Shall Be First'
LEAD: Eddie Edwards of Britain waving to his fans and soaring through the air in the 90-meter ski jumping event yesterday.
The myopic, madcap favorite of the crowd, and his country's only ski jumper, completed a Winter Olympics double by finishing dead last in the 70- and 90-meter jumps. (Agence France-Presse)


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Ozzie Newsome, the career leader in receptions among tight ends in the National Football League, sayid he will attempt to play another season with the Cleveland Browns. ''I don't have anything to accomplish individually,'' Newsome said. ''I'm playing to provide the role - whatever it is -to help this team win the Super Bowl.


3 Airlines Raise Discount Fares
LEAD: Three leading carriers -American Airlines, Delta Air Lines and United Air Lines -plan to increase their lowest discount fares by $10 per round trip, effective March 2.
The seasonal adjustment comes at a time when traffic usually strengthens after a period of weakness at the beginning of the year.


Injury Riddled Islanders Win
LEAD: Denis Potvin, who has played defense for almost every minute of his 15 years in the National Hockey League, treated his extended service on offense tonight as second nature.
Greg Gilbert, who has rarely, if ever, played defense well in his life, treated his brief stint behind the blue line more as an amusing experiment.


COMPUCOM SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUCOM SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
22,131,000
714,000
Net inc
833,000
b5,810,000
Share earns
.04
-
Yr sales
44,471,000
2,877,000
Net inc
209,000
b13,600,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Denver Journal; Center Attends to Cancer's Other Toll
LEAD: Silence ruled the Langford house for nearly two years.
When Lezlie Langford mentioned her sick sister's name, her father, Ken, would walk away. ''I just crept into a corner and wouldn't react to anything,'' he recalled.


POE &amp; ASSOCIATES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POE &amp; ASSOCIATES INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,941,000
8,273,000
Net loss
b413,000
c877,000
Share earns
-
.23
Yr rev
31,009,000
33,095,000
Net inc
1,490,000
4,439,000
Share earns
.40
1.07


SWAGGART ACTION RELATIVELY LIGHT
LEAD: The Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart was apparently given relatively mild discipline for his ''moral failure'' because he did not confess adultery, according to a source familiar with church disciplinary matters.


Worker Held In Theft of File On Brawley
LEAD: A printing machine operator at the New York State Attorney General's office was arrested yesterday and charged with stealing a copy of a 200-page transcript of grand jury testimony in the Tawana Brawley case.


First Commodity Settlement
LEAD: The Midamerica Commodity Exchange and the First Commodity Corporation of Boston have agreed to a $3.5 million settlement ending all fraud litigation against First Commodity, the exchange said Monday.


Boxing Notebook; King Hoping to Do Business in Soviet
LEAD: When Don King says that the Soviet Union is moving forward ''under the dynamic leadership of Gorbachev,'' the antennae of a boxing observer raise up.


WESTMARK INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTMARK INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
77,900,000
64,200,000
Net loss
b11,900,000
5,300,000
Yr rev
252,807,000
210,764,000
Net loss
c7,245,000
d14,930,000
b-Includes a $3.9 million charge for employee severance and office closure costs from the consolidation of the company's international and domestic ultrasound operations; also includes a $5.6 million charge for the revaluation of international (non- U.S.) ultrasound inventories.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: DEAR DIARY:


2.8% Decline In Orders For Durables
LEAD: Orders to United States factories for ''big ticket'' durable goods fell 2.8 percent in January, the biggest decline in a year, reflecting sharp drops in demand for aircraft and primary metals, the Government reported today.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '87
Brown-Forman Corp.
$28,600,000
+32.4
Deere &amp; Co.
67,500,000
*-
Fisher Scientific Group Inc.
11,100,000
*-
Harsco Corp.
18,600,000
+40.9
News Corp.


Gooden Says He's Ready for 'New Start'
LEAD: Dwight Gooden sat in a Washington Redskins T-shirt in the locker room and said it was all behind him - the drugs, the nights cruising around with the guys from the old neighborhood, the hassling over money with the Mets.


MINE SAFETY APPLIANCES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MINE SAFETY APPLIANCES CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
103,192,000
97,773,000
Net inc
7,744,000
6,965,000
Share earns
1.17
1.05
Yr sales
382,625,000
388,654,000
Net inc
14,042,000
21,063,000
Share earns
2.11
3.17


Advertising; Ketchum in Pittsburgh Wins Equitable Gas Job
LEAD: Ketchum Advertising/Pittsburgh has gained the business of the Equitable Gas Company, a utility, that formerly was handled by George Hill &amp; Company of Pittsburgh.
It is expected to bill about $1.5 million.


Stage: 'Esther: A Vaudeville Megillah'
LEAD: PURIM is one of the most joyful of Jewish holidays, and it is also a time of tomfoolery.


LONGS DRUG STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LONGS DRUG STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
496,669,000
469,966,000
Net inc
15,059,000
11,250,000
Share earns
.73
.53
Shares outst
20,748,000
21,323,000
Yr sales
1,772,460,000
1,635,442,000
Net inc
49,218,000
38,594,000
Share earns
2.33
1.78


Advertising; Private 18-to-34 Survey Widens NBC Audience
LEAD: Like undocumented aliens who go uncounted in the census, viewers who watch television in public places like pubs and college dorms are not recorded by A. C. Nielsen, the great enumerator of audiences.


Central America Budges
LEAD: The underlying issue in countries of Central America is not the ideological and security question of the Washington debate, although their high officials have learned to echo it to please Americans.
It is whether the region is finally beginning to change, to emerge from what the Nicaraguan anti-Sandinista Arturo Cruz Jr.


Kissinger Balks at Treaty on Strategic Arms
LEAD: Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary of State, told Congress today that the United States should not conclude a treaty reducing long-range nuclear weapons until progress is made toward a separate agreement on conventional arms in Europe.


THE POP LIFE
LEAD: Mexican Ronstadt


WEYENBERG SHOE MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEYENBERG SHOE MANUFACTURING CO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
34,180,000
28,835,000
Net inc
1,148,000
1,480,000
Share earns
1.05
1.32
Yr sales
117,856,000
106,703,000
Net inc
4,573,000
4,310,000
Share earns
4.15
3.66


IOWA SOUTHERN UTILITIES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IOWA SOUTHERN UTILITIES CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
33,052,768
32,900,746
Net inc
4,011,709
3,691,857
Share earns
.70
.64
Yr rev
118,000,156
140,546,325
Net inc
b8,741,913
15,718,979
Share earns
1.52
2.73


POLYMER INTERNATIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POLYMER INTERNATIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,913,000
10,870,000
Net inc
990,000
960,000
Share earns
.19
.18
9mo rev
39,273,000
29,562,000
Net inc
b5,503,000
2,493,000
Share earns
1.04
.51


Dollar Is Generally Lower While Gold Is Also Down
LEAD: A day of choppy trading yesterday left the dollar mostly lower.
Gold prices also fell.


TURNER CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TURNER CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
805,784,000
776,116,000
Net inc
777,000
4,326,000
Share earns
.17
1.03
Yr rev
2,789,857,000
2,497,235,000
Net loss
22,256,000
b10,147,000
Share earns
-
2.41


Justices Bar Some Suits By Union Benefit Plans
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today, by 8 to 0, that multi-employer union benefit plans may not sue companies in a Federal court for refusing to make contributions after expiration of a collective bargaining agreement.


In a Clean Glass
LEAD: A mind in search of an idea:


The Iran Panel Never Received Pipeline Memo
LEAD: The Justice Department failed to provide a memo to the Congressional Iran-contra committees that said Israel felt it was owed American help on a Middle East pipeline project because it had helped free an American hostage in Lebanon.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: Advances; Creating an Envelope: A System to Prevent Air Collisions
LEAD: AS a United Airlines DC-8 descends for a landing here, a series of white diamonds move across a video screen on the cockpit control panel.
They are part of the long-awaited, much-debated collision avoidance system that tracks nearby planes and advises pilots on evasive action when collisions are imminent.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There is no calming down in the territories.
The riots there come in waves.
We are in a stage of things growing more serious.''  - Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel.  [ A3:4. ]


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: I APPLIED to college barely a year after the '68 student uprisings.
It was a difficult time for my parents.
I was opposed to the war in Vietnam in a uninformed way, and my parents were not opposed to it, with a kind of reflexive patriotism that most adults still had then.


Houston
LEAD: FEW of Houston's best-known restaurants are in quaint brownstones or at sidewalk level with a view of passing pedestrians.
Instead, they are in the hundreds of small shopping malls that are synonymous with this city.
Tony's is in a strip shopping center, as is its brother restaurant, Anthony's; both are owned by Tony Vallone.


LAWSON PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LAWSON PRODUCTS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
38,898,621
35,126,219
Net inc
6,207,623
4,106,436
Share earns
.64
.42
Yr sales
147,488,320
135,763,916
Net inc
17,959,549
12,540,324
Share earns
1.83
1.28


Precious Metals in Decline After Greenspan Comment
LEAD: The prediction of the Federal Reserve's chairman, Alan Greenspan, that the economy would grow modestly while inflation remained low received a sharp negative reaction yesterday on the precious metals futures markets.


College Basketball; Temple Holds Off W Virginia, 62-61
LEAD: Mike Vreeswyk made two free throws with six seconds left and top-ranked Temple went on to beat West Virginia, 62-61, and clinch its second-straight Atlantic 10 Conference season title.


Regent in New York, Under Fire, Drops Bid for Re-election
LEAD: Dr.
Salvatore J. Sclafani, whose performance as a member of the Board of Regents has been criticized by a state school board association and by elected officials, abandoned his candidacy for a second full term on the education panel today.


As Protests Go On, 2 More Palestinians Are Killed
LEAD: Two 13-year old Palestinians, a boy and a girl, were shot and killed as protests continued today in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Afghan Rebels Reported Furious Over Rumors of U.S.-Soviet Deal
LEAD: The political leaders of the Afghan guerrilla forces were reported today to be furious with the United States and concerned that Washington and Moscow had already struck a deal in principle on ending the war.


VARLEN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VARLEN CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
39,728,000
27,118,000
Net inc
b555,000
c108,000
Share earns
.14
.03
Yr sales
169,869,000
111,408,000
Net inc
b6,217,000
c4,101,000
Share earns
1.53
1.01


Peres Says Hint of Bribe Offer Is 'Nonsense'
LEAD: Shimon Peres, the Israeli Foreign Minister, today dismissed as ''nonsense'' reports suggesting that his Labor Party was offered a bribe in 1985 in exchange for a promise not to interfere with the building of a proposed Iraqi pipeline.


PACIFIC SILVER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PACIFIC SILVER
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,199,957
2,603,621
Net inc
1,135,360
987,702
Share earns
.07
.07
9mo rev
10,434,751
3,686,370
Net inc
3,157,941
b812,054
Share earns
.20
-
b-Net loss


ALBA-WALDENSIAN INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALBA-WALDENSIAN INC (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
48,384,803
40,214,258
Net loss
b594,348
c898,457
Share earns
-
.48
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $1,584,094.
c-Net income and after a loss of $309,783 from discontinued operations.


NASA Engineer Joins Thiokol
LEAD: Judson A. Lovingood, a space shuttle rocket engineer who on the day before the Challenger explosion voiced concern about the launching, has retired from the space agency to join the company that built the shuttle's booster rockets.


Financial Support For Sail America
LEAD: Dennis Conner's Sail America syndicate picked up some critical financial support yesterday for its planned defense of the America's Cup next summer.
Marlboro, joining Pepsi-Cola, became the second of what Conner hopes will be four major sponsors of the $12 million effort.


Books: Paradise Lost
LEAD:  BUYING INTO AMERICA.
By Martin and Susan Tolchin. 400 pages.
Times Books. $19.95.


Salute to a Chief
LEAD: She is 278 feet long, has a cruising range of 10,800 nautical miles, carries the nation's most advanced navigation, communication and laboratory facilities and will soon be renamed The N.O.A.A.
Ship Malcolm Baldrige.


Women: Out of the House But Not Out of the Kitchen
LEAD: It has been at least 25 years since women began campaigning to have their husbands share the household chores, but according to a recent New York Times nationwide survey, they have not made much headway.
A quarter of a century after Betty Friedan wrote ''The Feminine Mystique,'' the book credited with igniting the feminist movement, women are still doing almost all the cooking and grocery shopping.


HARSCO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARSCO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
357,246,000
291,007,000
Net inc
18,587,000
b13,223,000
Share earns
.67
.45
Yr sales
1,169,225,000
1,130,253,000
Net inc
63,289,000
b46,401,000
Share earns
2.20
1.56


'My Daughter Is a Lesbian'
LEAD: Typically, the parent of a gay child passes through successive stages of shock, disbelief, sorrow and, sooner or later, acceptance.
For many of us, however, there is yet another phase: outrage against society's stereotypical thinking that would relegate our gay loved ones to second-class citizenship.


HARVARD INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARVARD INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
150,730,000
83,911,000
Net inc
1,396,000
b3,425,000
Share earns
.08
.19
b-After a gain of $1,606,000 from an accounting change.
The latest first quarter results included the operations of Kingston- Warren Corp.


Channel 13 Executive To Head Public Radio
LEAD: Stephen L. Salyer, a senior vice president at Channel 13, has been named president of American Public Radio, effective April 1.
He succeeds Al Hulsen, who resigned last August.


Sports People; Cub Games at Night?
LEAD: A City Council committee in Chicago has approved an ordinance drawn up by Mayor Eugene Sawyer's staff that would allow the Cubs to play eight night games at Wrigley Field this season and 18 next season.
But opponents of night games at the field, the only major-league stadium without lights, criticized the proposed ordinance as a betrayal of community interests.


News Corporation Profit Up
LEAD: The News Corporation Ltd., an international media and entertainment company controlled by Rupert Murdoch, yesterday reported a 45 percent increase in profits and a 31.4 rise in revenues for its second fiscal quarter ended Dec. 31.


ANGLO ENERGY LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANGLO ENERGY LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
13,173,000
7,186,000
Net loss
6,252,000
7,233,000
The results include accrued interest expense and amortization of discount totalling $4,939,000 and $4,541,000 for the fiscal 1988 and 1987 quarters, respectively, relating to the company's 15 percent Secured Income Notes.


2 NETWORKS TO CUT ELECTION COVERAGE
LEAD: At least two major broadcast networks, NBC and CBS, have decided to reduce prime time coverage of the March 8 primaries on the ground that the elections do not seem likely to yield a decisive result.


'88 Winter Olmypics: Notebook; Hockey Schedule Draws Fire
LEAD: The first prime-time game in the medal round of Winter Olympic hockey will send the Soviet Union against Canada.
The medal round will begin Wednesday with three games in the Saddledome: Sweden against Czechoslovakia at 12:30 P.M., New York time; Finland against West Germany at 4:30 P.M., and the Soviet Union against Canada at 8:30 P


Want to Dine at a Hot Restaurant? Call Early and Often
LEAD: BOOKING a table at one of the most popular restaurants in New York has become as complicated and onerous as making a reservation for one of those maxsaver air fares.
Telephone lines are busy; restrictions are many; weekend seats are few; reconfirmation is essential; reservations are accepted only at certain hours on certain days.


MBIA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MBIA INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
33,200,000
28,600,000
Net inc
18,000,000
13,800,000
Share earns
.48
.37
Yr rev
135,400,000
107,900,000
Net inc
74,300,000
53,600,000
Share earns
1.98
1.43


Advertising; DDB Needham Names Head in San Francisco
LEAD: Dennis P. Wilkinson, 39, has been appointed president of DDB Needham San Francisco, part of the Omnicom Group.
His appointment marks the completion of the reorganization begun a year and a half ago at the $35 million agency.


UTAH POWER &amp; LIGHT CO reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UTAH POWER &amp; LIGHT CO (NYSE)
Year to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
985,241,462
986,311,929
Net inc
150,924,206
100,001,121
Share earns
2.50
1.45
Prior 12 months reflect a decrease in earnings of $43,741,076, or 78 cents a share, from the December 1986 provision for the coal mining operations fund.


Caspar Weinberger, G.B.E.
LEAD: Former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger became an honorary knight today.
Queen Elizabeth II bestowed the medals on Mr.
Weinberger in a simple ceremony at Buckingham Palace, but that does not mean he can call himself Sir Caspar.
The title Caspar Weinberger, G.B.E. will have to do.
He received the gold cross of the Order of the British Empire and the silver star of a Knight Grand Cross.


Limits Imposed on Smoker
LEAD: A woman who said she smokes just to annoy her estranged husband has been ordered not to light up in front of him or their three children and to confine her smoking to one room of their house.
The order, from Justice Ralph Diamond of State Supreme Court, involves Elizabeth Roofeh, 41 years old, of Kings Point, L.I.


A Judge Orders Company to Pay Love Canal Cost
LEAD: A Federal judge today found the Occidental Chemical Corporation responsible for the multimillion-dollar cost of cleaning up the Love Canal landfill.


Senate Begins Filibuster on Campaign Funds
LEAD: The Senate, stalled for the past week over whether to take up a bill changing the system of financing Senate campaigns, today began its first round-the-clock filibuster in 10 years.


Florence Journal; The City's of Two Minds on Digging Up the Past
LEAD: ''This city is like a very beautiful woman who gets nausea everytime someone takes a long look at her.'' That alarming diagnosis came from a man who is single-handedly giving Florence a prolonged case of upset stomach, Francesco Nicosia, Tuscany's Superintendent of Archeology.


Don't Overrate Our Nuclear Arsenal's Safety; Defenses Are Feasible
LEAD: To the Editor:


Advertising; Baltimore Agency Adds 2 Health Care Accounts
LEAD: Eisner &amp; Associates, a 49-year-old Baltimore agency with $46 million in billings, is adding not only to its client list but also to its life expectancy with the acquisition of $2 million worth of health-related accounts.


Duguay Glad To Go to Kings
LEAD: Early Monday morning, Phil Esposito hung up his phone and smiled.
He had just reached an agreement in principle on a contract for Brian Leetch, the promising young Olympic defenseman.
Late Monday night, he picked up the phone again, but this time it was hard not to feel a little bit sad.
He was about to trade Ron


Bonds Advance After Fed's Report
LEAD: Bond prices rose yesterday in fairly active trading after commodity prices dropped and the Federal Reserve predicted that economic growth would be more modest than it had previously anticipated.


PHONEMATE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHONEMATE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
34,497,000
26,800,000
Net inc
b494,000
c445,000
Share earns
.21
.20
Yr sales
112,604,000
96,286,000
Net inc
b1,502,000
c1,046,000
Share earns
.64
.48


Drugs Detected in Switchman
LEAD: Marijuana was detected in the system of an Amtrak switchman who fled his post after a train derailment near Philadelphia last month, officials said today.


MOORE CORP LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOORE CORP LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
625,652,000
550,495,000
Net inc
44,735,000
b17,782,000
Share earns
.49
.19
Yr sales
2,281,493,000
2,114,313,000
Net inc
146,386,000
b109,613,000
Share earns
1.60
1.21


'88 Winter Olympics; In Hockey, 5 Teams Take Aim at the 6th
LEAD: There is nothing surprising about the identity of the six hockey teams that will open the Olympic medal round Wednesday.
And as has been the rarely broken rule since the Soviet Union began sending a hockey team to the Olympics some 30 years ago, the Russians will be defending their gold medal.


Pop: Tackhead At the Ritz
LEAD: TACKHEAD'S first three songs at the Ritz on Saturday re-emphasized its status as one of the finest rhythm sections of the 1980's.
Skip McDonald on guitar, Doug Wimbish on bass, and Keith LeBlanc on drums - the core of the famed early rap label Sugarhill Records - put on an astonishingly hard show; the beat sounded like a thousand iron doors shutting at once.


GEPHARDT, DUKAKIS SPLIT TWO RACES AMONG DEMOCRATS
LEAD: Richard A. Gephardt won the South Dakota Democratic primary yesterday, defeating Michael S. Dukakis in a race that both men had counted on for a lift in the two weeks before the crucial day when 20 states, mostly in the South, hold nominating contests.


It's Citrus That Puts Zest in the Cuisines of Many Cultures
LEAD: ORANGE juice may be the American breakfast beverage of choice, and grapefruit is certainly the dieter's delight, but when it comes to cooking with citrus fruits, as a nation we lack imagination.


Supreme Court Roundup; High Court Expands States' Rights To Tidelands Miles From the Ocean
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled 5 to 3 today that coastal states own or may have some rights to all the lands affected by the ebb and flow of the tides, including land miles from the ocean.


COMMONWEALTH EDISON CO reports earnings for 12mo Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMONWEALTH EDISON CO (NYSE)
12mo Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,662,251,000
5,455,186,000
Net inc
1,086,891,000
1,052,268,000
Share earns
4.72
4.69
Shares outst
207,510,000
199,594,000


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


BROWN-FORMAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BROWN-FORMAN CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
346,024,000
337,257,000
Net inc
28,577,000
21,606,000
Share earns
.89
.67
9mo sales
1,052,933,000
1,059,285,000
Net inc
84,450,000
65,987,000
Share earns
2.62
2.05


Seoul Urged to Make Amends for 1980 Massacre
LEAD: A special Government committee said today that in the name of national harmony, South Korea's new leadership should apologize and pay compensation to survivors of a 1980 massacre in the city of Kwangju.


Gore Now Favors Carriers and Draws Attack by Gephardt
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr. said today in Norfolk, Va., where two new aircraft carriers are being constructed, that he was the only Democratic Presidential candidate who was in favor of building the carriers.


A Good Restroom
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Woolridge Admits to Cocaine Problem
LEAD: One day after Orlando Woolridge told the National Basketball Association that he had a cocaine dependency problem, the league announced yesterday that the Nets' high-scoring forward had been placed in the hands of drug counselors, in accordance with the 1984 agreement between the league and the players union.


New Stock Is Issued By Irving
LEAD: In another move that could thwart the Bank of New York's $1.08 billion hostile takeover bid, the Irving Bank Corporation announced yesterday that it had issued $100.1 million of preferred stock to 15 investors.


How to Invigorate a Post-Board of Estimate New York City
LEAD: To the Editor:


Choosing Health Risks
LEAD: To the Editor:


EASCO HAND TOOLS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EASCO HAND TOOLS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
53,352,000
49,866,000
Net inc
2,399,000
896,000
Share earns
.17
.08
Shares outst
13,982,000
11,665,000
Yr sales
194,615,000
180,799,000
Net inc
9,218,000
5,047,000
Share earns
.70
.43
Shares outst
13,123,000
11,665,000


Pop: Michael Jackson Opens Tour
LEAD: The electronic image of two unmistakable, scoreboard-high legs, strutting across the stage, opened Michael Jackson's first United States tour here tonight at a sold-out Kemper Arena.
Those legs, as much as the hits that made Mr.
Jackson's ''Thriller'' the best-selling album in pop history and his new ''Bad,'' a top-10 album since its release in 1987, were the centerpiece of a show that reaffirms Mr.


British Economy Grows
LEAD: The British gross domestic product rose by 1 percent in the fourth quarter of 1987 over the third quarter, according to data released today by the Central Statistical Office.
This compares with a 2.1 percent gain in the third quarter of 1987 over the second.
The annual growth rate was 5.23 percent.


More Than Arms Control
LEAD: Something modest, but potentially momentous, occurred during Secretary of State Shultz's visit to Moscow this week.
The United States and the Soviet Union seemed in position, perhaps for the first time, to make as much progress on regional disputes and human rights issues as on arms control.


EDISON BROTHERS STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EDISON BROTHERS STORES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
304,900,000
279,100,000
Net loss
b15,500,000
c17,600,000
Share earns
-
1.77
Yr sales
931,000,000
904,200,000
Net loss
b12,200,000
c33,900,000
Share earns
-
3.36


'88 Winter Olympics; Multinational Bazaar on Alpine Slopes
LEAD: Olympic skiers clump through the machine-made snow, traversing past spectators who are trading pins, munching on hot dogs and hamburgers or simply taking in the sights.
Olympic flags and those of the participating nations flutter in brisk winds at the base of Mount Allan, but appear tranquil considering the Ice Station


Has Spring Arrived? Forget It!
LEAD: Diane Fuhrmann with her 2-year-old son, Kevin, and her brother, John Walsh, during lunch alfresco in the Fort Lee Historic Park in the shadow of the George Washington Bridge.
Although the temperature reached a balmy 62 degrees yesterday, it is expected to plunge into the teens by tonight. (NYT/Edward


CONNECTICUT NATURAL GAS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONNECTICUT NATURAL GAS CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
56,155,000
46,013,000
Net inc
3,489,000
1,956,000
Share earns
.48
.28
Shares outst
7,307,876
6,898,695
Yr rev
191,342,000
195,405,000
Net inc
b13,158,000
c10,657,000
Share earns
1.85
1.55
Shares outst
7,061,138
6,839,413


HEALTH CONCEPTS IV reports earnings for Year to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEALTH CONCEPTS IV
Year to Nov 30
1987
1986
Revenue
5,568,868
4,529,821
Net inc
110,596
308,750
Share earns
.05
.15
Shares outst
2,320,000
2,100,000


Arab Satellite Delay
LEAD: The Arab Space Communication and Satellite Organization is postponing the launching of a new satellite until 1995 but plans to extend the life of two already in orbit.
The group, which has had two satellites in orbit since 1985 with an original seven-year life span, said after a Monday board meeting that it would extend their lives by three years.


Sports People; Rowing to Antarctica
LEAD: Ned Gillette, a 43-year-old explorer-adventurer, launched a 28-foot boat early Monday for the start of a 600-mile rowing expedition from the tip of South America to Antarctica.
Gillette and three teammates set off from Cape Brecknock, a land mass in the Chilean archipelago above Cape Horn.
The trip across the treacherous Drake Passage is expected to take 15 to 20 days.


WACKENHUT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WACKENHUT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Revenue
104,476,000
83,114,000
Net inc
1,721,000
b431,000
Share earns
.45
-
Yr rev
373,483,000
320,799,000
Net inc
5,660,000
2,418,000
Share earns
1.47
.63


BENIHANA NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BENIHANA NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 3
1988
1987
Sales
7,092,000
6,513,000
Net loss
b3,106,000
c1,569,000
9mo sales
24,980,000
23,138,000
Net loss
b3,930,000
c4,942,000
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $1,491,000 and $2,643,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, and a loss from disposal of discontinued operations of $1,620,000 for both the quarter and 9 months.


On Battered Rio Hillsides, Homeless Dig Out
LEAD: Jose Messias, a 54-year-old odd-job man, thought he was going home high up on a hillside slum of Rio de Janeiro, but he found his home was no longer there.


SBARRO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SBARRO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
28,952,475
20,886,200
Net inc
3,043,000
1,924,565
Share earns
.34
.22
Yr rev
86,706,358
58,507,684
Net inc
7,378,831
4,881,718
Share earns
.83
.58


Bechtel's Link To the Pipeline
LEAD: Bechtel has not been charged with any illegality in connection with the scuttled Iraqi pipeline project but is being scrutinized by the special prosecutor investigating Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d.


SHOREWOOD PACKAGING reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHOREWOOD PACKAGING (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Revenue
24,040,000
21,832,000
Net inc
2,831,000
b1,761,000
Share earns
.22
.15
Shares outst
13,017,000
12,000,000
9mo rev
72,914,000
56,963,000
Net inc
8,849,000
b3,668,000
Share earns
.69
.37
Shares outst
12,884,000
9,719,000


GV MEDICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GV MEDICAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
371,241
262,738
Net loss
1,049,000
798,289
Yr sales
1,412,184
676,341
Net loss
3,643,748
3,202,355


NOLAND CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOLAND CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
113,226,000
104,178,000
Net inc
1,738,000
1,853,000
Share earns
.47
.50
Yr sales
434,593,000
426,489,000
Net inc
6,848,000
6,303,000
Share earns
1.85
1.70


David Otis Fuller, 84, Fundamentalist Pastor
LEAD: The Rev.
David Otis Fuller, a fundamentalist preacher who helped establish a children's radio ministry and the Grand Rapids Baptist College and Seminary, has died at the age of 84.


800 Attend Mass for Nicaraguan
LEAD: More than 800 people gathered last night in St.
Patrick's Cathedral for a memorial Mass for Nora Astorga, Nicaragua's chief delegate to the United Nations, who died of cancer last week at the age of 39.


Education; Protesters Seize Dormitory
LEAD: A small group of Hampshire College students occupied part of a dormitory today to protest what they said was a failure by the school administration to deal with campus racism.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aetna Life and Casualty Co., Hartford, said it had introduced liability insurance policies for independent corporate directors.


'Thirtysomething,' a Chronicle of Everyday Life
LEAD: There are no car chases, no romantic triangles, no stars to bolster the ratings.
Yet much of America's television audience finds ABC's ''Thirtysomething'' series as gripping as gangsters, as addictive as soap opera, and as memorable as a full-length feature film.


AMERICAN CENTURY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CENTURY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
2,687,000
1,620,000
6mo net loss
7,111,000
4,094,000


'Manchurian Candidate,' Old Failure, Is Now a Hit
LEAD: To the surprise of nearly everyone, ''The Manchurian Candidate,'' a 26-year-old suspense movie, is a box-office winner.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Penalty on Panama Urged


Questions and Answers In the Brawley Inquiry
LEAD: Three months ago today, 15-year-old Tawana Brawley vanished after stepping off a bus near her home in Wappingers Falls, N.Y.
Four days later, the black high school junior was found nearby, brutalized, incoherent and covered with excrement and scrawled racial epithets.
Repeated efforts to gain her testimony have been stymied by disputes over who should investigate the case.


Oil Rig Collapses in Gulf
LEAD: An oil-drilling rig collapsed in 30-knot winds and waves up to 10 feet high in the Gulf of Mexico on Monday.
The 34 workers on the rig, which is owned by Keyes Offshore Inc., were evacuated in lifeboats and then transferred to a workboat for the 82-mile trip north to Galveston, where they arrived this morning.


LOBLAW COMPANIES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOBLAW COMPANIES LTD
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Sales
2,030,000,000
2,040,000,000
Net inc
19,300,000
22,400,000
Share earns
.23
.27
Yr sales
8,630,000,000
7,840,000,000
Net inc
73,600,000
73,700,000
Share earns
.87
.91


Healthful Eating as a Way of Life
LEAD: TO the public, Sidney Wolfe is someone who has taken on the Food and Drug Administration, the food industry, pharmaceutical companies and anyone else he thinks is not giving the public a fair shake when it comes to health and safety.
He directs the Public Citizen Health Research Group, a consumer organization in Washington that he founded with Ralph


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Garrison Advances: Zina Garrison combined an aggressive net game with a steady serve to score a straight-set victory over ailing Isabelle Demongeot of France yesterday in the opening round of the $300,000 Virginia Slims of Washington tournament in Fairfax, Va.
Garrison, seeded sixth, was about to receive serve at match point when Demongeot clutched her stomach and walked off the court.


Black &amp; Decker Raises Standard Bid
LEAD: The pressure on American Standard Inc. tightened yesterday as the Black &amp; Decker Corporation raised its takeover bid to $68 a share, or $2.1 billion.


Israel's Main Goals, And Mr. Shultz's
LEAD: The peace journey of Secretary of State George P. Shultz has had a salutary influence even before the takeoff.
It has stimulated currents of thought that were previously held in the grip of prolonged inertia.


USLIFE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USLIFE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
291,470,000
313,554,000
Net inc
b20,131,000
c24,868,000
Share earns
1.10
1.25
Yr rev
1,189,002,000
1,179,033,000
Net inc
b79,755,000
c92,332,000
Share earns
4.21
4.63
Shares outst
18,800,000
19,763,000


Byzantine Stratagems Made Simple
LEAD: When military officers arrive from the field for duty in the Defense Department, they are often bewildered, frustrated and sometimes dismayed by the bureaucratic ethic that pervades the corridors of the Pentagon.


Southdown Chief Goes From Seller to Bidder
LEAD: About a year ago, Southdown Inc., a Houston-based cement maker, was looking for a buyer.
The company's president, Clarence C. Comer, was approached by the head of Moore McCormack Resources Inc., a Stamford, Conn., cement maker who thought the two businesses would make a good combination.


K-TRON INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*K-TRON INTERNATIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
13,173,000
11,328,000
Net inc
b1,267,000
c1,753,000
Share earns
.32
.46
Yr rev
44,431,000
38,037,000
Net inc
b4,365,000
c1,565,000
Share earns
1.12
.41


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A table in Business Day on Feb. 8 with an article about the 25 largest bank holding companies in the United States omitted one company.
Marine Midland Banks Inc. had assets of $25.5 billion on Dec. 31, and should have been ranked 22d.


INTERMEDICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERMEDICS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
53,179,000
42,795,000
Net inc
6,799,000
b4,571,000
Share earns
.40
.28
b-After a tax benefit of $1,694,000.


U.S. Agencies and Foundation Join to Aid Artists
LEAD: Two Federal agencies and a major private foundation have joined forces to get more exposure for American arts and artists at exhibitions and festivals abroad.
The joint effort was announced yesterday in New York by officials of the National Endowment for the Arts, the United States Information Agency and the Rockefeller


Music: Thomas Hampson
LEAD: THOMAS HAMPSON, the American baritone who has been making such a good impression in lyric roles at the Metropolitan Opera recently, came to Alice Tully Hall Sunday afternoon with an interestingly chosen program of Haydn (English canzonets), Meyerbeer, Debussy and a series of songs based on ''Des Knaben Wunderhorn,'' one of the folk anthologies that redirected German poetry in the 18th century.


TEXACO WILL PAY $1.2 BILLION TO U.S. FOR OVERCHARGES
LEAD: Texaco Inc. agreed yesterday to pay the Energy Department $1.25 billion to settle a complaint that it had overcharged customers for crude oil and refined oil products between 1973 and 1981, when Federal price controls were in effect.


PAROLE BY BRITISH STIRS IRISH FUROR
LEAD: Britain announced today that the only British soldier to be sentenced to life imprisonment for fatally shooting an Irish civilian had been paroled and restored to service after only 26 months of prison confinement.


Bechtel Faces Lack of Big Projects
LEAD: The low-profile Bechtel Group has found itself in the limelight in recent weeks because of its role in an ill-fated proposal to build an oil pipeline through Iraq and Jordan.


Gene Rambo, Cowboy, 67
LEAD: Gene Rambo, a former world champion cowboy, died Sunday of an apparently accidental self-inflicted shooting.
He was 67.
Mr.
Rambo apparently was trying to climb a fence when the trigger of his rifle caught and the weapon fired, said Tom Crompton, a Monterey County deputy coroner.


GUARANTY NATIONAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GUARANTY NATIONAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
38,509,000
32,140,000
Net inc
b4,676,000
c3,162,000
Share earns
.38
.25
Yr rev
143,975,000
108,839,000
Net inc
b19,786,000
c11,643,000
Share earns
1.59
1.02
Shares outst
13,273,000
12,254,000


NEWS CORP LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWS CORP LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,113,577,000
837,143,000
Net inc
b127,013,000
c87,599,000
Share earns
.79
.64
6mo rev
2,094,910,000
1,657,955,000
Net inc
b231,165,000
c119,975,000
Share earns
1.42
.88


Market Place; More Retail Takeovers Seen
LEAD: IF the takeover battle between Federated Department Stores and Campeau is any example of an unlikely set of opponents, as many as 15 other retail companies are being viewed as acquisition targets regardless of their size, internal strengths or weaknesses.


HMSS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HMSS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,322,000
4,111,000
Net inc
725,000
602,000
Share earns
.20
.23
Shares outst
3,586,000
2,579,000
Yr rev
20,577,000
13,302,000
Net inc
2,326,000
1,121,000
Share earns
.81
.47


3 Finalists Are Named For Hemingway Award
LEAD: Writers from three nations - Toni Morrison of the United States, Nadine Gordimer of South Africa and Michael Ondaatje of Canada - were named as the finalists for the $50,000 Ritz Paris Hemingway Award yesterday.
The prize, for the best novel published in English during 1987, will be presented April 11 at the Ritz Hotel in


56 G.O.P. Legislators Urge Jersey Milk Suit
LEAD: The 56 Republicans in the Assembly urged Attorney General Robert Abrams today to sue New Jersey to break what the legislators said are that state's barriers to the sale of New York milk.


Agenda Divided Verity and Key Under Secretary
LEAD: S. Bruce Smart Jr., who resigned Monday night as Under Secretary of Commerce after being denied a promotion, also disagreed with Commerce Secretary C. William Verity Jr. over the department's agenda, friends of both men said today.


ICOT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ICOT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
10,199,000
14,005,000
Net inc
b311,000
c2,270,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
21,101,000
25,908,000
Net inc
b1,050,000
c4,051,000
Share earns
.10
.38
b-After tax credits of $104,000 for the quarter and $350,000 for the 6 months.


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD:  BLOOD AND WATER AND OTHER TALES.
By Patrick McGrath. 192 pages.
Poseidon Press. $15.95.


Soviet Reports Major Unrest In Armenian Areas in South
LEAD: The Soviet Union today reported major Armenian nationalist disturbances in an ethnically volatile area in the southern part of the country.


Europe Meat Ban Voided
LEAD: The European Court of Justice today voided a 1985 European Community law banning the marketing of hormone-treated meat in the 12-nation trade bloc.


Robertson Emerges as Superstar of Super Tuesday Spending
LEAD: Pat Robertson's Presidential campaign has spent some $3.1 million in the 17 states with Republican primaries or caucuses March 8, about $1.1 million more than any other Republican.


Party Guests Stand By As Girl, 17, Is Murdered
LEAD: A 17-year-old Massachusetts girl visiting relatives in Brooklyn was shot to death early yesterday at a party by a man who assaulted her for 30-minutes while other frightened party-goers waited outside an apartment without calling for help, the police said.


Stage: 'Struttin',' a Musical of Struggle
LEAD: INNOCENT Ida Mae from Asbury Park, N. J., learns so much so quickly in wicked New York cabarets in the 1920's that it's no trick at all for her to cross the pond and become the queen of the naughty nightclubs of the Paris of the 30's.
Ah, but the feisty black entertainer has perils to face and troubles to overcome along the way in Lee Chamberlin's musical, ''Struttin','' being presented at the Amas Repertory Theatre.


Indians Are Said to Kill 20 Tamils In Sri Lanka After Troops Slain
LEAD: Indian troops shot and killed 20 ethnic Tamil civilians today after 4 soldiers died in an ambush by Tamil rebels, Sri Lankan military officials said.


Opera: 'Khovanshchina'
LEAD: IT'S an unbelievable story, really.


Ex-Judge Who Was at Center Of Scandal Is Guilty of Perjury
LEAD: A former assistant county judge who was at the center of misconduct charges against three State Supreme Court judges has been convicted of lying under oath.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 19
Feb.12
Feb. 20
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.6
6.4
Distillate production, daily
2.7
2.9
2.6
Gasoline stocks
240.5
236.6
252.9
Distillate stocks
112.6
117.9
131.5
Crude imports, daily
4.1
4.7
4.2
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.1
1.7
Crude stocks
333.1
334.9
328.7
Crude production, daily
8.2
8.2
8.3
Refinery utilization (%)
81.4
81.6
79.7


Sports People; Paxson Traded
LEAD: The Portland Trail Blazers traded their team's career-scoring leader, Jim Paxson, a guard, to the Boston Celtics yesterday for reserve guard Jerry Sichting and unspecified future considerations.
Paxson, who became the 30th active player in the National Basketball Association to pass the 10,000-point mark Sunday night, averaged 16 points a game in his eight-plus seasons with Portland.


2 Israelis Are Killed in Ambush in South Lebanon
LEAD: Two Israelis were killed and several were wounded today in a guerrilla ambush in southern Lebanon, according to police officials here.


Gloria Hollister Anable, 87, Dies; An Explorer and Conservationist
LEAD: Gloria Hollister Anable, an explorer, scientist and conservationist who set a women's world record for ocean descent in a bathysphere in 1931, died of cardiac arrest Friday at the Carolton convalescent home in Fairfield, Conn., where she had lived for three years.
She was 87 years old and had previously lived in


Auction of Stadium Blocked by Patriots
LEAD: The debt-ridden Sullivan family took a step toward keeping the Patriots in New England by blocking yesterday's planned auction of their stadium in Foxboro, Mass.


British Government to Yield Its 'Golden Share' of Britoil
LEAD: The British Government said today that it would relinquish its ''golden share'' of Britoil P.L.C., removing a major roadblock to the British Petroleum Company's takeover of the independent North Sea oil company.


Corrections
LEAD: A diagram in some editions of Science Times yesterday showing the structure of a cancer protein referred incorrectly to sites that contribute to the disease.
The sites are on loops 1, 2, 7 and 9.


KELLWOOD CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KELLWOOD CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
172,254,000
133,289,000
Net inc
5,516,000
4,518,000
Share earns
.50
.39
9mo sales
528,230,000
429,715,000
Net inc
21,949,000
18,030,000
Share earns
1.89
1.59


Bridge: Son of Nobel Prize Winner Is Famed in His Own Right
LEAD: Fame is a funny thing.
Two decades ago a middle-aged man checked into a hotel and the clerk seemed excited when he read the name.


Democrats Unveil Contra Aid Plan
LEAD: House Democrats unveiled a $25 million plan today to provide food, clothing and medical aid to the Nicaraguan rebels over the next four months.


Sharpton: Champion or Opportunist?
LEAD: When Governor Cuomo met two weeks ago with representatives of a 16-year-old black Dutchess County girl who says she was abducted and sexually assaulted by six white men, the Rev.
Al Sharpton was there.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly  COMMITTEE ON PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE: SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL SUBCOMMITTEE - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON U.N.
CHARTER -10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Meese and the Pipeline: The Story So Far
LEAD:  1980: War breaks out between Iran and Iraq, and Iran shuts off Iraq's access to the Persian Gulf, through which Iraq had previously shipped most of its oil exports.  1982: Syria, sympathetic to Iran, shuts down an oil pipeline carrying Iraqi oil to the Mediterranean.
Iraq, desperate for funds to finance its conflict with Iran, begins shipping its oil across Turkey and Jordan and negotiating with Turkey, Jordan and Saudi Arabia for rights to build permanent pipelines.


Group Burns Records On Euthanasia Survey
LEAD: Amid a controversy over an anonymous essay in The Journal of the American Medical Association describing the killing of a cancer patient by a resident physician, the Hemlock Society said today that it had destroyed responses to a recent survey of doctors about euthanasia.


Owens Illinois
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission asked a Federal appeals court today to prevent Owens-Illinois Inc., the nation's second-largest glass container manufacturer, from acquiring Brockway Inc. for $750 million while it appeals a lower court's refusal to halt the deal.
The F.T.C. contends that the merger, which would create the nation's largest glass container manufacturer, would reduce competition and raise the price of bottles, jars and other containers the companies make for foods and drinks.


WINE TALK
LEAD: THERE is something to be said for spending $32 in a Paris hotel for a breakfast of grapefruit juice, two eggs and coffee: it steels one for what is to come.


Takeover Talks For Public Service
LEAD: A Massachusetts electric holding company has begun talks aimed at taking over the ailing Public Service Company of New Hampshire, except for its 36 percent share of the stalled Seabrook nuclear plant, a Public Service spokesman said.


'88 Winter Olympics; Yesterday's Medal Winners
LEAD:  Biathlon; Men's 10K  Gold: Frank-Peter Roetsch, East Germany  Silver: Valery Medvedtsev, Soviet Union  Bronze: Sergei Tchepikov, Soviet Union  Ski Jumping; 90-meter  Gold: Matti Nykaenen, Finland  Silver: Erik Johnsen, Norway  Bronze: Matjaz Debelak, Yugoslavia  Speed Skating; Women's 3,000


Kalikow Revives Plan to Build On Historic East Side Block
LEAD: Peter S. Kalikow, the developer, has revived his efforts to build a new apartment tower on the site of a historic East River apartment block, this time with plans to erect the tallest building on the Upper East Side.
But the plan is drawing the same angry opposition from residents and neighborhood leaders that defeated his previous efforts to build at the site.


N.J. Transit Seeks to Raise Fares by 9%
LEAD: N.J.
Transit today proposed fare increases averaging 9 percent for 325,000 bus and rail riders.


PRIME MEDICAL SERVICES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PRIME MEDICAL SERVICES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
7,169,000
7,390,000
Net loss
10,742,000
b18,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
14,835,000
14,801,000
Net loss
10,995,000
b254,000
Share earns
-
.03


President Is Named At Continental Can
LEAD: Robert A. Fox contends that microwave foods will provide the greatest growth for the packaging industry and that research and development in this field will become his priority.


Portable Macintosh Details Published
LEAD: A trade journal published this week contains thorough details of Apple Computer Inc.'s portable Macintosh personal computer - a serious breach of internal security.
Macintosh Today said its article was based on a 160-page confidential document.
Apple has declined comment.
The article said the machine, code-named Laguna, will weigh 12 pounds and will feature an active matrix screen, which will work better with graphics than the displays in current laptops.


Egyptian Art Treasures Need Protection
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rates Move Lower On Citicorp Paper
LEAD: Interest rates fell at Citicorp's regular weekly auction of commercial paper.
The bank holding company said it had sold $50 million of 91-day paper at an average rate of 6.567 percent, down from 6.625 percent last week.


MIDSOUTH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MIDSOUTH CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,375,000
11,881,000
Net inc
1,232,000
1,325,000
Share earns
.35
.43
Yr rev
53,149,000
-
Net inc
5,352,000
-
Share earns
1.69
-
The company began operations March 31, 1986.


Which Hats Are in the Ring?
LEAD: Until this month the image most likely to be evoked by ''he threw his hat into the ring'' was a felt fedora or a straw skimmer.
No more.
Judging by the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary, the hat most apt to be found on a Presidential aspirant's head is the one that proclaims he's just folks.


SMUCKER J M CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SMUCKER J M CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
75,360,000
67,614,000
Net inc
5,143,000
4,154,000
Share earns
.70
.56
9mo sales
234,688,000
215,095,000
Net inc
16,838,000
12,962,000
Share earns
2.29
1.76


Education; Colleges Grapple With Dark Side of Fraternities
LEAD: The death here of a Rutgers University freshman who drank too much at a fraternity initiation party has increased the edginess of campuses across the nation already grappling with the darker dilemmas of fraternity life.


Larry Shay, 90, Dies; Composer and Coach
LEAD: Larry Shay, a composer and musical coach who worked with such stars as Al Jolson and Jimmy Durante and whose best-known song was ''When You're Smiling,'' died of lung cancer on Monday at Hoag Memorial Hospital.
He was 90 years old.


Peru Rebels Black Out Cities
LEAD: Suspected Marxist guerrillas blew up two power stations Monday night, blacking out nine coastal cities in Peru, the police said today.


BUELL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUELL INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
19,991,000
17,434,000
Net inc
1,248,000
716,000
Share earns
.52
.30


Education; Campus Notebook; Applications for College Running at Record Pace
LEAD: Whatever happened to those gloom-and-doom warnings that these would be the years when colleges would have to tighten their belts - if not close down entirely - because of a decline in the college-age population?


It's a Trap!
LEAD: In case anyone is wondering how well the Central Intelligence Agency is policing itself these days, there was a hint in the parking lot facing agency headquarters on Tuesday: there stood a uniformed security guard deploying a radar gun, happily registering violators of the 25-mile-an-hour speed limit - nearly all of them agency employees.


RIVER OAKS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RIVER OAKS INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,525,000
250,000
Net inc
b522,000
c23,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo rev
12,163,000
738,000
Net inc
b750,000
d3,924,000
Share earns
.05
.29
Shares outst
15,354,000
13,545,000


Education; A Career-Improvement Tax Break Ends
LEAD: After becoming a telephone service representative four years ago, Tanya Davis took several courses in journalism and magazine publishing to pursue her dream of a career in the field.


A Bug to Help Out On Gravy Stains
LEAD: The latest news from the detergent industry's never-ending war on stains is that biotechnology has produced an enzyme that will split fatty acids.
This means that those troublesome gravy spots that won't come out in the laundry (not to mention the lipstick stains on a collar that a teen-age heartthrob sang about a generation ago) may finally yield.


NUCOR CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NUCOR CORP (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
851,022,039
755,228,939
Net inc
50,534,450
46,438,888
Share earns
2.39
2.17
Shares outst
21,153,584
21,405,440


OTF EQUITIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OTF EQUITIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
55,968,000
56,723,000
Net loss
4,195,000
201,000
9mo rev
183,303,000
62,158,000
Net loss
2,875,000
b831,000
Share earns
-
.21
b-Net income


Oliver Swan, 83, Literary Agent With Eye for Worthy Unknowns
LEAD: Oliver G. Swan, a literary agent whose career spanned almost 40 years, died of pneumonia yesterday at Bryn Mawr (Pa.) Hospital.
He was 83 years old.
Among the authors he represented were Conrad Richter, Richard Wright, Morris West, Alex Hailey and the estate of Henry James.


State Department Asks Reagan to Penalize Panama Over Drug Trafficking
LEAD: Rejecting the conclusions of its bureau in charge of drugs, the State Department has recommended that President Reagan penalize Panama for failing to take adequate steps to control drug trafficking, State Department aides said today.


An E.M.S. Lieutenant Is Held on Drug Charge
LEAD: An Emergency Medical Service lieutenant was charged yesterday with bribing a police officer after he was arrested on drug and weapons charges, the police said.


Inmate Escapes From Manhattan Court
LEAD: A man charged with trying to kill police officers escaped from a holding pen at the State Supreme Court building in Manhattan on Monday and was still at large yesterday, officials of the New York City Department of Correction said last night.


QVC NETWORK reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QVC NETWORK (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
45,625,000
2,189,000
Net inc
687,000
c6,890,000
Share earns
.05
-
Yr sales
112,302,000
2,189,000
Net loss
b6,156,000
8,466,000
b-Includes an extraordinary loss of $1,341,000.


Tightening Student Aid Will Add to Dropouts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chambers's Fingers Were Bitten, Doctor Testifies
LEAD: Almost 24 hours after Jennifer Levin died, the hands of Robert E. Chambers Jr. were ''inflamed, swollen, red and tender'' from human bites that had broken the skin on three fingers, a doctor who treated him testified yesterday.


TOOTSIE ROLL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOOTSIE ROLL INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
26,045,000
26,039,000
Net inc
2,489,000
2,657,000
Share earns
.28
.30
Yr sales
114,803,000
111,403,000
Net inc
14,565,000
12,802,000
Share earns
1.65
1.45


F.B.I. Admits Informer Misled Inquiry
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation acknowledged today that it had been repeatedly misled by an undercover informer whose information led to a two-year surveillance campaign against Americans opposed to the Reagan Administration's policies in Central America.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: DEVELOPING a taste for one food or another may depend on the context in which that food is eaten.
I know several baseball buffs who consider a hot dog with sauerkraut absolutely vital at a game.
And yet these same people look on a platter of sauerkraut, using the pickled vegetable as the focal point of a main course, with something that borders on contempt.


Hijacking Confession 'Illegal'
LEAD: A Federal judge ruled today that the Federal Bureau of Investigation illegally obtained a Lebanese Shiite Moslem's confession to leading a 1985 plane hijacking during ''relentless interrogation'' that violated his rights.


Hopes for Peace Fade Despite Contra Cutoff
LEAD: Six months after the signing of a regional peace accord, prospects for an end to the Nicaraguan conflict appear to be dimming.


Connecticut Bonds Attract Investors
LEAD: The thin supply of tax-exempt issues in the marketplace was evident in the yields of a $125 million issue of Connecticut special tax obligation bonds priced yesterday to offer a maximum yield of 7.347 percent for an issue due in 2008.


'88 Winter Olympics; Soviet Gets Gold In Ice Dancing
LEAD: The Soviet Union made its Olympic superiority in the couples events in figure skating complete tonight when Natalya Bestemianova and Sergei Bukin, the world champions of the last three years, won the gold medal in dance.


Greenspan Sees Lag in Economy
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board's chairman, Alan Greenspan, who dominates economic policy-making at present, today predicted a slower but fairly sound economy for this year and indicated that he saw little reason now to help it through such means as cutting interest rates more.


'88 Winter Olympics; Corporate Rivalry Far From Calgary Over Games Logo
LEAD: What is the difference between an official Olympic sponsor that advertises on an Olympic telecast and a sponsor of an official Olympic telecast?
Between $5 million and $15 million, by one reckoning.
Some special sauce and a sesame seed bun by another.


Historic Windmill Destroyed in Queens Fire
LEAD: George O. Pratt, the director of the Alley Pond Environmental Center in Douglaston, Queens, standing near the charred ruins of a century-old windmill that was destroyed in a fire Monday night.
Investigators suspect arson in the fire.
The windmill was built on Arleigh Road in Queens and was moved in 1986 to the environmental center in an effort to prevent its demolition.


DEERE &amp; COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEERE &amp; COMPANY (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,000,000,000
478,000,000
Net inc
b67,500,000
c192,600,000
Share earns
.99
-
b-Included a one-time gain of $28,700,000 reflecting adoption of new accounting rules for income taxes.


FISHER SCIENTIFIC GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FISHER SCIENTIFIC GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
235,400,000
215,600,000
Net inc
11,100,000
b199,700,000
Share earns
.30
-
Yr sales
908,700,000
794,000,000
Net inc
30,900,000
b233,000,000
Share earns
.85
-


Biden Needs 2d Operation
LEAD: Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., who underwent surgery on Feb. 12 to repair an aneurysm in an artery supplying blood to his brain, left Walter Reed Army Medical Center today, but officials said he will require another operation to correct a second aneurysm.
Larry Rasky, a spokesman for the Biden family, said the 45-year-old Delaware Democrat would not return to his Washington office until he had recovered from the second operation, which has not yet been scheduled.


Rise in Firefighters' Medical Leaves Seen as Protest
LEAD: A marked increase in the number of New York City firefighters requesting medical leave for on-duty injuries, apparently to protest the closing of a Brooklyn firehouse, has cost several hundred thousand dollars and has prompted the city to consider invoking a state law that bars job actions by public employees.


Sports of The Times; '88 Winter Olympics; Bonnie Blair's Golden Opportunity
LEAD: SHE'S already the Mary Lou Retton and more of these XV Olympic Winter Games.
And now Bonnie Blair, the lady leprechaun who seems to have stepped off the drawing board of a Disney artist, has the golden opportunity to win what no American female speed skater ever has: two Olympic gold medals.
But she's too smart to talk about another gold, only about the possibility of a silver or a bronze, or both.


NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 24, 1988
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL A2-15  News analysis: In Nicaragua, political recriminations have become more bitter than at any time since the regional peace accord was signed.
The tensions make prospects for an end to the conflict there appear to be dimming.
Page A1


A.T.&amp;T.'s Unix Is a Hit at Last, And Other Companies Are Wary
LEAD: AFTER nearly 20 years of unfulfilled promise under the wing of its creator, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's Unix computer operating system is becoming a hit, emerging with the potential to establish an industry standard.


High Court Hears Challenge to New York Curb on Men's Clubs
LEAD: A skeptical Supreme Court today heard a constitutional challenge to a New York City law intended to force some of the country's most prestigious men's clubs to admit women as members.


Pearson-Les Echos
LEAD: Finance Minister Edouard Balladur has opposed the planned sale of the French financial newspaper Les Echos to Pearson P.L.C. of Britain, saying he will not allow the transfer of ownership to proceed automatically.
Mr.
Balladur said the deal, worth about $158 million, that was signed Jan. 11 between Pearson and Les Echo's owner, Jacqueline Beytout, ''is subject to the explicit authorization of the French authorities.


Blazers Keep Nets Mired in Bad Luck
LEAD: The Portland Trail Blazers, one of the better teams in the National Basketball Association this season, played their part in the Nets' disastrous season tonight.
They breezed to a 114-102 victory, then left the Byrne Meadowlands Arena before any of the Nets' bad luck could rub off on them.


Rock: Budka Suflera
LEAD: BUDKA SUFLERA, a six-member Polish rock group, made its New York debut on Saturday at the Beacon Theater.
Not surprisingly, since much of the world has embraced Anglo-American music as cultural overlord, the group sounded denationalized; even though its members sang in Polish, the group trafficked in a sort of gray rock internationalism.


Women at Home
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Stage: Bergman Version Of Ibsen's 'Doll's House'
LEAD: ''NORA,'' Ingmar Bergman's stripped-down adaptation of ''A Doll's House,'' is akin to an opera composed entirely of arias.
Having eliminated the Helmer children and servants, he offers two hours of confrontations.


ISOMEDIX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ISOMEDIX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,139,399
3,195,076
Net inc
b77,212
1,694
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
4,717,363
5,106,345
Yr sales
13,055,789
13,793,796
Net inc
b592,129
961,874
Share earns
.12
.19
Shares outst
4,787,335
5,106,345


ARMY TO DESTROY OLD CHEMICAL ARMS
LEAD: The Army will dispose of its aging stockpile of chemical weapons by burning them in closed incinerators to be built at the eight sites where the chemicals are now stored, a top official said today.


Big East Notebook; Directors Approve A Ban for Brawling
LEAD: In response to a string of bench-clearing brawls in the Big East Conference this season, Commissioner Dave Gavitt and the league's athletic directors approved legislation yesterday that calls for an automatic one-game suspension of any player leaving the bench to participate in a fight or any player ejected for fighting.


HOMESTAKE MINING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOMESTAKE MINING CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
249,676,000
97,934,000
Net inc
111,989,000
11,730,000
Share earns
1.15
.12
Shares outst
97,285,000
96,650,000
Yr rev
516,226,000
347,664,000
Net inc
146,407,000
22,576,000
Share earns
1.51
.23


11 Off Broadway Shows To Help AIDS Fund
LEAD: Box-office receipts from special Monday night performances added to the schedules of 11 Off Broadway shows are to be donated to the Equity Fights AIDS Fund, a nonprofit fund established by the actors' union to provide direct financial help to members who have the disease.


GEN-PROBE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GEN-PROBE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,137,000
649,000
Net loss
1,800,000
1,400,000
Yr rev
4,213,000
2,356,000
Net loss
7,700,000
4,600,000


Winfield Is Wasting No Time Getting Into Camp Routine
LEAD: In past springs, he has been among the later arrivals in camp, never here on the day the regulars were asked to report, never apparently bothered by the criticism that usually followed.
This year, however, Dave Winfield - newly married and perhaps beginning his final season as a Yankee - was on time.


Economic Scene; A Little Daylight On the Deficits
LEAD: VIRTUE is nice, but sometimes luck will suffice: Four months and much hand-wringing after the October crash, the United States economy seems no worse for wear.
In fact, there is growing reason to think that the stock plunge may actually protect the nation from a dollar crisis that would cut deeply into income and employment.


Job Opening
LEAD: A job of uncommon power is opening up in Washington: that of executive director of the 12-member National Economic Commission, the eminent bipartisan panel that in March of next year will offer Congress and the White House a way out of the budget deficits.


CANADIAN OCCIDENTAL PETROEUM LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CANADIAN OCCIDENTAL PETROEUM LTD (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
151,200,000
137,600,000
Net inc
14,800,000
10,000,000
Share earns
.22
.15
Yr rev
598,800,000
537,000,000
Net inc
58,000,000
40,800,000
Share earns
.87
.61


Campaign Test on Long Island
LEAD: Last year, New York's Legislature got caught in an embarrassing payroll scandal involving the use of legislative workers in political campaigns.
Has it mended its ways?
The special elections on March 15 to fill five vacant Assembly seats offer an instructive test.


UTILICORP UNITED reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UTILICORP UNITED (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
176,742,000
150,971,000
Net inc
9,378,000
7,508,000
Share earns
.50
.44
Shares outst
17,501,000
14,967,000
Yr rev
594,860,000
595,805,000
Net inc
b30,450,000
29,732,000
Share earns
1.74
1.79


All-Terrain Vehicle 'Critic' With a Curious Client
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.63
6.77
5.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.63
5.66
5.47
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.78
5.92
5.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.93
8.01
6.99
30-YR.


Disparities of Rich and Poor Prompt Gifts to the Neediest
LEAD: Natalia Somers came from Russia and she loves the freedom of New York, according to her husband, Thomas Milo Somers of Manhattan.


Education; Lessons
LEAD: It has always seemed an addled adage: ''Those who can, do.
Those who cannot, teach.'' Some of the doers, it now seems, have long yearned to educate.
Lawyers, nurses, millwrights, accountants and executives - people of experience - in growing numbers are leaving their professions, earning teaching certificates and heading for the classroom.


FORMICA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FORMICA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
112,306,000
105,335,000
Net inc
4,203,000
2,471,000
Share earns
.33
.33
Shares outst
15,996,000
7,465,000
Yr sales
413,515,000
378,178,000
Net inc
b2,127,000
6,988,000
Share earns
.21
.94
Shares outst
10,299,000
7,431,000


Bronx Botanical Garden Plans an Expansion
LEAD: The New York Botanical Garden is planning an ambitious expansion that will include a new plant science center and the renovation of its landmark museum building in the Bronx to house exhibitions.


U.S. and Rome Back Relocating of F-16's From Spain to Italy
LEAD: The United States and Italy have reached preliminary agreement on relocating the 72 American F-16 jet fighters now in Spain to a base in Italy, senior diplomats from the two countries said today.


City Ballet: Both 'Faun' And 'Antique Epigraphs'
LEAD: JEROME ROBBINS re-creates the world of the ballet studio in ''Afternoon of a Faun.'' In ''Antique Epigraphs,'' he creates a world outside of time and place.
Both ballets are set to dappled scores by Claude Debussy.
Together, as they were performed by the New York City Ballet on Saturday night at the New York State


AGS COMPUTERS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AGS COMPUTERS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
141,341,000
114,445,000
Net inc
3,869,000
2,729,000
Share earns
.30
.27
Shares outst
12,978,000
9,984,000
Yr sales
496,729,000
381,497,000
Net inc
14,158,000
8,752,000
Share earns
1.19
.85
Shares outst
11,852,000
10,320,000


Sports People; Johnson Honored
LEAD: When he broke the world record for the 100-meter dash at the world track and field championships in Rome last summer, Ben Johnson of Canada did so in 9.83 seconds, shaving a full 10th of a second off the previous mark.
It was the kind of stunning performance worthy of another sprinter, Jesse Owens, more than 50 years ago.


Joyner, Tartabull May Not Report
LEAD: Wally Joyner of the California Angels and Danny Tartabull of the Kansas City Royals said yesterday that they were considering not reporting to spring training this week because of contract disputes.


Governors Seek Housing and Child Care Changes
LEAD: Seeking to reshape a Federal system they consider out of kilter, the nation's governors today announced a major effort to increase state responsibilities substantially in housing and child care.


Reagan Chooses a Skilled Infighter to Lead Navy
LEAD: President Reagan today chose a veteran Capitol Hill infighter, William L. Ball 3d, to step into a simmering dispute over Pentagon budget cuts as his new Secretary of the Navy.


Western States Get a Taste of Prosperity as a Weak Dollar Spurs Exports
LEAD: After three years of troubled times, much of the West is experiencing an economic rebound, spurred by a weaker dollar, which has stimulated exports, as well as increased demand for the wood, minerals, livestock and other commodities produced in the mountains and plains of the region.


A Computer Traffic Cop
LEAD: Anyone who has ever given a computer a command and received a response, intelligible or not, has used a computer operating system.
People who seek to explain computers to the unintiated often search for operating system metaphors.
A traffic cop is a common one.
Another is a super-efficient office manager.


Dolls in Paris Fashions Of '46 Will Tour Again
LEAD: In 1945, to show the world that French fashion had survived World War II, Paris designers planned a world tour of their creations.
But with material, models and money in short supply just after the war, the designers turned to miniature mannequins to show their clothes.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: New-issue activity was relatively light in the tax-exempt market yesterday, except for the Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority, which tentatively offered $210.9 million of refunding revenue bonds for Johns Hopkins University.
The bonds have a maximum yield of 7.54 percent for an issue due in 2020 through underwriters led by Alex.


Mr. Webb's Petulant Resignation
LEAD: It's a fine thing to resign on principle.
But James Webb seems to have resigned as Secretary of the Navy on something closer to pique.
He failed to get on with his boss, Secretary of Defense Frank Carlucci, and left with a gratuitous personal blast.
Mr.
Webb's departure raises no great debate about the future of the


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 24, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


Kraft Settlement
LEAD: Kraft Inc. said it would will pay Ambrit Inc. $8.5 million to settle a trademark dispute.
The case involved Kraft's Polar B'ar ice cream bars, which Ambrit contended were packaged in a manner that infringed on its own Klondike bar's trademark.
The United States Supreme Court last year let stand a lower court ruling prohibiting Polar B'ar from using a wrapper resembling Klondike's.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart of Olympic medal winners in Sports Pages yesterday gave an incorrect nationality for Sigrid Wolf, the winner of the women's Super G race.
She is from Austria, not France.


Reagan News Session Will Be on Air Today
LEAD: President Reagan's news conference at 8 o'clock tonight will be broadcast on the ABC, CBS and NBC television networks and on CNN, the Cable News Network.
In addition, some local affiliates of PBS and SIN, the Spanish International Network, will carry the conference, either live or as a tape-delayed broadcast.


Robertson Hints a Bush Link To Disclosures on Swaggart
LEAD: Pat Robertson asserted today that it was no accident that news of the Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart's difficulties broke two weeks before the South Carolina Republican Presidential primary, in which Mr.
Robertson, a former television evangelist, hopes to score a major success.


Real Estate; Outlet Mall Planned for Manhattan
LEAD: ALTHOUGH Manhattan has long had discount shopping districts, like Orchard Street on the Lower East Side or the stretch of 14th Street between Seventh Avenue and Broadway, bargain hunters in New York City have had to leave town to find deep discounts offered in the region's growing number of factory outlet shopping centers.


West Virginia Budget Held Unconstitutional
LEAD: The state Supreme Court declared West Virginia's $1.49 billion budget unconstitutional today because it contains a deficit, and the state auditor's office said all state spending would cease immediately.


ENTREE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENTREE CORP
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Revenue
105,436,000
117,450,000
Net loss
1,027,000
221,000
9mo rev
376,359,000
403,144,000
Net loss
645,000
b2,521,000
Share earns
-
.39
b-Net income


Guitar: Larry Almeida
LEAD: ''TEMPERAMENTS,'' a short guitar composition in five sections by Leslie Bassett, had its New York premiere Monday at a Merkin Concert Hall recital by Larry Almeida.
It is a reasonably attractive piece that seems to wander at times; it also provided a concise summary of the strengths and weaknesses of Mr.


CHICAGO MILWAUKEE ST PAUL &amp; PACIFIC RP., DEBTOR reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHICAGO MILWAUKEE ST PAUL &amp; PACIFIC RP., DEBTOR (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,485,000
19,052,000
Net inc
b5,125,000
c13,766,000
Share earns
2.10
5.62
Yr rev
102,108,000
44,239,000
Net inc
b49,537,000
c60,208,000
Share earns
20.21
24.56


NEC Challenges Intel Copyrights
LEAD: The NEC Corporation and its California subsidiary asked a Federal judge to rule that the Intel Corporation had forfeited the copyrights it claims for the powerful and widely used 8086 and 8088 microprocessors.
The action by NEC of Tokyo and NEC Electronics Inc., based in Mountain View, Calif., is the latest salvo in a two-and-a-half-year battle with Intel over the microprocessors.


Education; Deflecting Protests With Open Heart and Mind
LEAD: For just about any other college chancellor, it would have been a nightmare: 100 minority students occupying a campus building to protest racial violence and harassment, vowing not to leave until the school met their demands.


Sale by Federated Of Unit Held Near
LEAD: Federated Department Stores Inc. stock inched up 12.5 cents yesterday to close at $60.875, a tick away from the $61-a-share tender offer by the Campeau Corporation.
Reports persisted that Federated was close to a sale of its Ralphs Grocery Company supermarket chain in California.


U.S. Seen as Confident of Afghan Pullout by Soviet
LEAD: Intelligence reports from Afghanistan showing Soviet troops retreating to defensive bases and dependents leaving the country have increased American confidence that the Soviet Union is preparing to withdraw its forces, a senior official traveling with Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today.


Japanese Weigh Backing a Harlem Project
LEAD: A contingent of Japanese real-estate executives, visiting New York City yesterday, said it was considering an investment in Harlem on the Hudson, a huge development that would transform 40 acres of Harlem riverfront into a center of new housing, business and cultural events.


Berlin, N.H.
LEAD: SINCE washing clothes is a drag, while eating is fun, a diner-laundry doesn't seem outrageous.
Well, not too outrageous.
Welcome to Berlin, home of the Eastern Depot Restaurant and Laundromat.
Here you will find that elusive hybrid, a place where you can cram your clothes into a washing machine, then escape next door for first-rate diner fare.


Agent Affidavits Needed
LEAD: For the first time since 1971, players in the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament next month will have to submit notarized affidavits stating that they have not signed with an agent and will not do so during the tournament.


A Dispute With Religious Overtones
LEAD: The southern rim of Soviet Transcaucasia, the focal point of recent nationalist demonstrations, is an arid mountainous region crisscrossed by ancient scars of geology and the more recent scars of Islamic-Christian friction.


The Dinner Party Quietly Bows To More Casual Alternatives
LEAD: ANDREA GROVER, who lives in West Orange, N.J., is adding a dining room to her home and redoing her kitchen so that she can have dinner parties more comfortably.
That makes her something of an anomaly among her friends, who rarely entertain guests at dinner.


While the Dollar Falls, Paris Bistros and Brasseries Surge
LEAD: AMERICAN travelers, victimized by two ruthless pickpockets in the past year -the falling dollar and the plunging stock market - seem to have lost their appetite for stellar French restaurants.
Instead, they are seeking out more affordable fare in brasseries and bistros.


SOUTHERNNET INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERNNET INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
48,361,000
40,900,000
Net inc
b2,168,000
c4,492,000
Share earns
.18
-
Yr rev
187,435,000
152,740,000
Net inc
b8,794,000
c6,684,000
Share earns
.72
-


San Francisco
LEAD: CALIFORNIA'S passion for food includes an insatiable curiosity about its historic and cultural aspects, as seen in the following events around the state.


New Zealand Is Jolted By a Speedy Decontrol
LEAD: In its rapid shift over the last few years from one of the most tightly regulated economies outside the Eastern European bloc to one of the most free and open, New Zealand has been experiencing what people here call ''speed wobbles.''


20 Senators Ask Reagan for Guarantees on Canada Pact
LEAD: A group of 20 Senators, most from Western states, called on President Reagan today to provide guarantees that Canada will end subsidies to its natural resource producers as American tariffs are lowered under a free-trade pact recently concluded by the two Governments.


Advertising; Burnett, in 4-Way Race, Wins a Noxell Account
LEAD: With a limited amount of chortling, the Leo Burnett Company of Chicago announced yesterday that it had beaten three New York agencies by wnning the $20 million Clarion ac-count from the Noxell Corporation.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Amfac Hawaii Inc., Honolulu, a subsidiary of Amfac Inc., a diversified food, retail, real estate and lodging concern, named Robert H. Ozaki executive vice president and chairman.


'88 Winter Olympics; Nykaenen Jumps For a Second Gold
LEAD: Matti Nykaenen of Finland scored an overpowering victory in the 90-meter jump today, completing a first-ever sweep of the ski-jumping events at the Winter Olympics.


CLEAR CHANNEL COMMUNICAIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLEAR CHANNEL COMMUNICAIONS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,586,000
9,811,000
Net inc
726,000
389,000
Share earns
.22
.12
Yr rev
37,161,000
27,420,000
Net inc
2,153,000
1,406,000
Share earns
.66
.44


FIRST WORLD CHEESE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST WORLD CHEESE
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,500,000
6,400,000
Net inc
185,000
c433,000
Share earns
.07
-
Yr rev
29,500,000
18,100,000
Net inc
b530,000
c316,000
Share earns
.19
-
b-Includes results for newly acquired Mountain Farms Inc.


Don't Overrate Our Nuclear Arsenal's Safety
LEAD: To the Editor:


DECISION INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DECISION INDUSTRIES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
54,861,000
56,327,000
Net loss
b13,484,000
d6,805,000
Share earns
-
.72
Yr rev
191,398,000
195,083,000
Net loss
c23,346000
d7,750,000
Share earns
-
.82


Goldwater Tells Mecham: Go Back to Car Business
LEAD: Former Senator Barry Goldwater said today that the impeached Governor, Evan Mecham, should go back to selling cars, and he said his endorsement of the auto dealer in the 1986 election had been a mistake.


WESTVACO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WESTVACO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
501,000,000
441,000,000
Net inc
37,600,000
19,500,000
Share earns
.58
.30


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about Foodmaker Inc.'s purchase of Chi-Chi's Inc. misstated the price to be paid for each share.
Foodmaker will pay $10.15 a share, or a total of $230 million, for the chain of Mexican restaurants.


Hostile Bidder for IU Tops a Friendly Offer
LEAD: The protracted battle for control of the IU International Corporation intensified today as the company announced a friendly leveraged buyout proposal and later became the subject of a higher hostile takeover offer.


Death Toll at 275 in Flooding in Rio
LEAD: Rescuers pulling a woman from the wreckage of a building that collapsed yesterday as a result of a week of tropical rainstorms that have left at least 275 people dead in Rio de Janeiro state.
Relief funds began arriving yesterday for rescue efforts and repairs.
Although damage was widespread, destruction was greatest in the poor shanty towns scattered around Rio.


INTEGON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTEGON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b8,088,000
c7,857,000
Share earns
.25
.30
Shares outst
29,280,000
26,000,000
Yr net inc
b41,399,000
c26,868,000
Share earns
1.41
1.03
Shares outst
27,703,000
26,000,000
Shares outst
27,703,000
26,000,000


Walden Theater Group To Offer 'Corner Boys'
LEAD: ''Corner Boys,'' a play by James Himelsbach about four young men coming of age in the 1960's, is to be presented by the Walden Theater Company weekends through March 5 at the 1010 Theater, Park Avenue Christian Church, Park Avenue and 85th Street.


Drop in U.S. Steel Jobs
LEAD: Employment in the nation's steel industry fell in 1987 to its lowest level in at least 54 years, but wages increased slightly, according to the American Iron and Steel Institute.
An average of 163,300 people, including 120,900 production workers, were employed in the steel industry in 1987, the lowest number since records were first kept in 1933, the institute said.


Bahrain Offers Rare Welcome to U.S. in Gulf
LEAD: The rains that drenched Bahrain last weekend were a good omen for the people of this dry desert land, but they nearly ruined the American Fourth of July celebration.


Senator's Office an Electronic Command Post
LEAD: Senator Gordon J. Humphrey, a former airline pilot, now spends his days in solitude with his computer and his headset, working in a hideaway office where he feels as though he is back in a DC-9 cockpit.


HANSON PLC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANSON PLC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,672,000,000
3,284,000,000
Net inc
244,000,000
214,000,000
Share earns
.34
.30
The share earnings are in American Depositary Receipts (ADR).


I Lost to Kasparov: A Chess Patzer's Tale
LEAD: How does a patzer feel while playing Gary Kasparov, the chess champion of the world, in a simultaneous exhibition?


Driver in Howard Beach Case Is Penalized
LEAD: The driver of the car that accidently killed Michael Griffith, the black victim in the Howard Beach racial assault case, has been ruled guilty of state motor vehicle violations in the death and is scheduled to lose his driver's license for 30 days.


Clement Chen, Hotel Architect, 58
LEAD: Clement Chen Jr., the first architect to participate in a joint international venture in China, died Friday.
He was 58 years old.


OIL-DRI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OIL-DRI CORP
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,959,000
15,308,000
Net inc
1,585,000
1,575,000
Share earns
.29
.28
6mo sales
33,300,000
30,346,000
Net inc
3,177,000
3,088,000
Share earns
.57
.56


Stun-Gun Trial Ends With Four Being Convicted
LEAD: A former New York City police sergeant and a suspended officer were convicted yesterday of felony assault and other charges for torturing a marijuana dealer with an electronic stun gun at a Queens station house.


New York's Flags: Long May They Wave
LEAD: NEW YORK CITY'S flag - a tripartite design of orange, indigo blue and white with a seal in the center depicting an Indian and a sailor -doesn't readily come to mind to most people.
But no matter; 40 of the city's artistic minded have just redesigned it.


HARLEY-DAVIDSON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARLEY-DAVIDSON INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
167,027,000
72,211,000
Net inc
b4,881,000
c1,271,000
Share earns
.71
.22
Shares outst
6,910,000
5,910,000
Yr sales
685,358,000
295,322,000
Net inc
b21,215,000
c4,871,000
Share earns
3.27
.93
Shares outst
6,495,000
5,235,000


BMW Price Rise
LEAD: BMW of North America Inc. said it would raise the price of its cars by an average of 1.8 percent, or $686 a car, effective with shipments to dealers on March 15.
The greatest increase is for the top-of-the-line model, the 12-cylinder 750iL, the price of which will rise 3 percent, to $69,000 from $67,000.


HEALTHPersonal Health
LEAD: Many pet owners are so embarrassed by an invasion of fleas that they are even reluctant to admit to physicians, veterinarians or exterminators that they, their pets and their households are infested with these tiny, wingless, blood-thirsty insects.


NATIONAL HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
60,806,000
60,863,000
Net loss
6,758,000
8,453,000
6mo rev
123,240,000
115,298,000
Net loss
14,269,000
7,794,000
The year-ago periods' losses included an after-tax charge of about $7 million for additional provisions for uncollectible accounts and allowances, charges associated with the disposition of two rural hospitals, and for an accounting change.


Large Infusion of Funds Urged for Public Works
LEAD: A Federal report today urged a huge infusion of up to $90 billion a year to repair and expand the nation's dilapidated highways, mass transit systems, waste disposal facilities and other public facilities and services.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''In the world of debate about public affairs, many things done with motives that are less than admirable are protected by the First Amendment.''  - Chief Justice, William H. Rehnquist.  [ A22:3. ]


At Jet Engine Plants, Fear of Layoffs
LEAD: Dark clouds of concern loom these days over workers at the Pratt &amp; Whitney plants here and in four other Connecticut communities.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief report in the Executive Changes column of Business Day on Feb. 5 incorrectly described the activities of National Intergroup Inc. of Pittsburgh.
The company's principal business is wholesale distribution of pharmaceutical products.


Austria Is Not to Blame For Waldheim's Crimes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yields Down For Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds were mostly down for the week ended yesterday.
But fewer financial institutions were posting lower rates as compared with last week.


KAPPA NETWORKS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KAPPA NETWORKS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,927,086
2,653,231
Net inc
30,475
b95,769
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Double-Barrel Judgement; The Hustler Decision Bolsters Protections Of First Amendment and the Sullivan Rule
LEAD: The unanimous Supreme Court decision yesterday in the Hustler case was an extremely valuable two-tier victory for journalists and First Amendment advocates.


Children and TV
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Transactions
LEAD: BASEBALL  BOSTON (AL) - Signed Tom Bolton, pitcher, and Danny Sheaffer, catcher.
MINNESOTA (AL) - Traded Julius McDougal, infielder, to the Detroit Tigers for Doug Baker, infielder.
PITTSBURGH (NL) - Signed Doug Drabek and John Smiley, pitchers, to one-year contracts.
BASKETBALL


To Help the Botanical Garden Grow
LEAD: The New York Botanical Garden, deeply concerned with the welfare of growing things, now faces the need for growth of its own.
Its new expansion plan deserves the support of all who would celebrate and protect plant life around the globe.


Sentences in Panda Killings
LEAD: Eleven men have been given prison sentences ranging from three years to life for killing two giant pandas, the official New China News Agency said today.
The report said a court in Sichuan Province, one of the last natural habitats of the endangered species, found the men guilty in two incidents of killing pandas and selling pelts.


Anti-Defamation League Honors Vuitton for What It Didn't Do
LEAD: No one knows how the rumors began, but they have plagued and pained the Louis Vuitton company since the early 1970's.
In New York and Paris, word spread that the purveyor of luxury goods had run employment ads in French newspapers that said, ''Israelites S'Abstenir.'' (''Jews Need Not Apply.'') In 1974, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith investigated and found the rumors groundless.


Hers
LEAD: ''IT'S a rare bone infection!'' exclaimed the oral surgeon who stuck a needle in my mouth and drew screams.
He gave me an hour to get to Santa Monica Hospital for a six-week course of i.v. antibiotics, 30 hours in a hyperbaric chamber and surgery.


Students Learn Under a Cloud
LEAD: Students at Richland High School in this city, the home of a major nuclear weapon plant, have voted overwhelmingly to retain a nuclear mushroom cloud as their symbol.


WEST CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEST CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
66,559,000
61,099,000
Net inc
b659,000
4,774,000
Share earns
.04
.29
Yr sales
253,321,000
235,635,000
Net inc
b13,745,000
17,020,000
Share earns
.85
1.05


Soviet Permits Accounts of Khrushchev Era
LEAD: A Soviet political writer said today that Nikita S. Khrushchev risked his life when he denounced Stalin in a 1956 speech.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Greeting Corp. filed $100 million of notes due in 1993 through Goldman, Sachs.


Reagan Denies Meese Impropriety, Seeing a 'Lynch Mob Atmosphere'
LEAD: President Reagan defended Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d tonight against accusations of impropriety and said his opponents had created ''a kind of lynch mob atmosphere'' that unfairly charged members of his Administration with ethical misconduct.


House Panel to Delay Move to Expel Biaggi
LEAD: Be-cause Representative Mario Biaggi is involved in litigation, the House ethics committee has decided to delay intro-ducing a resolution caling for his ex-pulsion, according to a statement re-leased today.


Twenty Mule Team To Go Greyhound
LEAD: The Greyhound Corporation has acquired Twenty Mule Team Borax, an early broadcast sponsor of the long-running radio and television Western ''Death Valley Days,'' and two other household cleaning product lines from the United States Borax and Chemical Company.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Adler &amp; Shaykin announced that it had completed its acquisition of Wherehouse Entertainment Inc. for $14 a share, or about $190 million.


A.T.&amp;T. Sees No Computer Profit Till '90
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company's computer business will not be profitable until 1990, a year later than expected, James E. Olson, the company's chairman, said yesterday.


CENVILL INVESTORS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENVILL INVESTORS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,419,000
5,476,000
Net inc
3,579,000
3,697,000
Share earns
.51
.53
Yr rev
25,488,000
20,839,000
Net inc
15,382,000
14,478,000
Share earns
2.20
2.20


Coastal Offering Notes and Stock
LEAD: The Coastal Corporation is offering $200 million of 11 1/8 percent senior subordinated notes due in 1998 at a price of 99.673 to yield 11.18 percent through underwriters led by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.


The New Hearing Aids: Nearly Invisible Devices Filter Distracting Sounds
LEAD: The hearing aid, long considered a simple sound magnifier for the deaf, has been undergoing a quiet revolution of computerized sophistication that is making it not only smaller, but smarter.


Farmers Group Bid Backed at B.A.T.
LEAD: The shareholders of the British conglomerate B.A.T.
Industries approved a hostile $4.2 billion effort by the group's American subsidiary for Farmers Group Inc., the seventh-largest United States insurer.


Women as Predators
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Trump Gets Tyson Fight
LEAD: Donald Trump has won the bidding on the live rights to the Mike Tyson-Michael Spinks bout, and will stage the fight on June 27 at the Atlantic City Convention Center, adjoining Trump Plaza.
Bill Cayton, co-manager with


Dollar Is Narrowly Mixed: Gold Off $8.70 in New York
LEAD: The dollar turned in a narrowly mixed performance yesterday on the world's foreign-exchange markets.
Gold fell sharply worldwide and was down $8.70 an ounce in New York, to $432.80.


The Targets of Pretoria
LEAD: In its crackdown today, the Government restricted the activities of 17 anti-apartheid organizations and one labor federation.
Here are the names and descriptions of the groups: Azanian People's Organization (Azapo).


E.P.A. Gets Reports Of Illegal Dumping Into Ohio After Spill
LEAD: Reports that toxic chemicals may have been dumped into the Ohio River while the water was fouled with diesel fuel have been turned over to investigators for the Environmental Protection Agency, an E.P.A. official said today.


A City Hopes to Strike Oil
LEAD: The City of Baytown, banking that City Hall may be sitting on a pool of oil, is looking in its own backyard for more income.
The City Council voted Tuesday to approve a plan for Trace Oil and Gas to drill a well 5,000 to 6,000 feet deep near the entrance to the 30-acre wooded City Hall complex.
The city would receive a 20 percent royalty on any petroleum uncovered under the agreement.


San Diego in Cup Concession
LEAD: The San Diego Yacht Club agreed yesterday to a proposal for a multination America's Cup challenge this year, but the concession may have come too late for anybody to build a boat in time for a sailoff with New Zealand before the September cup regatta.


Vindication for a Leading Proponent Of Theory 'People Are Born to Be Fat'
LEAD: For Dr.
Jules Hirsch, a professor at Rockefeller University in New York and a senior physician at the university's hospital, the new studies showing that fat people are biochemically different from thin people are a vindication of a view he has promoted for more than two decades.


DIANA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIANA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 2
1988
1987
Net loss
848,000
bc1,576,000
Share earns
-
.38
9mo net inc
2,105,000
c3,212,000
Share earns
.52
.78
b-Net income  c-Includes an extraordinary gain of $1,043,000 for both the quarter and 9 months.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices, 6 to 2, Hold Rent Control Law in San Jose, Calif., Is Constitutional
LEAD: The Supreme Court today upheld the constitutionality of a rent control law in San Jose, Calif., in an opinion suggesting that challenges to rent controls are unlikely to succeed except when particular landlords can show they have been denied a fair return.


AIDS Panel Calls for Major Effort On Drug Abuse and Health Care
LEAD: The chairman of President Reagan's AIDS commission today called for a $2 billion-a-year effort to expand treatment programs for drug abuse and improve health care services to combat the growing epidemic.
He urged hiring 32,000 drug treatment specialists and setting up 3,300 drug centers.


BALTIMORE GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO reports earnings for 12mo Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALTIMORE GAS &amp; ELECTRIC CO (NYSE)
12mo Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,806,357,000
1,828,925,000
Net inc
306,012,000
276,516,000
Share earns
3.54
3.18


Soviet Union Rolls On In Hockey Tournament
LEAD: Canada had perfected its formula, perhaps to the detriment of fun or flair, so that it could be applied like a sort of glue to the styles of other Olympic hockey teams, and expressly to the sinuous machinations of the Soviet Union's team.


Jackson's White Voters
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Designs on the Rose: Floral Home Furnishings
LEAD: THE versatile and ornamental rose - the center of attention in fashion, where floral fever is approaching epidemic proportions - is now taking on a leading role in decorating.


COHU INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COHU INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,057,000
6,912,000
Net inc
647,000
b279,000
Share earns
.36
-
Yr rev
29,812,000
28,774,000
Net inc
1,867,000
522,000
Share earns
1.03
.29
b-Net loss


Home Improvement
LEAD: SLIDING doors - the kind installed in closets or cramped doorways - are excellent space savers.
But the frustration they can cause when they malfunction is often a greater price than one wants to pay for the advantage.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: N.B.A.
Celtics 113, Trail Blazers 112: Larry Bird scored 16 of his 44 points in the fourth quarter last night.
The victory was the Celtics' second in six days over the Trail Blazers and brought their home-court record to 21-3.
The Celtics overcame a 100-88 deficit with eight minutes remaining.


Excerpts From High Court's Affirmation of Speech Protections
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the opinion of Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist today as the Supreme Court rejected an award for the Rev.
Jerry Falwell from Hustler magazine.
All other members of the Court joined his opinion except Justice Byron R. White, who filed a separate opinion concurring in the judgment, and Justice Anthony M.


Bonds Slip in a Stagnant Market
LEAD: Bond prices dipped slightly in light, directionless trading yesterday.
Dealers said the activity was mostly confined to professionals, with little or no interest from retail customers.


CDI CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CDI CORPORATION (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
149,517,000
111,324,000
Net inc
2,267,000
709,000
Share earns
.36
.12
9mo rev
438,828,000
342,007,000
Net inc
7,989,000
4,131,000
Share earns
1.28
.67


Bridge: 11-Year-Old Collects Points In Quest to Be a Life Master
LEAD: Most players of the highest class began bridge when they were teen-agers, and a few began even earlier.
The record for the youngest to achieve Life Master rank is held by Douglas Hsieh of Manhattan, who was 11 when he did so.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 1988
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY


Peres Aide Says Bechtel Offered Oil At Reduced Price for Pipeline Pledge
LEAD: The Bechtel Group offered to sell oil at reduced rates to Israel for 10 years - a reduction worth $650 million to $700 million - in exchange for an Israeli pledge not to attack a proposed oil pipeline from Iraq to Jordan, an aide to Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said today.


The Big Chinook Arrives
LEAD: NEVER underestimate the power of wishful thinking.
Before these Winter Games ever began, some southerners at heart prayed for a Chinook wind to warm up the Alberta prairie.


CARIBBEAN SELECT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CARIBBEAN SELECT
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
477,187
775,415
Net loss
619,834
369,165
9mo sales
3,279,506
3,691,041
Net loss
1,375,860
317,419


DONALDSON CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DONALDSON CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
85,871,000
66,505,000
Net inc
b4,211,000
c1,801,000
Share earns
.87
.36
6mo sales
171,348,000
135,599,000
Net inc
b8,336,000
c5,424,000
Share earns
1.66
1.05


SHAKLEE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHAKLEE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
180,800,000
99,100,000
Net inc
9,000,000
5,000,000
Share earns
.68
.38
Yr sales
571,800,000
397,800,000
Net inc
23,500,000
62,100,000
Share earns
1.77
4.70


Desert Partners Is Offering $2.1 Billion to Acquire USG
LEAD: In the latest round of its battle to gain control of the USG Corporation, Desert Partners L.P. today offered $42 a share, or $2.16 billion in cash and securities, for the outstanding common stock of the nation's largest gypsum producer.


Advertising; Australian Is a Favorite At Saatchi
LEAD: GEOFFREY A. COUSINS, a second-generation ad man, arrived in Times Square yesterday morning looking unbelievably fresh after a 22-hour flight from Sydney, Australia.


Joint of Shuttle Rocket Said to Pass New Test
LEAD: A joint on the redesigned space shuttle booster rocket apparently survived another test of its ability to contain the hot gases blamed in the explosion of the Challenger, a space agency official said today.


OVERMYER CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OVERMYER CORP
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
32,293,433
23,827,716
Net inc
b1,372,154
b413,787
Share earns
1.57
.45
b-Includes a tax credit of $543,000 and $170,000 for the latest and prior years, respectively.


Knoll Sets Up a New Studio for Celebrated Designers
LEAD: AS Knoll International turns 50 years old, the New York company, which has won international acclaim for its office furnishings, is introducing the KnollStudio division: furniture by well-known architects and designers.


Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Schlage Lock Company to Mojo Advertising, San Francisco, part of Mojo MDA of Australia.


ROHR INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ROHR INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
220,001,000
154,271,000
Net inc
7,628,000
8,313,000
Share earns
.44
.47
6mo sales
422,642,000
312,803,000
Net inc
14,801,000
17,057,000
Share earns
.84
.97


Architect's Vision: Pyramid To Suburbia
LEAD: A CHAIR with an asphalt shingle roof and wood siding that resembles the facade of a house; tables that burst apart into four cracked pieces; lighting that looks like a piece of scaffolding.
Such are the intriguing designs by the architect Allan Wexler, in a show at Ronald Feldman Fine Arts.


Santa Fe Shuns Henley's Offer
LEAD: The Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation today tersely rejected Henley Group Inc.'s latest offer to buy a substantial stake in the company.


An Avid and Successful Risk-Taker
LEAD: If John A. Mulheren Jr. had his way, he would now be a member of the United States Olympic luge team in Calgary, Alberta, where he hoped to become an instant celebrity.
Not only had he developed a daring new technique in his training, but the fun-loving Mr.
Mulheren even planned to speed down the Calgary run wearing a mask.


BISHOP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BISHOP INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,421,000
2,559,000
Net loss
b197,000
104,000
b-Includes a gain on sale of lease receivables of $22,000.


U.S. and Bonn Seek Harmony Over Missile Issue
LEAD: The United States and West Germany have agreed to put aside the contentious issue of modernizing short-range nuclear missiles to guarantee harmony in the Atlantic alliance, according to American and German officials.


SAVIN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAVIN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
91,313,000
82,483,000
Net inc
b1,143,000
c1,052,000
Share earns
.02
.04
Yr rev
356,277,000
362,657,000
Net inc
b423,000
cd9,218,000
Share earns
-
-


Books: Empire of Fur
LEAD: CAESARS OF THE WILDERNESS.
Company of Adventurers, Vol.
II.
By Peter C. Newman. 450 pages.
Illustrated.
Viking. $25.


FAB INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAB INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 28
1987
1986
Revenue
36,333,000
31,195,000
Net inc
2,042,000
2,771,000
Share earns
.57
.76
Yr rev
139,748,000
121,782,000
Net inc
b12,439,000
10,726,000
Share earns
3.43
2.95


Critic's Notebook; Fixing the Blame for 'Serious Money'
LEAD: CARYL CHURCHILL'S ''Serious Money,'' a runaway hit in its production at the Public Theater last fall, opened and closed in less than two weeks on Broadway this month.
We can all guess the meaning of this cautionary tale, but, should anyone fail to, surely someone connected with ''Serious Money'' will remind us of the moral in a public pronouncement sometime soon.


ECOLAB INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ECOLAB INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
279,608,000
161,018,000
Net inc
8,633,000
c10,565,000
Share earns
.32
.40
Shares outst
26,820,000
26,554,000
Yr sales
1,020,155,000
618,564,000
Net inc
b141,741,000
c45,119,000
Share earns
5.30
1.67
Shares outst
26,765,000
27,007,000


Ultimatum Is Sent To Foster Wheeler
LEAD: The New York investor Asher B. Edelman said that he might present his proposals to acquire or restructure the Foster Wheeler Corporation directly to the company's shareholders if its management refused to meet with him.


Trial of Hunt Brothers In Silver Case Begins
LEAD: A $150 million lawsuit against the Hunt brothers of Dallas went to trial yesterday in Manhattan, with a lawyer representing the leading Peruvian mineral company accusing the Hunts of engaging in an elaborate scheme in 1979 and 1980 to manipulate silver prices.


Prague Journal; In Red-Garlanded City, Unbidden Specter of '68
LEAD: Rich red bun-ting on the principal buildings and posters in store windows announce that the Czechoslovak Communist Party is about to celebrate the events leading up to Feb. 25, 1948, when its leader, Klement Gottwald, announced the death of parliamentary democracy and the beginning of Communist rule.


CERTRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CERTRON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,812,000
6,982,000
Net inc
b130,000
125,000
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
3,148,000
3,056,000
b-Includes a tax loss carryforward of $16,000.


Sweden Preserves Its Porcelain Stoves
LEAD: IN the late 1960's, Kjell-Evart Sigvardsson realized he was one of Sweden's last master makers of wood-burning tiled stoves in a nation swiftly converting to central heating.
He decided to fight back.


Gold Falls to 10-Month Low, With Little Inflation Seen
LEAD: Gold prices plunged to a 10-month low yesterday as mining companies and speculators increased their sales in a market weakened by a firmer dollar, declining energy futures and the Federal Reserve's forecast of continued low inflation.


Bush, Stepping Up Attack, Demands Apology From Robertson
LEAD: Vice President Bush, who finished back in the pack in Tuesday's two Republican Presidential contests, stepped up his battle with Pat Robertson today, demanding that Mr.
Robertson apologize for statements implying that Mr.
Bush's campaign was engaged in ''sleazy'' politics.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Alba-Waldensian Inc., Valdese, N.C., a maker of women's and men's hosiery, elected William F. Karnbach president and chief operating officer, succeeding William D. Shubert, who remains chairman and chief executive.


Worcester Journal; Town Asks Springsteen, Why Here? (and Smiles)
LEAD: Bruce, why Worcester?


Untimely Exercise
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviet Buys More Wheat
LEAD: An additional 700,000 metric tons of subsidized United States wheat has been sold to the Soviet Union, the Agriculture Department said Tuesday.
Overall wheat exports, spurred by subsidized sales to China and the Soviet Union, are expected to rise more than 50 percent from last year, reducing the American stockpile to its lowest level in six years.


CAMBRIDGE BIOSCIENCE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAMBRIDGE BIOSCIENCE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
869,000
579,000
Net loss
1,607,000
849,000
Yr sales
3,609,000
2,192,000
Net loss
4,492,000
2,239,000


Federated's Board To Review Offers
LEAD: Federated Department Stores Inc. said its board would review a variety of proposals today, including the increased $61-a-share tender offer for the company by the Campeau Corporation.
The directors, holding a regularly scheduled meeting, will also review a previously announced restructuring plan as well as negotiations with third parties that have indicated an interest in acquiring Federated or its Ralph's division or in participating in the restructuring.


VARO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VARO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
23,369,000
19,820,000
Net inc
503,000
408,000
Share earns
.11
.10
9mo rev
71,273,000
56,337,000
Net inc
b1,405,000
1,161,000
Share earns
.32
.27
b-Includes a gain of $600,000, or 14 cents a share, from an accounting change.


Greenspan Resisting Pressure
LEAD: The chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan, said today that he ''objected quite strongly'' to a Reagan Administration attempt to interfere in the Fed's management of the economy and that he would resist any election-year pressure on Fed policy.


Jazz: Art Blakey Group
LEAD: THE great drummer Art Blakey has, since 1955, been leading bands which effecively function as schools, producing generation after generation of jazz's best soloists.
His more recent groups haven't always lived up to the sum of their parts - like the seasons change, so do Mr.
Blakey's young band members, occasionally making for a ragged ensemble sound.


A Senator Is Captured, but Not His Mind
LEAD: ''One arrest, no conviction,'' Senator Bob Packwood said today, summing up his brush with the law in the early morning.


CALIFORNIA BIOTECHNOLOGY reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CALIFORNIA BIOTECHNOLOGY (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,675,000
16,818,000
Net loss
8,500,000
b18,968,000
b-Includes a charge of $19.7 million resulting from the company's purchase of the majority of outstanding units of its research and development limited partnership.


BELVEDERE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELVEDERE CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,131,000
7,008,000
Net inc
b1,001,000
-
Share earns
.17
-
Shares outst
5,924,510
3,181,805
Yr rev
45,591,000
22,707,000
Net inc
b3,436,000
c1,451,000
Share earns
.59
.53
Shares outst
5,829,937
2,757,040


Tot Badly Bitten by Ants
LEAD: A 16-month-old girl bitten by a horde of ants was in critical condition today, a spokeswoman for Sacred Heart Hospital said.
Tiffany Cheatam of Navarre, a community about 20 miles east of this Panhandle city, had stopped breathing when rescuers arrived at her home shortly after noon Tuesday, emergency personnel said.


CIMCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CIMCO INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,432,060
7,295,337
Net inc
555,340
302,144
Share earns
.23
.13
9mo sales
27,080,396
24,833,879
Net inc
1,580,395
1,370,630
Share earns
.66
.60


Knicks Nearer to Deadline, Not Trade
LEAD: Bill Cartwright was suppposed to be traded to the Portland Trail Blazers, the Atlanta Hawks, the Dallas Mavericks, the Chicago Bulls or any other team that would have him.
Chris Mullin was coming to the Knicks from the Golden State Warriors for either Kenny Walker or Gerald Wilkins.
Pat Cummings was going to Portland.


How the Dying Can Save the Living
LEAD: Several months ago in New York City, a young girl died while waiting for the heart and lung transplant that was the only means of extending her life.
A few weeks later, a baby boy died before he could be given a new heart.


KOREANS INSTALL A NEW PRESIDENT
LEAD: Roh Tae Woo, who transformed himself from co-conspirator in a military coup to avowed champion of democracy, assumed the presidency today in South Korea's first peaceful transfer of power in four decades as an independent nation.


Trump's Promise Wins Relicensing for Casino
LEAD: The Casino Control Commission voted, 5 to 0, today to relicense the Resorts International casino, a day after the company's chairman, Donald J. Trump, pledged that it would meet its obligations to build housing in Atlantic City.


Calendar: Workshop, Antiques And Crafts
LEAD: The World's Gardens


U.S. Spurs Drive for Exports
LEAD: The Commerce Department began an effort today to help smaller companies capitalize on a highly competitive dollar-exchange rate to penetrate foreign markets.


Arbitrager Said to Have Helped Boesky
LEAD: One of John A. Mulheren Jr.'s closer friends on Wall Street was the fallen arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky.
It was a relationship that helped Mr.
Boesky greatly at a crucial time in his career.


Corrections
LEAD: The Nasdaq National Market table in Business Day last Thursday and last Monday carried an erroneous identification supplied by The Associated Press for the Xplor Corporation.
The company is no longer named


Booby Trap in Home Equity Loan Agreements
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Says It May Seek a Cut in Its U.N. Dues
LEAD: The United States may seek a reduction in its financial commitments to the United Nations and affiliated organizations because Congress refuses to pay the current dues, Reagan Administration officials say.


INVESTITECH reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INVESTITECH
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,653,717
1,014,074
Net inc
142,021
68,774


Moslem Patrol Helps Cut Crime in Brooklyn
LEAD: In more than 20 years as a businessman in Brooklyn, Eric Bullen has faced riots and looting and mounting drug-related crime, including more burglaries than he cares to remember.
But lately, he says, the sense of siege has been reduced, and he has noticed something unusual: customers browsing casually at the windows of his men's clothing store on Fulton Street.


Norma Kamali Moves on to Furniture
LEAD: WHEN they find OMO SoHo closed on April 1, shoppers may think it is Norma Kamali's idea of an April Fools' joke.
But in fact Ms.
Kamali, a fashion designer, is closing her doors at 113 Spring Street (Mercer Street) from April 1 to 18 so the space can be transformed from a clothing store to one devoted to home furnishings.


Short Sales Outstanding Rise by 19.8% on Nasdaq
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the over-the-counter market's ''short interest'' position -the number of shares sold short and not yet covered -in the month ended Feb. 12 soared by 34.7 million shares, or 19.8 percent.


NEUTROGENA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEUTROGENA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
44,931,000
30,513,000
Net inc
7,368,000
4,247,000
Share earns
.34
.20
The share earnings reflect a 3-for-2 stock split distributed on Jan. 15, 1988.


South Africa Bans Most Anti-Apartheid Activities
LEAD: South Africa today banned the activities of 17 leading anti-apartheid organizations, including the nation's largest, the United Democratic Front, and prohibited the major labor federation from all political action.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Feb. 5 about a South Korean effort to improve relations with Communist countries misstated the trade relationship between the Koreas and the United States.
It is South Korea, not North Korea, that depends heavily on trade with the United States.


Two Marines Charged With 'Indecent Acts'
LEAD: Two women marines have been charged with ''fraternization and indecent acts'' with other women at the training base here, the Marine Corps says.


OSHKOSH B'GOSH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OSHKOSH B'GOSH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
53,703,000
50,389,000
Net inc
5,143,000
6,137,000
Share earns
.35
.42
Yr sales
226,298,000
198,197,000
Net inc
23,899,000
20,636,000
Share earns
1.64
1.41


Peugeot Sets Japan Marketing Pact
LEAD: Automobiles Peugeot, the French auto maker, said today that the Suzuki Motor Company of Japan as well as Austin Rover Japan had agreed to help distribute its cars in Japan.


Homes On a Budget
LEAD: ''IT was all done on a shoestring,'' said Tom McIntyre, the South Boston union leader who was the motivating force behind the Andrew Square housing development.
In fact, Mr.
McIntyre had the edge over many nonprofit housing corporations, tapping the power of two labor unions in the Bricklayers and Laborers Nonprofit Housing


HECK'S INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HECK'S INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
136,940,000
181,211,000
Net loss
22,090,000
8,221,000
Yr sales
412,634,000
556,346,000
Net loss
61,340,000
18,269,000
The latest fourth quarter included separate charges of $7.3 million and $10 million associated with inventory liquidations and store closings and a charge of $2 million for an increase in the reserve for bankruptcy-related expenses.


New York Grants for Basics in the Arts
LEAD: The New York State Council on the Arts announced this week the first grant recipients in a new program to support building repairs and other capital projects for arts organizations.
The Capital Aid Program represents a new departure for the nation's largest state arts agency, whose legislative mandate has in the past prohibited it from supporting capital projects.


HANDLEMAN CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HANDLEMAN CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
151,711,000
125,049,000
Net inc
10,161,000
7,433,000
Share earns
.72
.53
9mo sales
397,263,000
338,233,000
Net inc
23,899,000
17,740,000
Share earns
1.69
1.27


Washington Talk: Senate; Age of TV Catches Up With an Anachronism
LEAD: Once again, as it has done periodically over the last seven decades, the Senate has pinned itself to the floor with its own unusual wrestling move: the filibuster.


Airbus Holds Talks
LEAD: The European consortium Airbus Industrie is discussing a wide range of manufacturing ventures with United States aircraft makers, and it hopes to announce a deal within a year, Airbus executives said.
Adam Brown, Airbus vice president for strategic planning, also said the company had held negotiations about manufacturing arrangements with McDonnell Douglas, Lockheed and Rockwell International.


EQK GREEN ACRES LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EQK GREEN ACRES LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,040,000
2,680,000
Share earns
.30
.26
Yr net inc
11,480,000
-
Share earns
1.12
-
Share earnings are in units.
The company began operations June 30, 1986.


Stage: Rodeo '88 At Olympic Festival
LEAD: Anything that moves, so to speak, falls within a dance critic's purview.
So why not saddle-bronc riders who, like ballet dancers, earn points the more they turn their toes out?


Text of Cuomo Statement
LEAD: Following is the text of the statement made yesterday by Governor Cuomo on the Tawana Brawley case:


New Womb Disorder Drug
LEAD: A new drug that blocks the production of sex hormones appears to be an effective alternative for treating endometriosis, the growth of tissue from the lining of the uterus elsewhere in the body, a study concludes.
The condition affects about 5 percent of all women in their reproductive years.


J.T. Lanman, 70, a Pediatrician
LEAD: Dr.
Jonathan T. Lanman, a pediatrician who served in a high research post at the National Institutes of Health, died of a lung ailment Monday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 70 years old.


SAVANNAH FOODS &amp; INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAVANNAH FOODS &amp; INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
232,670,000
158,858,000
Net inc
4,197,000
2,879,000
Share earns
.63
.43
Yr sales
878,726,000
634,682,000
Net inc
14,021,000
10,399,000
Share earns
2.11
1.56


Year at Dartmouth $18,199
LEAD: Tuition, room and board at Dartmouth College will cost $18,199 next year, up 6.4 percent from this year, the trustees have announced.
Tuition will rise from $12,474 to $13,335, a 6.9 percent increase.
Room and board will go up 5 percent.
Robert Field, the college treasurer, said continued pressure for higher salaries and increases in financial aid were largely responsible for the increases.


ERLY INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ERLY INDUSTRIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
61,998,000
27,370,000
Net loss
402,000
b2,242,000
Share earns
-
1.04
9mo sales
162,916,000
95,205,000
Net loss
2,002,000
b4,443,000
Share earns
-
1.97


Chinese Film Named Best In Berlin
LEAD: ''The Red Sorghum Field,'' an epic film about seduction and war in China, has won the best-picture award at the 38th Berlin Film Festival.


RAX RESTAURANTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RAX RESTAURANTS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
30,088,000
28,016,000
Net inc
b75,000
c4,035,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
61,748,000
59,157,000
Net inc
b860,000
c3,706,000
Share earns
.12
-


Don't Sell a Refuge For a Mess of Oil
LEAD: Veiled in a fog of doubletalk, the Senate Energy Committee voted last week on behalf of the oil industry to open up one of the world's great biological reserves to certain environmental degradation for the sake of uncertain profits.
The 10 to 9 vote to permit development of the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


Israeli Soldier Killed in Ambush Is Mourned
LEAD: Ruth Ashouri, whose boyfriend, Amir Zidner, was one of two Israeli soldiers killed in an ambush Tuesday in southern Lebanon, at his funeral yesterday.
With her were Mr.
Zidner's mother, Naomi, and brother, Alon.
The soldiers were killed in the Israeli-designated security zone when their patrol was hit by a guerrilla rocket attack.


BINKS MANUFACTURING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BINKS MANUFACTURING CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
39,339,000
44,155,000
Net inc
1,694,066
1,849,000
Share earns
.58
.62
Shares outst
2,882,598
2,976,598
Yr sales
184,571,000
162,264,000
Net inc
7,755,000
6,879,000
Share earns
2.67
2.29
Shares outst
2,902,688
3,004,515


Double Triumph Leaves Dole Smiling
LEAD: For Bob Dole, a week of brooding finally gave way to buoyancy today.


Advertising; Public Service Effort Promotes Teaching
LEAD: Because it believes that the nation will need 1.5 million new teachers in the next six years, an organization called Recruiting Young Teachers turned to the Advertising Council for a public service campaign.


Excerpts From Report of Commission on AIDS
LEAD: Following are excerpts from recommendations presented today by James D. Watkins, chairman of the Presidential Commission on Human Immunodeficiency Virus Epidemic, for consideration by the full commission.


PENRIL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PENRIL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,075,000
10,178,000
Net inc
b763,000
c1,309,000
Share earns
.33
-
6mo rev
19,214,000
19,561,000
Net inc
b1,022,000
c1,480,000
Share earns
.44
-


U.S. Concerned On Coffee Price
LEAD: The United States suspects that coffee is being sold to some nations at a 25 percent discount, the American delegate to the International Coffee Organization, Bruce McMullen, said today.
He said the United States wanted the subject discussed when the organization's board meets this week in London.


Compulsory Consultations
LEAD: Katarina Witt, left, of East Germany, and Debi Thomas of the United States talking to their coaches during the compulsory figures.
Page B10. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


Contraceptive Device Is Approved for U.S. Market
LEAD: A panel of the Food and Drug Administration today gave final approval to commercial sale of the cervical cap, a contraceptive device similar to the diaphragm, that could be made available as early as April.


Myerson Takes the Fifth in a Civil Case
LEAD: Bess Myerson, testifying under subpoena, invoked the Fifth Amendment yesterday at a civil proceeding in State Supreme Court in Manhattan when a lawyer asked if she had taken anything from the Long Island beach home of her companion, Carl A. Capasso.


Henderson Not Speedy Now
LEAD: In a way, it has become a rite of spring for the Yankees.
On the day they conduct their first full-scale workout in Florida, the same key player is always missing: Rickey Henderson.


Suns Trade Edwards
LEAD: The Phoenix Suns traded James Edwards, a 32-year-old center, to the Detroit Pistons yesterday for Ron Moore, a rookie center, and a second-round choice in the 1991 college draft.
Moore, 25 years old and 6 feet 10 inches tall, was the second-round pick of the Knicks in the 1987 draft.
He was traded to the Pistons in October for Sidney Green and played in only nine games for Detroit this season, averaging 1.1 points.


DIGITAL OPTRONICS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIGITAL OPTRONICS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
43,351
16,710
Net loss
403,408
137,903
The company is a development stage company.


SCOR US reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCOR US (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
27,941,605
16,581,144
Net inc
b4,357,774
c3,856,194
Share earns
.35
.30
Yr rev
102,042,650
58,730,489
Net inc
b17,386,444
c10,179,213
Share earns
1.38
1.05


A New View of Old Art
LEAD: IT is obvious when an oil painting is torn, blistered or cracked and in need of repair.
But how do you tell when it needs cleaning?


BELLWETHER EXPLORATION COMPANY reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BELLWETHER EXPLORATION COMPANY
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
686,703
607,840
Net inc
61,390
61,056
6mo rev
1,198,955
1,152,244
Net inc
177,074
b4,737,091
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


U.S. OFFICIAL MEETS AFGHAN ALLIANCE
LEAD: A State Department official met with representatives of all seven Afghan guerrilla factions today in Pakistan to discuss a Soviet troop withdrawal from Afghanistan, the department announced.


Essay; Bailing Out Moscow
LEAD: We have just been told by a well-placed informant inside the Kremlin that the Soviet Union is not the economic power our intelligence analysts have long thought it was.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Secret Weapon
LEAD: Worried that the elimination of several classes of nuclear missiles and the sharp reduction of other strategic weapons may dangerously weaken the United States or the Soviet Union?
Rest easy.
According to Alan Greenspan, by way of President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, there is another megaweapon that nobody has thought of scrapping.


Trade Deficit $159.2 Billion
LEAD: The United States foreign trade deficit was a seasonally adjusted $40.17 billion in October through December, bringing the total deficit to a record $159.2 billion in 1987, the Commerce Department said today.


Tennessee Tops Florida, 65-63
LEAD: Greg Bell of Tennessee hit a jumper from 16 feet with three seconds left tonight as the Volunteers rallied from a 15-point deficit to beat Florida, 65-63, and give Coach Don DeVoe his 300th victory.
DeVoe's career record is 300-193.


Bribing Foreigners: What the Law Says
LEAD: The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, the law that is at the center of a special prosecutor's investigation of Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, is so complicated that even prosecutors have trouble determining when it is broken.


COURT, 8-0, EXTENDS RIGHT TO CRITICIZE THOSE IN PUBLIC EYE
LEAD: The Supreme Court, in an 8-to-0 ruling today, broadly reaffirmed and extended its rules protecting criticism of public figures as free speech, even if the criticism is ''outrageous'' and offensive.


Meese Encouraged Those Who Prejudge Him; Arguing the Right Point
LEAD: To the Editor:


Trompe l'Oeil Ornaments That Paste Onto Walls
LEAD: RIBBONS and bows, swags and rosettes are still popular in interiors, though using them has always taken skill and a professional eye.
In response to a growing do-it-yourself market, several companies are producing these decorations as precut pieces of wallpaper, some to coordinate with wallpaper and fabric lines.


COLORADO PRIME reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLORADO PRIME (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 29
1988
1987
Revenue
21,622,000
19,131,000
Net inc
1,034,000
480,000
Share earns
.21
.14
Shares outst
4,881,000
3,349,000


Rabbi Seymour Siegel, 61, Leader In Conservative Judaism, Is Dead
LEAD: Rabbi Seymour Siegel, an architect of contemporary Conservative Jewish theology whose writings helped open the door for the ordination of female rabbis and other innovations, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital after a long illness.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Schneider Wins Giant Slalom
LEAD: Seven men in wooly fur coats, accompanied by an accordion player, stood on the side of an icy slope, singing the praises of Mateja Svet, their heroine from Yugoslavia.
Another man held a sign wishing the eventual winner, Vreni Schneider of Switzerland, much luck.
And, of course, all eyes were riveted on the giant slalom course when those other Swiss misses, Maria Walliser and Michela


Other Bids Sought By Stop and Shop
LEAD: Eager to escape Dart Group Inc. and the Haft family, which controls it, the Stop and Shop Companies said it was negotiating with several other parties with a view to being acquired.
But the Boston-based retailer, which operates 113 Stop and Shop supermarkets and 169 Bradlees discount department stores, did not identify the companies it was talking with and said there was no assurance that a deal would be reached.


DEST CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEST CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,279,000
5,645,000
Net loss
b639,000
304,000
9mo rev
23,452,000
16,716,000
Net loss
b1,060,000
1,818,000
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $247,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary gain of $54,000 for the 9 months.


Steinbrenner Heads Panel on U.S. Effort
LEAD: The United States Olympic Committee named a special Olympic Overview Commission today to determine how well it had done and what direction it should take.
The commission chairman is George Steinbrenner, the principal owner of the Yankees and a member of the U.S.O.C.
Executive Board representing the private sector.


TV Ad Expenses Questioned On Dukakis and Gephardt
LEAD: The Federal Election Commission's general counsel today urged the commission to deem ''unreasonable'' a practice used in Iowa by the Presidential campaigns of Michael S. Dukakis and Richard A. Gephardt.
Those candidates counted half the cost of television advertising as a fund-raising expense.


Davis Near Decision
LEAD: Since Tom Flores resigned as head coach of the Los Angeles Raiders on Jan. 20, Al Davis, the team's owner, has been interviewing candidates in the hope of filling the vacancy before the National Football League meetings begin on March 14.
Yesterday, The Associated Press said Davis was leaning toward one of five candidates but would not say which one: Mike Shanahan, the offensive coordinator of the Denver Broncos; Dennis Green, an assistant coach with the San Francisco 49ers; or one of three Raider assistant coaches, Charlie Sumner, Tom Walsh and Sam Gruneisen.


AMERICAN BANKERS INSURNCE GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN BANKERS INSURNCE GROUP INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,952,000
d6,117,000
Share earns
.46
.48
Yr net loss
b32,317,000
cd25,988,000
Share earns
-
2.03
b-Includes net realized gains of $222,000 and $1,659,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTAGE CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTAGE CORP (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
301,000,000
247,000,000
Share earns
18.12
14.87
The company said reclassifications have been made in the financial statements to certain 1986 amounts as previously reported in order to make them consistent with the presentation of 1987 amounts.


Civil War '88: Too Many Battles, Too Few Troops
LEAD: History enthusiasts organizing re-enactments of major Civil War battles this summer are running into the same problem Gen.
Ulysses S. Grant and Gen.
Robert E. Lee faced 125 years ago: not enough Yankees and Confederates to go around.


BRADY, W H CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRADY, W H CO (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
38,299,000
31,384,000
Net inc
2,728,000
2,088,000
Share earns
.37
.28
6mo sales
73,170,000
60,858,000
Net inc
5,234,000
4,649,000
Share earns
.71
.63


DOSKOCIL COMPANIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOSKOCIL COMPANIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
54,116,000
62,649,000
Net loss
b1,671,000
c1,019,000
Shares outst
5,220,000
6,012,000
Yr sales
215,017,000
223,918,000
Net inc
b1,515,000
c4,656,000
Share earns
.27
.79
Shares outst
5,649,000
6,012,000


Talking Deals; Murdoch's Focus On Bottom Line
LEAD: FOR Rupert Murdoch, buying The New York Post was a bad deal, a financial failure.
In the 12 years that he owned The Post, he lost an estimated $150 million.


Dykstra Displays New Look
LEAD: The first fat cat of the spring arrived today when Lenny Dykstra checked into the Mets' training camp with 20 extra pounds.
Manager Dave Johnson wasn't sure that he liked what he saw.


Advertising; Nike Is Persisting In 'Revolution' Theme
LEAD: The fourth TV commercial in Nike's ''Revolution in Motion'' campaign featuring the Beatles song ''Revolution'' began last night, just as a spokesman for the shoe company earlier in the day had said it would.


Underwriting Test in Senate
LEAD: The Senate Banking Committee chairman, William Proxmire, said today that he hoped a majority of his panel would approve a bill that would allow banks to underwrite securities.


Summerfare Drops Play With Redgrave
LEAD: An official of the National Theater of Great Britain said yesterday that an important Soviet company had been dropped from the 1988 schedule of Pepsico Summerfare because the performances would have included a simultaneous translation delivered by Vanessa Redgrave.


PLASTI-LINE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLASTI-LINE INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
19,615,000
17,946,000
Net inc
89,000
1,259,000
Share earns
.02
.35
Yr sales
66,503,000
57,976,000
Net inc
1,556,000
3,995,000
Share earns
.43
1.13
The company said that the latest year and quarter results include results for Tencon Inc., acquired last August.


Van Gogh Portrait to Be Auctioned in May
LEAD: A portrait by Vincent van Gogh of Adeline Ravoux, which will be auctioned at Christie's in New York on May 11.
The house estimates that the oil on canvas - one of three studies by van Gogh of a 13-year-old girl in a blue dress - will sell for more than $15 million.


A DELEGATE COUNT
LEAD: Current breakdown of Presidential preference of delegates to national political conventions.
Preferences are based on delegates' public statements or binding state laws or party rules.
Some Democratic delegates outside U.S. mainland have fractions of votes.
DEMOCRATS
Dukakis
44.50
Gephardt
39.00
Simon
33.00
Gore
10.55
Jackson
9.80
Hart
0.00
Others
0.00
Uncommitted
278.40


RANGER OIL LTD (CANADA)(N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RANGER OIL LTD (CANADA)(N)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
74,002,000
68,618,000
Net inc
b23,757,000
c62,922,000
Share earns
.30
-
b-Includes a $7,307,000 tax credit.
c-Net loss and includes a $50,352,000 writedown of North Sea drilling equipment operations and a $18,045,000 loss on disposal of U.S.


Not a Lobbying Group
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Berg Quartet Concert
LEAD: The Alban Berg Quartet is to give an all-Beethoven program tonight at 8 at Carnegie Hall.
The musicians - Gunther Pichler and Gerhard Schulz, violinists; Thomas Kakuska, violist, and Valentin Erben, cellist - are to play the Quartet No. 2 in G (Op. 18, No. 2), No. 11 in F minor (Op. 95, ''Serioso''), and No.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUESFarm Credit Sale Comprises 4 Issues
LEAD: The Federal Farm Credit Banks is offering four tranches of bonds totaling $3.3 billion at par through various securities dealers.


At a Crucial Period, Dissent Splits S.E.C.
LEAD: In several key policy areas - particularly regarding regulatory responses to the October collapse of the stock market - the Securities and Exchange Commission has almost become a house divided.


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (KALAMAZOO) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (KALAMAZOO)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
58,000
b968,000
Share earns
.03
-
Yr net inc
2,284,000
1,413,000
Share earns
1.25
.78
b-Net loss


St. John's Late Surge Beats Georgetown
LEAD: For all of the tension preceding Georgetown's appearance at Madison Square Garden last night, it was St.
John's who wound up doing the muscle flexing.


SCITEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SCITEX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
47,941,000
47,018,000
Net inc
1,822,000
b4,990,000
Share earns
.17
-
Yr rev
159,317,000
132,842,000
Net loss
4,612,000
33,749,000
b-Net loss


Dole and Dukakis Are Big Winners in Minnesota
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, Democrat of Massachusetts, emerged as the big winners in the Minnesota Presidential contests on Tuesday.


WCBS to Buy Program; May Shift 'Evening News'
LEAD: WCBS Channel 2 is expected to announce today that it has purchased the new syndicated news-and-information program based on the USA Today newspaper, a move that may lead to the removal of the CBS ''Evening News'' from its customary 7 P.M. time slot on the network's flagship station.


COTTON STATES LIFE &amp; HEALTH INSURANCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COTTON STATES LIFE &amp; HEALTH INSURANCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b733,606
c766,326
Share earns
.27
.28
Yr net inc
b2,406,178
c2,289,000
Share earns
.88
.83
b-Includes capital gains of $149,000 and $916,716 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Stockbroker Parlays Long Shot Into a Job
LEAD: Fred Kayne makes investments by playing conservative odds.
But he owes his new job to a long shot: spotting a company that had the rights to the harness-racing franchise in California and owned land in a Los Angeles suburb.


Unscheduled Landing
LEAD: A Delta Air Lines jet flying from Boston to Salt Lake City made an emergency landing today at O'Hare International Airport here after the crew shut down one engine.
Delta Flight 235, a Boeing 757 with 127 people on board, landed safely and taxied on its own to a terminal, said a spokeswoman for the Federal Aviation Administration.


LITTON INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LITTON INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,157,831,000
974,502,000
Net inc
40,663,000
34,080,000
Share earns
1.56
1.28
6mo sales
2,354,501,000
2,038,618,000
Net inc
81,288,000
68,425,000
Share earns
3.07
2.54


AUSTRON INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AUSTRON INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,920,782
1,606,770
Net loss
36,218
103,043
6mo sales
3,928,144
3,035,169
Net inc
153,468
b250,642
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss


TOWNE-PAULSEN INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TOWNE-PAULSEN INC
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
15,477,470
10,923,176
Net loss
b2,012,453
b8,895,065
Includes net of $2,128,729 from discontinued operations for the latest year and a loss of $7,098,247 from discontinued operations for the prior year.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.My parquet oak floor was stripped and refinished about five years ago.
Now, stains and spills have caused dark spots.
Can I do anything to lighten these stains without stripping and refinishing the entire floor?


Baseball No-Shows
LEAD: Wally Joyner, the California Angels' first baseman, and Danny Tartabull, the Kansas City Royals' outfielder, failed to appear for the first full-squad workouts of spring training yesterday because they are unhappy with their contract negotiations.
Tartabull, who is asking for $425,000, made $145,000 last year.


APPLIED BIOSCIENCE INTERNAIONAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*APPLIED BIOSCIENCE INTERNAIONAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,650,000
6,874,000
Net inc
808,000
617,000
Share earns
.25
.21
Yr rev
33,505,000
25,872,000
Net inc
2,866,000
2,077,000
Share earns
.91
.69


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: SEASON TICKET. A Baseball Companion. By Roger Angell. 406 pages. Houghton


Power Bonds Are Offered By North Carolina Agency
LEAD: The North Carolina Municipal Power Agency offered about $419 million of bonds yesterday to refund previously sold debt.
The new financing, made through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, is the North Carolina agency's first since the summer of 1986.


Advertising; Tracy-Locke to Handle Texas Commerce Bank
LEAD: Tracy-Locke of Dallas, part of the Omnicom Group, has won the retail business of the Texas Commerce Bank, a subsidiary of Chemical New York Corporation.
The former agency was Della Femina, Travisano &amp; Partners in New York.


The Influence Game
LEAD: The newly published correspondence of Attorney General Meese raises hard legal questions about Mr.
Meese's behavior.
But we do not need lawyers or judges to understand the essential character of those documents.


INSPIRATION RESOURCES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSPIRATION RESOURCES CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
262,300,000
277,200,000
Net inc
b200,000
c32,000,000
Share earns
.01
.50
Yr rev
1,305,400,000
1,227,900,000
Net inc
b24,800,000
c25,900,000
Share earns
.38
.40
Shares outst
65,600,000
64,200,000


Reformbusters in the Senate
LEAD: How far will Senate Republicans go to resist limits on campaign spending by candidates for the Senate?
One answer is 5 feet 11 inches.
Normally, that's how tall Bob Packwood, the Oregon Republican, stands.
At dawn yesterday he wasn't standing; he was carried into the Senate, feet first, by Capitol police officers.


NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 1988
LEAD:  International A3-11, A17


COMMERCIAL INTERTECH reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMERCIAL INTERTECH
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
79,595,000
67,180,000
Net inc
1,634,000
852,000
Share earns
.15
.08
At the annual meeting Commerical Shearing's shareholders approved changing the company's name to Commercial Intertech Corp., effective immediately.


Vehicle Sales Up By 14.5%
LEAD: Sales of new American-made cars and light trucks rose 14.5 percent in mid-February from the comparable period last year, the eight domestic manufacturers reported today.


Compulsories Led By Soviet Skater
LEAD: If the Olympic women's figure-skating competition is going to develop as expected as a showdown between Katarina Witt of East Germany and Debi Thomas of the United States, something will have to be done about Kira Ivanova, a 24-year-old skater from Moscow.


BINGO KING CO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BINGO KING CO INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,771,000
4,698,000
Net inc
137,000
104,000
Share earns
.10
.07
6mo sales
11,062,000
9,364,000
Net inc
244,000
264,000
Share earns
.17
.17


HENLEY MANUFACTURING reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HENLEY MANUFACTURING
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
146,900,000
156,100,000
Net inc
2,200,000
b39,100,000
Share earns
.21
-
Yr rev
605,300,000
656,400,000
Net inc
19,400,000
b35,100,000
Share earns
1.86
-


Harry M. Arthur, Retired Major General, 88
LEAD: Maj.
Gen.
Harry M. Arthur, retired who spent two years as the ranking American officer with the Chinese Army in World War II, died Tuesday.
He was 88.


Ice Dancing: Taking a Step Backward
LEAD: Not to worry.
The all too frequent debate over whether ice dance is sport or art came to a rest at the Olympics when the free dance program wound up the ice dancing competition.
Whatever was on view, it wasn't art.


'Shock and Distress' in West Over Pretoria's Action
LEAD: Western officials and analysts reacted with dismay yesterday to South Africa's crackdown on major anti-apartheid organizations and predicted that the move would hasten the growth of violent conflict between the Government and its opponents.


Nykaenen Becomes Triple Champion
LEAD: Matti Nykaenen became ski jumping's first triple Olympic champion today when he led Finland to a gold medal in the team 90-meter jumping competition.


PROTECTIVE LIFE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PROTECTIVE LIFE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b5,052,000
c5,692,000
Per share
.36
.39
Yr net inc
b20,184,000
c24,434,000
Per share
1.40
1.69
b-Includes capital losses of $15,000 for the quarter, and the year includes capital gains of $5,556.000.


Court Upholds Rent Controls
LEAD: In a sharp setback for landlords, the Supreme Court upheld, by 6 to 2, the constitutionality of a San Jose, Calif., rent control law.
Page A23.


Japan Insider Curbs Asked
LEAD: A Finance Ministry committee today approved a report calling for tougher laws against insider trading on Japan's stock markets, where traders say information about companies is frequently leaked to investors.


OIL UNION REJECTS PROPOSED MERGER
LEAD: The Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers rejected a proposed merger with the United Mine Workers on Tuesday, just hours before the unions planned to announce an agreement, officials said.


Ex-Agent at Peace With Himself but in Conflict With F.B.I.
LEAD: Five months after the Federal Bureau of Investigation dismissed him, John C. Ryan. a former agent, is grappling with a religious renewal that caused him to question his past, challenge his supervisors and lose his job.


Africa Said to Need $2 Billion More in Aid
LEAD: Africa's poorest nations will require an extra $2 billion a year in aid for the next few years if the nations are to achieve further economic development, an independent panel of experts reported today.


President's News Conference on Foreign and Domestic Issues
LEAD: Following is a transcript of President Reagan's news conference last night n Washington, as recorded by The New York Times:  OPENING STATEMENT


ALDUS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALDUS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,278,000
3,646,000
Net inc
2,172,000
419,000
Share earns
.18
.04
Yr sales
39,542,000
11,136,000
Net inc
7,806,000
2,362,000
Share earns
.66
.21


VALERO NATURAL GAS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VALERO NATURAL GAS LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
262,100,000
290,600,000
Net inc
6,400,000
10,800,000
Share earns
.21
.45
Yr rev
1,125,300,000
1,277,400,000
Net inc
37,800,000
46,900,000
Share earns
1.49
1.98


Little Impact Seen in New York
LEAD: Tenants in New York State are unlikely to be affected by the United States Supreme Court decision yesterday upholding a San Jose, Calif., rent-control ordinance.


ANCHOR GLASS CONTAINER reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANCHOR GLASS CONTAINER (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
248,942,000
136,088,000
Net inc
3,854,000
b2,110,000
Share earns
.28
.16
Yr sales
766,100,000
587,492,000
Net inc
20,023,000
b22,137,000
Share earns
1.45
1.84


ABRAMS INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ABRAMS INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,330,770
9,167,301
Net inc
194,550
84,858
Share earns
.11
.05
9mo rev
33,587,094
34,961,864
Net inc
620,181
398,383
Share earns
.35
.22


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: THERE'S a public-service announcement on national television in which a teary-eyed girl flinches as she hears her parents call her stupid and clumsy.
A few seconds later a young boy smiles proudly as his parents tell him what a good job he's done.
The message is clear.
Children learn who they are by how we label them.


Big Loan to Kodak
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company has secured a three-year loan of $5 billion from a group of international banks to help finance its acquisition of Sterling Drug Inc.
The bridge loan - in the form of a revolving credit -comes from a syndicate of 23 international banks, with the Bankers Trust Company of New York acting as agent for the interim financing.


TV Review; McKellen as a Retarded Man in 'Walter'
LEAD: ON American television, addicted to uplift, society's outsiders will inevitably find the friendship and love they crave.
On ''L.A.
Law,'' for instance, a mentally retarded man named Benny fortuitously wanders into an office full of compassion and understanding.
We all know, of course, that that is hardly always the case.


Physical for Klecko
LEAD: Joe Klecko, the four-time Pro Bowl defensive lineman the Jets waived earlier this month, will meet with the Denver Broncos' doctors next Tuesday to find if he is medically fit for a tryout.
When the Jets dropped Klecko, a 34-year-old pass rusher who played 11 seasons in New York, Dr.
James Nicholas, the team physician, recommended that Klecko retire because of an unstable left knee that had undergone two major operations.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Soviet Tries to Quell Unrest


UNITED INDUSTRIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNITED INDUSTRIAL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
86,968,000
67,777,000
Net inc
5,329,000
b16,960,000
Share earns
.40
-
Yr sales
297,501,000
272,508,000
Net inc
14,302,000
b9,174,000
Share earns
1.07
-


PRIMARY AND CAUCUS TOTALS
LEAD: Unofficial results from the South Dakota Presidential primary with 1,150 of 1,151 precincts reporting, and the Minnesota caucuses with 3,004 Democratic and 3,274 Republican precincts reporting.
Minnesota has 4,076 precincts.
Percentages are rounded.
*2*S.D. primary
*2*Minn. caucuses
Tally
Percent
Tally
Percent


Why Contra Aid Promotes Peace
LEAD: Many House Democrats are so disgusted with Reagan Administration policy toward Nicaragua that they'd simply stop all aid to the contras.
But that's bad policy and bad politics.
It would relieve pressure on the Sandinistas to compromise and would shift political responsibility for what happens in Central America to the moderates and away from President


U.S. and Lisbon to Negotiate On Air Base Treaty Problems
LEAD: Portugal and the United States agreed today to reopen talks on an agreement that allows the United States to use a military base in the Azores in exchange for military and economic aid.


Turning Point in Korea
LEAD: Roh Tae Woo being installed as President in Seoul.
He replaced Chun Doo Hwan in the first peaceful transfer of power in South Korea's history.
Page A6. (Reuters)


BEAR HUNTING CASE YIELDS 17 ARRESTS
LEAD: Federal agents arrested 17 people today, 12 of them in Virginia, and were looking for seven more in the conclusion of a four-year investigation into illegal bear hunting.


Suspect in Theft Of Brawley File Drinks a Poison
LEAD: A man accused of stealing a transcript of grand jury testimony in the Tawana Brawley case was taken to a Manhattan hospital yesterday after apparently attempting suicide at his home, the police said.


Fire Dept. Plans A Court Action On Sick Leaves
LEAD: The Koch administration threatened yesterday afternoon to seek a court order to halt what it called an illegal job action organized by the firefighters' union to protest the quick and quiet closing of a Brooklyn firehouse last month.


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (AUSTIN) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN ASSN (AUSTIN)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b13,697,000
2,373,000
Yr net loss
b13,653,000
4,317,000
b-Includes an $11.6 million addition to loan reserves, which brings total loan loss reserves to about $30 million.


DUNKIN' DONUTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DUNKIN' DONUTS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Revenue
25,442,000
24,710,000
Net inc
3,447,000
3,418,000
Share earns
.51
.46
Shares outst
6,725,000
7,458,000


Sevareid Assails TV News
LEAD: At a seminar Tuesday at the Museum of Broadcasting, Eric Sevareid said news on television ''has become part of the daily entertainment of a rather bored society.''


Hampshire College Students Present List of 12 Demands
LEAD: About 100 students of Hampshire College who took over a dormitory office to protest racism, marched across campus today to present a list of 12 demands to the college president.


Corrections
LEAD: The Advertising column of Business Day on Feb. 12 misidentified the creator of the ''snap, crackle, pop'' slogan for Kellogg Rice Krispies.
The N. W. Ayer advertising agency created the slogan in the late 1920's.


MARK CONTROLS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MARK CONTROLS CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,400,000
15,605,000
Net inc
b820,000
c6,971,000
Share earns
.16
-
Yr sales
58,473,000
66,485,000
Net inc
b2,371,000
c7,659,000
Share earns
.48
-


250 Chicago Pupils Demoted; Parents Protest
LEAD: Angry parents in a tough neighborhood on Chicago's South Side kept nearly half the pupils home from a public school today after the principal demoted 250 students at midyear because of their poor reading skills.


Bomb Blast Kills 2 Soldiers On Northern Ireland Patrol
LEAD: Two soldiers of the Ulster Defense Regiment were killed and a civilian and two soldiers were wounded in a bomb attack in Belfast tonight, a police spokesman said.


Bob O'Farrell, Catcher, 91
LEAD: Bob O'Farrell, a catcher with four National League teams from 1915 to 1935, died last Saturday at St.
Therese Medical Center.
He was 91 years old.


Kramer Acquitted
LEAD: It took only a little more than an hour yesterday for a jury in Minneapolis to acquit Tommy Kramer, the Minnesota Vikings' quarterback, of a drunken-driving charge.
Kramer was arrested last July 24 after leaving a restaurant in Bloomington, a Minneapolis suburb.
Three police officers testified that Kramer's car was weaving on the road and that, after he was stopped, he had trouble with a balance test and reciting the alphabet.


Scandal Spurs Interest In Swaggart Finances
LEAD: In the most recent issue of his magazine The Evangelist, the Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart offered some ruminations on the flood of dollars coursing through the evangelical world.


WILLCOX &amp; GIBBS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WILLCOX &amp; GIBBS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
90,677,000
72,273,000
Net inc
2,801,000
2,322,000
Share earns
.37
.32
Yr sales
317,380,000
261,713,000
Net inc
10,089,000
7,637,000
Share earns
1.34
1.11


Soviet Trying to Quell Ethnic Unrest
LEAD: The authorities in two southern Soviet republics moved today to quell Armenian nationalist protests that appeared to be developing into a major problem for Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the Communist Party.


VALSPAR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VALSPAR CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 29
1988
1987
Sales
94,802,000
72,114,000
Net inc
1,788,000
1,361,000
Share earns
.16
.12


New Blood Screening Studied
LEAD: The American Association of Blood Banks announced today that it was studying new screening techniques that might further reduce the chances of transmitting the AIDS virus through blood transfusions.


Music: Liliane Montevecchi
LEAD: WHEN Liliane Montevecchi struts onto the stage of the tiny Kaufman Theater, 534 West 42d Street, in her one-woman show, ''On the Boulevard,'' we know at once that here is a woman who has been in mythical places.


For Stavropoulos, Nothing Too Trendy
LEAD: GEORGE STAVROPOULOS is not given to pontificating about fashion.
Ask him the design message of his newest collection, and he will say, ''To make women feel pretty - as usual.''


7 Convicted of Racketeering, 1 Acquitted, in Westies Trial
LEAD: Seven defendants were convicted yesterday of racketeering charges involving several murders and other crimes carried out by the Westies, a gang accused of terrorizing a Manhattan neighborhood for 20 years.


Music: Bill Monroe
LEAD: THE longstanding kinship between traditional Celtic music and American bluegrass was fruitfully explored on Tuesday evening at Carnegie Hall where Bill Monroe, the man who virtually invented bluegrass music shared the bill with the Boys of the Lough, the noted quintet from the British Isles that plays toe-tapping reels, jigs and hornpipes in a carefully arranged ensemble style.


Shultz to Press Eventual Goal of an Israeli Pullout
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz plans to seek agreement among Israelis and Arabs on a set of principles linking an interim plan for self-administration in the Israeli-occupied territories with the ultimate goal of territorial compromise, a well-placed State Department official said today.


Pop: Michael Jackson Opens Tour
LEAD: The electronic image of two unmistakable, scoreboard-high legs, strutting across the stage, opened Michael Jackson's first United States tour here tonight at a sold-out Kemper Arena.
Those legs, as much as the hits that made Mr.
Jackson's ''Thriller'' the best-selling album in pop history and his new ''Bad,'' a Top 10 album since its release in 1987, were the centerpiece of a show that reaffirms Mr.


CONVERGENT SOLUTIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONVERGENT SOLUTIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
846,053
617,636
Net inc
170,600
117,670
Share earns
.04
.05
Shares outst
4,541,188
2,375,925


New Obesity Studies Indicate Metabolism Is Often to Blame
LEAD: Two new studies have provided the strongest evidence yet that many people become obese more because their bodies burn calories too slowly than because they eat too much.


STEVENS, J P &amp; CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*STEVENS, J P &amp; CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
381,476,000
361,667,000
Net inc
12,875,000
11,965,000
Share earns
.82
.70
Shares outst
15,675,107
17,121,064


QANTEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*QANTEL CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,554,000
16,170,000
Net inc
b3,039,000
1,941,000
Share earns
.19
.12
9mo rev
45,029,000
51,709,000
Net inc
b7,451,000
5,672,000
Share earns
.45
.35


Missiles Are Being Removed, 2 Allies of Soviet Announce
LEAD: Czechoslovakia and East Germany say they will start removing shorter-range Soviet nuclear missiles from their territory on Thursday in accordance with the missile treaty signed by Moscow and Washington in December.


HIMONT INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HIMONT INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
367,737,000
254,425,000
Net inc
b77,030,000
c63,671,000
Share earns
1.18
1.27
Shares outst
65,169,468
50,000,000
b-Included a partially paid up royalty of $6.4 million, and was partially offset by several individually immaterial non-recurring items totaling $1.8 million.


FLEETWOOD ENTERPRISES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLEETWOOD ENTERPRISES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 24
1988
1987
Sales
309,298,000
291,949,000
Net inc
8,011,000
8,575,000
Share earns
.35
.37
9mo sales
1,031,910,000
910,289,000
Net inc
33,250,000
271,219,000
Share earns
1.43
1.17


KUHLMAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KUHLMAN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
46,741,000
35,949,000
Net loss
1,750,000
643,000
Yr sales
169,779,000
147,457,000
Net loss
2,573,000
b193,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Oldest Embryo of a Dinosaur Is Found in a Fossil in Utah
LEAD: An X-ray examination of a 150 million-year-old fossil egg discovered in Utah has revealed the outlines of what probably is the oldest dinosaur embryo ever found, paleontologists at Brigham Young University reported yesterday.


REAGAN SUPPORTS ANY CONTRA HELP
LEAD: President Reagan said tonight that any aid package Congress was willing to pass to keep the Nicaraguan rebels in existence was worthwhile even if it did not include money for military aid.


U.S. Is Protesting Detention Of 28 Servicemen in Panama
LEAD: The State Department said today that it would protest to Panama over the two-hour detention of 28 American servicemen on Monday.


Arms for Hostages? No
LEAD: In an answer to a question about the nature of Vice President Bush's reservations about the arms shipments to Iran, President Reagan insisted at his news conference tonight that he had never traded arms for hostages.


Brain Wound Eliminates Man's Mental Illness
LEAD: A mentally ill young man who shot himself in the head in a suicide attempt suffered a brain injury that apparently eliminated his phobia of germs and his obsession with washing his hands, doctors say.


PENTAGON DELAYS ON MISSILE BASING
LEAD: Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci retreated today from the Pentagon's plan to begin deploying MX nuclear missiles on railroad cars in 1991 to make it easier for them to escape detection by an enemy.
He said more research and discussions with Congress must come before the program proceeds.


BREAKWATER RESOURCES reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BREAKWATER RESOURCES (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
30,463,000
22,996,000
Net inc
4,203,000
925,000
Share earns
.19
.05


Decker Loses In Delaware
LEAD: A Federal judge has rejected the Black &amp; Decker Corporation's request to block Delaware's new corporate anti-takeover law, but he did not rule on the constitutionality of the statute.


2 Held Hostage for 3 Hours at Brooklyn Office
LEAD: A man who said he was dissatisfied with the settlement of his worker compensation case held two lawyers hostage at gunpoint for three hours yesterday in downtown Brooklyn before freeing them unharmed and surrendering.


Judge Orders E.P.A. to Ban Sale Of 2 Pesticides Used on Termites
LEAD: A Federal judge today gave the Environmental Protection Agency until April 15 to ban the sale and commercial use of products containing an anti-termite pesticide believed to cause cancer.


Sale of Real Estate By First Interstate
LEAD: A subsidiary of First Interstate Bancorp said it had put up for sale $165 million worth of property, or about 24 percent of its portfolio of nonperforming real estate assets.
The accelerated asset sale is part of a restructuring begun by the Los Angeles-based bank holding company last year.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about an administrative judge's ruling on an investigation of a Manhattan dentist's refusal to treat an AIDS patient, carried an erroneous identification of the dentist, supplied by the patient's lawyer.
The dentist is Dr.
Michael Hurwitz, not Dr.
David Hurwitz.


Boy Killed and Man Lynched in a Clash of Arabs
LEAD: An Arab accused by fellow villagers of collaborating with the Israeli authorities opened fire in a West Bank village today, killing a 4-year-old boy and wounding 13 other people, before he was captured and hanged, according to Israeli and Palestinian reports.


The Practical Reason to Restore Wetlands
LEAD: To the Editor:


G.M. to Raise Output By 175,000 Vehicles
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said today that it would increase its automotive production in North America, adding about 175,000 cars and trucks in the remainder of 1988.


Resentment in the Open
LEAD: A principal leader of the Afghan resistance alliance brought into the open tonight the guerrillas' smoldering resentment of what they believe to be American collusion with the Soviet Union to reach a compromise over Afghanistan.


Market Place; Bankrupt Utility's Sale a Question
LEAD: TAKEOVER proposals always raise questions about price and terms, and often about regulatory approval, but an announcement that the New England Electric System had opened discussions with the bankrupt Public Service Company of New Hampshire has more than the usual share of uncertainties, experts in the field say.


Group Reports a Big Stake in Societe Generale
LEAD: A coalition of stockholders siding with Societe Generale de Belgique in its takeover battle with Carlo de Benedetti, the Italian financier, declared today that it had ''firm commitments'' for 52 percent of the company's shares.


A Woman's Friends
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Time to Greet the Year of the Dragon
LEAD: Since the eve of the Year of the Dragon, members of New York's Chinese community have been struggling to fit New Year's festivities into busy lives.


Metro Matters; Parents' Anxiety: Price of Change At Ivory Tower
LEAD: The red-brick fortress on Park Avenue that houses Hunter College's elementary and high schools was contrived to complement the facade of an adjacent armory.


SYNTEX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SYNTEX CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
310,100,000
291,000,000
Net inc
80,300,000
67,400,000
Share earns
.68
.56
6mo sales
616,200,000
553,900,000
Net inc
155,700,000
131,300,000
Share earns
1.32
1.07


Boston Mayor Seeking To Distribute Needles
LEAD: Mayor Raymond Flynn wants the City Council to approve an experimental program to give sterile needles to drug addicts in an effort to curb the spread of AIDS.


OUTSIDERS FOMENT PALESTINIAN RIOTS, REAGAN SUGGESTS
LEAD: President Reagan said tonight that the United States had ''intimations'' that outside agitators were partly responsible for inciting the violent clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security forces in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


ICM PROPERTY INVESTORS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ICM PROPERTY INVESTORS (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b5,752,000
c526,000
Share earns
-
.09
Yr net loss
5,198,000
c3,888,000
Share earns
-
.67
b-Included a writedown of $4,180,000 on a joint venture investmemt.


LIQUI-BOX CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIQUI-BOX CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,667,000
16,770,000
Net inc
1,038,000
1,503,000
Share earns
.45
.64
Yr sales
72,001,000
70,667,000
Net inc
5,683,000
6,042,000
Share earns
2.44
2.59


GALACTIC RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GALACTIC RESOURCES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,884,812
10,509,977
Net inc
1,433,439
b14,111,967
Share earns
.05
-
Yr sales
40,441,744
20,008,767
Net inc
1,805,166
b25,624,767
Share earns
.07
-


CORCOM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CORCOM INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
6,656,000
4,761,000
Net loss
164,000
b223,000
Share earns
-
.06
Yr sales
23,916,000
20,476,000
Net inc
522,000
c399,000
Share earns
.15
-
b-Net income


Konroyd is Sidelined
LEAD: Steve Konroyd, the valuable defenseman for the Islanders, has a fractured orbital rim above one eye as well as a fractured frontal sinus.
He was hit in the face with a puck Sunday in Hartford and is expected to miss three weeks.
The loss of Konroyd is just one more setback for the Islanders, who have been troubled by injuries in recent weeks.


FAIRFIELD-NOBLE CORP reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FAIRFIELD-NOBLE CORP
(
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,430,000
2,489,000
Net inc
18,000
312,000
Share earns
.01
.14
6mo sales
6,921,000
6,728,000
Net inc
1,142,000
1,212,000
Share earns
.50
.53


Custodian vs. Principal: Stacked Deck
LEAD: Some days, there is no toilet paper in the bathrooms at Riverdale Junior High School in the Bronx.
Other days, exit doors remain chained, and garbage swirls in the wind outside the building.


Steve Martin Honored By Hasty Pudding Club
LEAD: The actor and comedian Steve Martin had a question as soon as he received the Hasty Pudding Club Man of the Year award at Harvard University: ''There is a cash prize for this, right?''


U.S. Loan Set For Argentina
LEAD: The United States has announced that it will give $500 million in short-term financing to Argentina while it works out arrangements for a longer-term loan with the International Monetary Fund.


Don't Withhold Tip
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dance: Peridance At the Joyce
LEAD: IN recent seasons, Peridance has been attracting well-deserved attention because of the gusto of its dancing and the craftsmanship of the choreography by its artistic director, Igal Perry.
These virtues were in evidence once again Tuesday night when it opened a week's engagement at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street) with the world premiere of Mr.


Ethel Saniel Brook, 84, Essayist and Professor
LEAD: Ethel Saniel Brook, an essayist and former professor of French literature at New York University and Hofstra University, died of congestive heart failure Saturday at St.
Luke's Hospital.
She was 84 years old.
During her career, Mrs.
Brook served as liaison in France for the Loyalist international brigades during the Spanish Civil War.


Devils Score Once on 45 Shots
LEAD: An inability to convert scoring chances, failure on the power play and inspired goaltendng by the opposition cost the Devils their second consecutive defeat.


Robert Lapham, 58, Demographics Expert
LEAD: Dr.
Robert J. Lapham, an authority on international demographics, died of brain cancer Saturday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 58 years old.


No Irving Decision by Fed
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board said today that, as scheduled, it had considered the hostile takeover bid by the Bank of New York Company for the Irving Bank Corporation but had reached no decision as to whether to permit the offer.
Officials of the Fed said the central bank would continue consideration of the takeover proposal on


Saudis Plan Refining of Oil Abroad
LEAD: Fifty years after it first discovered oil, Saudi Arabia is setting out to establish its own marketing and refining network abroad, primarily in the United States and Western Europe.


Nicotiana, the Aristocrat of Annuals
LEAD: MY gardening friends sometimes accuse me of being altogether enamored of hardy perennials, and a glance around my garden in the summer probably shows that they are on the right track.


Doctor Asserts Levin's Blouse Was a 'Noose'
LEAD: A forensic medical expert testifying in the murder trial of Robert E. Chambers Jr. graphically demonstrated for the first time yesterday the prosecution's theory of how Jennifer Levin died - that she was strangled when her blouse was twisted into a ''noose.''


Play Uses 'Butterfly' As Subtext
LEAD: John Dexter has directed many plays and operas but never Puccini's ''Madama Butterfly.''


7-Tiered Tree House to Stay In Back Yard in Minnesota
LEAD: A man who fought city hall to keep a seven-tiered tree house in his back yard can continue to use the structure as long as he makes some safety improvements, city officials say.


Colombian Official Talks of Legalizing Cocaine
LEAD: Calling Colombia's war against drug traffickers totally useless, Attorney General Alfredo Gutierrez Marquez has declared that the Government might have to consider negotiating with drug barons and legalizing cocaine.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the Justice Department's failure to provide the Congressional Iran-contra committees with a memo on a Middle East pipeline project misstated the committee's means of seeking documents from the department.
It requested them in a letter to the Justice Department, not by subpoena.


Great Expectations for a Federal 'Drug Czar'
LEAD: To the Editor:


West Virginians Put A Budget Crisis Aside
LEAD: A crisis over the legality of the state budget blew over today almost as quickly as it developed after state officials agreed to continue government as usual until they hear more on the issue from the State Supreme Court.


Home Show Theme: Mishap Prevention
LEAD: Of the 20,500 accidental deaths at home in the United States in 1986, almost half were among people 65 or older, according to the National Safety Council.
Many of these deaths - as well as millions of injuries that occur in the home each year - might have been avoided if houses had been modified to meet the changing needs of the elderly.


Cuomo Presses For Testimony In Racial Case
LEAD: Governor Cuomo today urged State Attorney General Robert Abrams to take ''whatever legal devices are available'' to gain Tawana Brawley's cooperation in the investigation of what she says was a racial and sexual attack on her.


ABC Olympic Coverage Puts Network at No. 1
LEAD: ABC's coverage of the Winter Olympics gave the network 4 of the top 10 places in last week's ratings, and moved ABC into first place for the month among the three major networks, according to figures by the A. C. Nielsen Company.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.29
6.63
5.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.62
5.63
5.46
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.77
5.78
5.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.96
7.93
7.00
30-YR.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Ecolab Inc.
$8,600,000
-18.7
Heck's Inc.
(22,100,000)
-
Himont Inc.
77,000,000
+20.9
Litton Industries
40,700,000
+19.4
Shaklee Corp.
9,000,000
+80.0
J.P.


Meese Encouraged Those Who Prejudge Him
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bankers Trust Trader Quits on Bonus Day
LEAD: Andrew Kreiger, a 31-year-old trader in the Bankers Trust Company's foreign-exchange unit, resigned unexpectedly on the day he received his bonus for 1987.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Watching the Watchdog
LEAD: Who audits the auditors?


BRINKMANN INSTRUMENTS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRINKMANN INSTRUMENTS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
20,392,000
16,931,000
Net inc
1,283,000
1,170,000
Share earns
.35
.32
Yr sales
71,053,000
59,212,000
Net inc
3,826,000
3,191,000
Share earns
1.04
.87


Cello: Semyon Fridman
LEAD: SEMYON FRIDMAN, a Soviet-born cellist who won first prize at the 1987 Concert Artists Guild International New York Competition, made an impressive New York debut Tuesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
Focusing on the passionate side of his instrument's literature, Mr.
Fridman plunged briskly into the recital's major works - the Brahms Sonata in F minor and the Shostakovich Sonata - yet only in the third movement of the


YESTERDAY'S MEDAL WINNERS
LEAD: Alpine Skiing: Women's Giant Slalom;  Gold: Vreni Schneider, Switzerland  Silver: Christa Kinshofer Guetlein, West Germany  Bronz: Maria Walliser, Switzerland  Nordic Combined Team  Gold: West Germany  Silver: Switzerland  Bronz: Austria  Ski Jumping Team 90 Meter


Industrial Beachhead
LEAD: Not even Japan has one, nor any other country in the European Community.
The West Germans have stolen a march on everyone by setting up a Washington office that represents their private sector exclusively.


BOSTON CELTICS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOSTON CELTICS LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,442,000
1,834,000
Share earns
.22
-
6mo net inc
646,000
1,378,000
Share earns
.10
-
Share earnings are in units.
There are no per unit earnings for the year-ago periods because the company went public in October 1987.


Revision Lifts G.N.P.'s Rise To 4.5% Rate
LEAD: The nation's economy grew at a 4.5 percent annual rate in the final three months of 1987, somewhat faster than the preliminary estimate a month ago, the Commerce Department said today.


Tomba Is First In Giant Slalom
LEAD: His name echoed on Mount Allan from the moment he left the starting chute on his first run in the giant slalom today, and built in a crescendo by the time he crossed the finish line a conquering hero after his second successful trip round the gates.


SWANK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SWANK INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
62,421,000
54,701,000
Net inc
3,515,000
2,697,000
Share earns
1.01
.78
Yr sales
157,782,000
137,926,000
Net inc
5,902,000
1,096,000
Share earns
1.70
.32


New Seoul Chief's Aides Dampen Expectations
LEAD: As President Roh Tae Woo took charge of the South Korean Government today, his advisers and neutral analysts warned against overly high expectations for swift or dramatic political and economic change.


Vandals Paint Swastika In a Yonkers Apartment
LEAD: Early today someone spray-painted a swastika on the wall outside the apartment of Laurie A. Recht, the only Yonkers resident who spoke in support of a court-ordered desegregation plan at a City Council hearing last month.


BRITISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS PLC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRITISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS PLC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,918,000,000
4,527,000,000
Net inc
671,000,000
578,000,000
Share earns
1.12
.96
9mo rev
14,281,000,000
13,247,000,000
Net inc
1,977,000,000
1,731,000,000
Share earns
3.29
2.89


Terrorists Beware
LEAD: Attention, terrorists of the world!


Laszlo G. Versenyi, Philosophy Professor, 59
LEAD: Laszlo G. Versenyi, a philosophy professor at Williams College, died Tuesday of cancer at his home in Williamstown.
He was 59 years old.


NEIMAN-MARCUS GROUP reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEIMAN-MARCUS GROUP (NYSE)
13wks to Jan 30
1988
1987
Revenue
375,123,000
347,523,000
Net inc
16,653,000
13,733,000
Share earns
.32
-
26wk rev
672,953,000
627,278,000
Net inc
b14,162,000
28,641,000
Share earns
.11
-


Distortions Abound on Life of Koreans in Japan; Anger Over Election
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rangers Survive a Late Scare
LEAD: There were 5 minutes 26 seconds left in the third period last night when Kelly Kisio's stick crashed across Randy Cunneyworth's back.
Fortunately, Cunneyworth, a forward for the Pittsburgh Penguins, skated away unhurt.
The incident, though, still posed an enormous threat to the Rangers.
It was their backs it threatened to break.


World Noise Capital
LEAD: To the Editor:


By Law, 'Public Figure' May Not Be So Obvious
LEAD: The Supreme Court's decision Wednesday further limiting suits by public figures against their critics underscores the importance of the legal line the Court has drawn between such people and everyone else.


Late Selling Depresses U.S. Issues
LEAD: Late waves of selling eroded prices of Treasury notes and bonds yesterday despite a flow of generally positive news for fixed-income securities.


OVERSEAS SHIPHOLDING GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OVERSEAS SHIPHOLDING GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
78,104,000
69,396,000
Net inc
b9,822,000
c8,221,000
Share earns
.38
.32
Yr rev
293,542,000
294,989,000
Net inc
b35,531,000
c37,347,000
Share earns
1.38
1.45


Key Witness Against Noriega Sentenced in Drug Operation
LEAD: A witness who was instrumental in an indictment of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega of Panama was sentenced today to 14 years in prison without parole for his part in an operation that smuggled drugs and laundered drug profits.


Film: Marcel Pagnol's 'Angele' in Series at Public
LEAD: MARCEL PAGNOL made ''Angele'' in 1934, soon after the screen adaptations of his plays ''Marius'' and ''Fanny'' had spread his reputation as a chronicler of life in southern France.
So why has ''Angele,'' one of Mr.
Pagnol's first efforts as a movie director, not found its way into American theaters until now?


ENERGYNORTH INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ENERGYNORTH INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
16,809,000
17,485,000
Net inc
1,846,000
b1,771,000
Share earns
1.19
1.29
Shares outst
1,550,444
1,374,565
b-Includes a gain of $293,000 from an accounting adjustment.


Churches Will Protest Crackdown, Tutu Says
LEAD: Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu indicated today that churches would try to take up the mantle of anti-apartheid resistance after the Government crackdown Wednesday on 17 anti-apartheid organizations.


At Least 9 Are Killed In Army Copter Crash
LEAD: An Army helicopter carrying 18 soldiers crashed and burned in a pasture today, killing nine people,the authorities said.
Nine others were seriously burned.
The helicopter, a twin-rotor Ch-47D Chinook based at Fort Sill, Okla., crashed about 3 P.M. near this community northwest of Fort Worth, Wise County sheriff's officers said.


About Real Estate; Lot Layout Aids Privacy In Big Westchester Tract
LEAD: An unusual way of laying out houses on a large tract is being devised for a Westchester development of 306 high-priced homes in Harrison, N.Y.
The idea is to provide privacy amid an unspoiled natural setting.


Spending Rises in Japan
LEAD: Japan's inflation-adjusted consumer spending rose 1.9 percent in December from a year ago, the Government reported today.
The Government also said that major retailers reported a rise in sales of 7.1 percent from the period a year earlier.


Arms Control Question: What Is Helms Up To?
LEAD: Officials of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency are used to dealing with arcane technical questions involving throw-weight and treaty verification.


Jets Cut 4 Veterans In a Move to Youth
LEAD: The Jets yesterday cut Joe Fields, Dave Jennings, Gordon King and Barry Bennett, veterans all more than 30 years old.
The move followed the recent dismissal, for medical reasons, of 34-year-old Joe Klecko.


Mini vs. Super
LEAD: CBS News and NBC News have offered an unconvincing reason for something they have every right to do - reducing their prime-time coverage of the results of Super Tuesday voting.
Spokesmen for the networks said they would do so because caucuses and primaries in 20 states that day, March 8, would not be ''definitive'' (NBC) but would produce ''muddled results'' (C


Film: 'Frantic,' From Polanski
LEAD: ALFRED HITCHCOCK would have appreciated the inexorable process whereby Dr.
Richard Walker (Harrison Ford), a surgeon visiting Paris to address a convention and enjoy a kind of second honeymoon, is drawn into a web of intrigue.
It is perhaps no accident that Dr.
Walker's troubles begin in the shower.


Distortions Abound on Life of Koreans in Japan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ex-Financial Officer at Hospital Indicted
LEAD: The former chief financial officer of a Brooklyn hospital that closed last year was arraigned yesterday on charges of stealing $46,000 during the hospital's final months, the state Attorney General's office said.


FLIGHT INTERNATIONAL GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLIGHT INTERNATIONAL GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,382,000
5,570,000
Net inc
655,000
439,000
Share earns
.30
.22
9mo rev
28,113,000
14,607,000
Net inc
b1,792,000
b511,000
Share earns
.83
.26


Executive of Guinness Will Head Storehouse
LEAD: Michael Julien has been named group chief executive and chairman-designate of Storehouse P.L.C., the British retailing company formed by Sir Terence Conran.


Olympics Rewrite Moscow's Schedule
LEAD: Two of the more unusual minutes in Soviet television history took place this week.
At 9 P.M.
Sunday, the time every night when the familiar ''Greetings, comrades; here is the news tonight'' is heard, audiences were watching the Soviet women's ski team winning the cross-country relay.


Nine-Year Fugitive Arrested
LEAD: A man sought for nine years on a Florida sex charge has been arrested in Tucson, where he has been living under an assumed name, the authorities said today.
Retha Rogers said she was unaware that David Elliott Rogers, her husband of six years, was Charles Danison.
Local officials, acting on a tip from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, arrested Mr.


Pop/Jazz; City College Offers Sound Of Tangier
LEAD: THE Gnaoua musicians of northern Africa carry an exalted musical tradition.
In the public squares of Marrakesh and Tangier, they perform for ecstatic, all-night ceremonies.
They accompany dancers and acrobats; they summon spirits; sometimes they work what Westerners would regard as miracles - walking on hot coals, or making wounds disappear.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The friendship and ties between Israel and the U.S. have never been so strong.
The time is right to move ahead.
The time is right, together, to make decisions of historic proportions.''  - Secretary of State George P. Shultz.  [ A1:3. ]


BAKER, MICHAEL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BAKER, MICHAEL CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
21,039,084
12,562,903
Net inc
344,336
279,711
Share earns
.19
.16
Yr rev
79,061,008
49,590,053
Net inc
1,270,105
1,098,659
Share earns
.71
.62


U.S. Gives Morgenthau Data in Schiff's Murder
LEAD: Information that could help solve the murder of Irwin Schiff, the millionaire businessman who was killed in an Upper East Side restaurant last August, has been turned over to the Manhattan District Attorney's office, Federal authorities said yesterday.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
B P Chemicals, Danbury, Conn., a subsidiary of British Petroleum Co., said it had formed American Acetyls, a venture with Union Carbide Corp. to supply and market acetic acid and vinyl acetate.


CROWN ANDERSEN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROWN ANDERSEN INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,609,734
2,679,906
Net loss
102,514
b10,186
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Two Years Later, Manila Flounders
LEAD: If the peaceful ouster of Ferdinand E. Marcos was, as a popular song here has it, ''the Philippines' lesson to the world,'' it was hard to know today, on the second anniversary of his flight out of the country, just what that lesson was.


Kaolack Journal; Where Western-Style Politics Thrives in Africa
LEAD: Ouza and the Ouzettes, a big-time band from Dakar, had just struck up a dance tune when the candidate appeared, resplendent in an electric-blue caftan.


Dollar and Gold Seesaw Between U.S. and Europe
LEAD: The dollar turned in a narrowly mixed performance yesterday on the world's foreign-exchange markets, slipping against major currencies in United States trading after edging up against most of them in Europe.


DOLLAR GENERAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOLLAR GENERAL CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
189,573,000
186,150,000
Net inc
5,276,000
2,509,000
Share earns
.28
.13
Yr sales
588,436,000
564,782,000
Net inc
6,501,000
4,318,000
Share earns
.35
.23


News Cut Off as Armenian Protests Continue
LEAD: Armenian nationalist protests continued today in two southern Soviet republics as the authorities in Moscow moved to limit the flow of information from the area.


Board of Britoil Accepts B.P. Offer
LEAD: The North Sea oil company Britoil P.L.C. conceded defeat and accepted a takeover offer by the British Petroleum Company.
Britoil's board advised shareholders to accept B.P.'s offer of $:5, or about $8.50, a share, while describing the offer as inadequate.


ALOETTE COSMETICS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ALOETTE COSMETICS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,934,000
4,053,000
Net inc
762,000
337,000
Share earns
.26
.12
Yr rev
16,004,000
14,594,000
Net inc
2,003,000
1,815,000
Share earns
.68
.69
Shares outst
2,935,734
2,648,257


Piano: Weissenberg at Carnegie Hall
LEAD: ALEXIS WEISSENBERG is a continuing enigma.
Few pianists play with his staggering facility, but even fewer give such maddeningly uneven performances on a regular basis.
Tuesday evening's recital by the Bulgarian-born musician at Carnegie Hall turned out to be one more in a series of such erratic events, redeemed here and there by the flashes of keyboard brilliance that have always been the Weissenberg trademark.


Kodak's Optimism
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company, under fire for purportedly overpaying in its $5.1 billion acquisition of Sterling Drug Inc., said it expected to earn profits ''well in excess'' of the amount predicted by Wall Street analysts.
Analysts had lowered their 1988 earnings projections by about 35 cents a share since Jan.


Philips '87 Net Declined 15%
LEAD: The Dutch electronics giant Philips N.V. said today that the weak dollar had cut the 1987 profit by 15 percent, and that it would eliminate up to 20,000 jobs worldwide in the next two years to cut costs as it consolidates operations in Europe and perhaps expands operations in Mexico.


ELECTRONIC TELE-COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTRONIC TELE-COMMUNICATIONS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
809,821
1,369,622
Net inc
71,971
259,583
Share earns
.03
.11
Yr sales
3,101,746
5,605,536
Net inc
136,219
1,234,912
Share earns
.08
.56


Sunset for a Baseball Tradition: They're Lighting Wrigley Field
LEAD: After 72 summers of playing only daytime baseball at Wrigley Field, the Chicago Cubs were given permission by city officals today to install lights and schedule night games at home this season.


BARRETT RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BARRETT RESOURCES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,724,000
1,118,000
Net inc
b504,000
c55,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Includes a $153,000 tax credit.
c-Net loss


U.S. Finishes 7th in Hockey
LEAD: They ended their Olympic experience with a victory that they didn't celebrate.
Then, with their fraternity disbanding and their Olympic plans dissolved, the hockey players from the United States went back to the business of coping with life as they used to know it.


Film: 'Aloha Summer'
LEAD: ''ALOHA SUMMER'' features Bobby Darin songs, surfers, wholesome guys and their girls singing around a fire on a beach in Waikiki.
An unironic memoir of six teen-aged friends in the summer of '59, it is more likely to inspire deja vu about 50's movies than about the year Hawaii became a state.


Village Scorns Spotlight of Brawley Case
LEAD: It cost Cornelius Kelly $100 in cash to bail his best friend, Jerry Bugs, out of jail last week.


Political Marketing; Gephardt Ads Summon a Proud U.S.
LEAD: The pattern has been unrelenting.
Hundreds of times over two months, the Missouri Congressman with the famous disappearing eyebrows appeared on television to gaze into voters' living rooms and hammer home his message: jobs, pride, strength, America.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 418 money market mutual funds increased $2.56 billion, to $279.99 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 113 institutional funds increased $2.01 billion, to $83.02 billion.
Assets of the 208 general purpose funds were down $522.8 million, to $81.44 billion.


MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC INDUSRIAL CO LTD (JAPAN)(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC INDUSRIAL CO LTD (JAPAN)(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,776,600,000
10,022,000,000
Net inc
433,900,000
289,400,000
Share earns
2.22
1.58
9mo sales
29,845,600,000
27,910,600,000
Net inc
1,055,200,000
911,400,000
Share earns
5.41
5.00


Pat Robertson's Special Sources
LEAD: As a Presidential candidate, Pat Robertson plays down his past as a television evangelist, but he still claims knowledge from obscure sources.
Just before the New Hampshire primary, Mr.
Robertson announced he had information that there were Soviet missiles in Cuba.
That surprised everyone from Fidel Castro to Defense Secretary Carlucci to Admiral Crowe, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.


Botanic Garden Teaches Nurturing Trees in City
LEAD: How to nurture trees in a tough city environment will be discussed at a free daylong syumposium on Sunday jat the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, in the Crown Heights section.


Afterlife of the Famous: Heirs Warn of 'Poachers'
LEAD: In Modigliani-esque repose, the likeness of W. C. Fields - in white gloves, cane, top hat, bow tie and absolutely nothing else -bore witness to the legislative proceedings yesterday.


Museum Honors James Stewart at the Waldorf
LEAD: ''Jimmy Stewart is the quintessential American man to millions of moviegoers,'' said Rochelle Slovin, the founder and director of the American Museum of the Moving Image, which presented a tribute to the actor last night at the Waldorf-Astoria.


Mamdouh Salem, 70; Was Egyptian Premier
LEAD: Mamdouh Salem, a former Prime Minister of Egypt, died in London on Wednesday while undergoing treatment for an undisclosed illness, a Foreign Ministry official said today.
He was 70 years old.


When Rikers I. Erupted: How the Tension Mounted
LEAD: For months before a Rikers Island jail erupted in violence last week, there were hints that tension was mounting, New York City jail officials said yesterday.


Union Pressure At Chrysler
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers' council at the Chrysler Corporation voted today to halt all cooperative undertakings with the company, such as productivity and quality improvement programs, and threatened to disrupt operations with strikes at local plants until plans to sell Acustar, a Chrysler division, are shelved.


Blues at Tramps
LEAD: A.C.
Reed and his Red Hot Spark Plugs will play Chicago blues tonight and tomorrow at Tramps, 125 East 15th jStreet (777-5077).
With sets at 9:30 and midnight.
There is a $10 cover and a two-drink minimum.


Film: 'Hairspray,' Comedy From John Waters
LEAD: The concept of Smell-o-Vision never really took hold in America's movie theaters, but it's very nearly a reality in John Waters's ''Hairspray.'' During this bright, bouncy film's opening montage of early 60's teen-agers preparing their coiffures for a television dance program, it's almost possible to sniff the huge clouds of poison they spray onto their teased, empty heads.


Auctions
LEAD: In the 1960's, when Leo Castelli sold a painting by Roy Lichtenstein, it wouldn't be unusual for the dealer to give his client a lithograph of the artist's work. ''It was a way of helping to promote Lichtenstein's image,'' recalled Pat Marie Caporaso, director of Castelli Graphics. ''But what were freebies over 20 years ago are now fetching upward of $20,000 at auction.


IRISH MUSIC
LEAD: Ian Carney on button accordion, Deirdre Carney on fiddle and Mary Coogan on guitar will play Irish traditional music tomorrow at the Eagle Tavern, 355 West 14th Street (924-0275).
Sets are at 9 and 10:30 P.M.; tickets ar $5.


MOORE PRODUCTS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOORE PRODUCTS CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
21,565,000
20,511,000
Net inc
1,300,000
1,289,000
Share earns
.62
.62
Yr sales
84,242,000
79,769,000
Net inc
4,825,000
4,710,000
Share earns
2.31
2.27


Yesterday's Medal Winners
LEAD:  Alpine Skiing Men's Giant Slalom  Gold: Alberto Tomba, Italy  Silver: Hubert Strolz, Austria  Bronze: Pirmin Zurbriggen, Switzerland  Cross-Country Women's 20 km  Gold: Tamara Tikhonova, Soviet Union  Silver: Anfissa Reztsova, Soviet Union  Bronze: Raisa Smetanina, Soviet Union


Astoria Journal; Where a River and the Sea Eat Ships
LEAD: Just before a recent sunrise the unforgiving edge of the Pacific Ocean claimed another boat here at the mouth of the Columbia River, a place locally considered among the shipwreck capitals of the world.


Helmick Outlines Concerns
LEAD: With the United States about to finish one of its less successful Winter Olympics, the United States Olympic Committee this week took the first step in trying to learn how to make its programs more efficient and its athletes more productive.


GENERAL BINDING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL BINDING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
56,304,000
46,609,000
Net inc
b3,131,000
c1,617,000
Share earns
.44
.22
Yr sales
212,005,000
181,385,000
Net inc
b10,873,000
c6,030,000
Share earns
1.52
.83


Leader to Take AFG Private
LEAD: Randall D. Hubbard, the founding chairman of AFG Industries, said today that he intended to take the glassmaker private for $33 a share in a deal valued at about $726 million for the stock that he does not already own.


DELTONA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DELTONA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
33,536,000
17,747,000
Net inc
b1,488,000
cd833,000
Share earns
.13
-
Yr rev
89,390,000
68,515,000
Net inc
b3,101,000
d458,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-Includes tax credits of $689,000 for the quarter and $1,387,000 in the year.


Regulators Study Plunge
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board is involved in a series of meetings with other Government regulators about October's stock market plunge, a Commodity Futures Trading Commission member confirmed today.


CRONUS INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CRONUS INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
21,168,000
21,933,000
Net loss
803,000
d3,161,000
Yr sales
80,392,000
82,047,000
Net loss
b7,872,000
cd23,382,000
Share earns
-
4.29
b-After a gain of $1,282,000 from discontinued operations.


N.B.A. to Check Early Woolridge Alert
LEAD: The National Basketball Association said yesterday that it would investigate allegations by Dave Wohl, the former Nets coach, that he made team officials aware of Orlando Woolridge's drug problems during training camp last October but they took no action.


Fed Alters Economic Monitoring
LEAD: In a significant change in policy, the Federal Reserve Board has altered the way it monitors the economy, its vice chairman, Manuel H. Johnson, said today.
The new approach will give the financial markets a better sense of where interest rates are heading.


Abbey Simon: Evolution of 'a Pianist's Pianist'
LEAD: Some years ago, a music critic called Abbey Simon ''a pianist's pianist.'' Mr.
Simon has never been one of the big, publicized headliners, but his has been a solid, consistent career, and when he gives a recital - as he will on Sunday at 8 P.M. in Carnegie Hall - the audience will be full of professionals trying to figure out how those infallible fingers do this or that, how he gets the kind of color he does, and what he does with the rhythms to make them so flexible.


Football in the Garden
LEAD: Arena Football, an indoor professional league with a miniaturized field and wide-open offenses that played its first season in the spring and summer of 1987 with four teams, will return in April with six teams.
One of the new teams will be the New York Knights, who will play their home games in Madison Square


Woody Allen and 'Self-Hating Jew' Drivel
LEAD: To the Editor:


Third Investor Seeks Sizable Texaco Stake
LEAD: A third investor has announced plans to buy a stake in Texaco Inc.


Signs of Spring Erupting in Museums
LEAD: THE Museum Mile, as it is called on festive occasions, begins at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and goes north along Fifth Avenue.
Its attractions include the Guggenheim Museum, the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, the National Academy of Design and the Jewish Museum (in geographical order).
But there is another Museum Mile, or mile and a half.


INCOME OF FAMILIES IS UP, WITH RICHEST BENEFITTING MOST
LEAD: American families are better off than they were in 1970, largely because of the increase in two-worker families, but there are bigger income gaps between rich and poor, according to a major study issued today.


In Union County, a Network Aids the Homeless
LEAD: To the Editor:


Timeless Calendar
LEAD: With the White House up for grabs and Congress unable to plan its schedule more than a day at a time, some may take comfort in the fact that at least one major institution of Government maintains an air of immutability.


ERO INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ERO INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,506,000
10,057,000
Net inc
1,295,000
904,000
Share earns
.41
.28
Yr sales
45,250,000
39,087,000
Net inc
3,138,000
2,554,000
Share earns
.98
.80


COMPUDYNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMPUDYNE INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
20,748,000
16,317,000
Net inc
b4,575,000
cd954,000
Share earns
4.06
-
Yr sales
74,922,000
71,091,000
Net inc
b4,668,000
d8,370,000
Share earns
3.96
7.56


CENTRAL RESERVE LIFE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTRAL RESERVE LIFE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
1,826,190
b1,536,412
Share earns
-
.37
Yr net loss
1,539,876
b4,071,688
Share earns
-
.98
b-Net income


2 Soldiers Seized in Security Case Linked to Drug Trafficking
LEAD: Two Army enlisted men have been arrested on charges of improperly handling classified documents, and Federal officials say the suspects may be linked to an illicit drug operation at Fort Irwin in the Southern California desert.


DATAPOINT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATAPOINT CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Revenue
84,234,000
74,337,000
Net inc
b1,824,000
c65,869,000
6mo rev
154,384,000
145,735,000
Net inc
b2,710,000
c70,342,000
b-Includes tax benefits of $1,152,000 for the quarter and $1,639,000 for the 6 months.


POTOMAC ELECTRIC POWER CO reports earnings for 12mo Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*POTOMAC ELECTRIC POWER CO (NYSE)
12mo Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,328,189,000
1,364,837,000
Net inc
206,051,000
b226,653,000
Share earns
2.09
2.28
b-Includes an extraordinary gain of $21,680,000 from the sale of the company's Virginia service territory.


Shultz Urges 'Historic' Israeli Step To End Impasse Over Palestinians
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz called on Israel today to make ''decisions of historic proportions'' to help change the status quo in the Middle East.


NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF CAEERS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF CAEERS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,413,353
1,432,568
Net inc
115,018
267,743
Share earns
.03
.09
Shares outst
3,462,734
2,993,368


Woody Allen and 'Self-Hating Jew' Drivel; Is It Not Incredible?
LEAD: To the Editor:


ELECTRO-NUCLEONICS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ELECTRO-NUCLEONICS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,215,000
16,240,000
Net inc
230,000
b8,036,000
Share earns
.05
-
6mo sales
33,111,000
30,876,000
Net inc
397,000
b8,231,000
Share earns
.09
-


India Tests Its Own Surface-to-Surface Missile
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi announced today that India had successfully tested a surface-to-surface missile.
He said it would be used ''purely for defense purposes.''


Fed Clears Bid by Bank of New York
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board voted unanimouslytoday to permit the Bank of New York to proceed with its $1.08 billion takeover bid for the Irving Bank Corporation, provided it raises large amounts of new capital.


HAMBURGER HAMLETS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HAMBURGER HAMLETS INC
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Sales
11,861,065
11,047,613
Net inc
56,727
151,203
Share earns
.02
.05
9mo sales
35,928,056
32,819,005
Net inc
b867,692
377,429
Share earns
.27
.12
b-Included a non-recurring gain of $900,000 from the favorable settlement of litigation.


BUFFETS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUFFETS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1987
1986
Sales
11,682,000
7,183,000
Net inc
594,000
388,000
Share earns
.10
.07
Yr sales
47,772,000
27,006,000
Net inc
2,931,000
1,415,000
Share earns
.48
.25


BLOCKBUSTER ENTERTAINENT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLOCKBUSTER ENTERTAINENT (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
14,837,000
4,658,000
Net inc
1,285,000
b938,000
Share earns
.32
-
Yr rev
43,228,000
7,438,000
Net inc
4,090,000
b3,221,000
Share earns
1.12
-


IMPERIAL CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMPERIAL CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
5,300,000,000
5,040,000,000
Net inc
337,000,000
b228,000,000
Share earns
1.99
1.39
Yr sales
20,800,000,000
18,950,000,000
Net inc
1,421,000,000
b1,042,000,000
Share earns
8.50
6.39


Irwin Chanin, Builder of Theaters And Art Deco Towers, Dies at 96
LEAD: Irwin S. Chanin, an architect and builder whose skyline signature was formed of jazzy Art Deco towers and whose legacy to Broadway was a half dozen elegant theaters, died of natural causes Wednesday at his Manhattan home, his family said.
He was 96 years old.


Officer Testifies Again In Killing of Her Partner
LEAD: In quiet tones that belied the high-stakes drama, a New York City police detective dueled with defense lawyers in a Queens court yesterday over a shootout that left the detective wounded and her partner dead.


SWIFT ENERGY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SWIFT ENERGY CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,758,726
1,727,680
Net inc
1,304,579
485,866
Share earns
.32
.12
Yr rev
11,698,048
4,967,710
Net inc
4,024,003
1,108,314
Share earns
1.01
.28


INSTRON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INSTRON CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
30,638,000
24,703,000
Net inc
1,848,000
1,698,000
Share earns
.30
.27
Yr sales
95,749,000
87,384,000
Net inc
3,336,000
4,664,000
Share earns
.54
.75


Jessica Brodax Is Married To D. J. Harris, Executive
LEAD: The marriage of Jessica Brodax, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert P. Brodax of Weston, Conn., to David Jay Harris, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
I.
Robert Harris of New York, took place last evening at the East River Yacht Club in New York.
Rabbi Benjamin M. Kahn officiated.


MINNETONKA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MINNETONKA CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
52,241,000
37,139,000
Net inc
b50,355,000
c3,982,000
Share earns
2.85
.22
Yr sales
152,437,000
95,317,000
Net inc
b58,603,000
c9,129,000
Share earns
3.32
.52


INSIDE
LEAD:  Tomba Wins Gold


Advertising; New Effort By Insurance Institute
LEAD: IN carrying out the industry's mandate, the 29-year-old Insurance Information Institute publishes brochures, monographs and books; does original research; sponsors seminars, and trains speakers for radio and television.


DICK CLARK PRODUCTIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DICK CLARK PRODUCTIONS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,271,000
5,165,000
Net loss
1,229,000
b232,500
Share earns
-
.03
6mo rev
8,877,000
14,140,000
Net loss
1,135,000
b1,844,000
Share earns
-
.26


Waldheim Won't Speak at Anniversary Rite
LEAD: Amid a continuing uproar over his war record, President Kurt Waldheim said today that he would not speak as scheduled at the main ceremony on the 50th anniversary of Nazi Germany's annexation of Austria.


CAMBRIDGE ANALYTICAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAMBRIDGE ANALYTICAL
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,787,642
1,024,962
Net inc
15,562
b240,696
Share earns
.01
-
Yr sales
6,000,605
3,829,929
Net loss
311,997
539,853
b-Net loss


PURIM CELEBRATION
LEAD: The Jewish holiday of Purim, which begins on Wednesday, is to be celebrated this Sunday with a parade and fair at the Loeb Student Center of New York University West Fourth Street and La Guardia Place.
At 12:15 P.M., youngsters in holdiay costumes are to walk from the arch in Washington Square to the student center, where food, crafts and entertainment will await.


KEWAUNEE SCIENTIFIC EQUIPMENT CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KEWAUNEE SCIENTIFIC EQUIPMENT CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,837,000
14,400,000
Net inc
b96,000
c1,372,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo sales
51,927,000
44,050,000
Net inc
b416,000
c2,885,000
Share earns
.16
-


North's Testimony on Casey Is Made Public
LEAD: Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North testified that he discussed specific plans with William J. Casey for covert operations that would have been financed with profits from the Iran arms sales, according to testimony made public today by the Senate Iran-contra committee.


In South Carolina, Republicans Find Import Issue
LEAD: The battle over foreign imports, a powerful and dividing question in the Democratic race for President, has become a major issue for the Republican candidates as well.


COLOR SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COLOR SYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,244,968
1,080,325
Net loss
1,794,595
2,429,236
6mo rev
5,266,841
1,555,616
Net loss
3,624,409
4,668,086


Dole's Chairman Angrily Dismisses 2 Senior Campaign Aides
LEAD: A power struggle in Senator Bob Dole's Presidential campaign ended abruptly today when Bill Brock, the campaign chairman, angrily dismissed two senior aides who have been traveling with the Kansan.


Film: 'Apprentice to Murder'
LEAD: THE film that announces for no good reason that it is ''inspired by a true story'' often lacks any authenticity of its own.
Certainly that's the trouble with ''Apprentice to Murder,'' which opens today at Loews Astor Plaza and other theaters and tells of strange goings-on in rural Pennyslvania, circa 1927.


MAIL BOXES ETC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAIL BOXES ETC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,995,415
2,464,557
Net inc
557,298
509,113
Share earns
.27
.23
9mo rev
9,142,448
6,576,070
Net inc
1,384,185
1,150,632
Share earns
.64
.55


Disputed Court Nominee Promises No Surprises
LEAD: Bernard H. Siegan, a California law professor whose nomination to a Federal appeals court has touched off intense liberal opposition, insisted at his Senate confirmation hearing today that he would follow Supreme Court precedent ''without question or reservation of any sort.''


BDM INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BDM INTERNATIONAL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
78,580,000
82,185,000
Net inc
5,525,000
4,184,000
Share earns
.47
.36
Yr rev
314,039,000
322,198,000
Net inc
19,740,000
13,585,000
Share earns
1.66
1.21


Film: Wilford Brimley Stars in 'End of the Line'
LEAD: THERE is a moment when ''End of the Line'' looks like a small miracle.
However, that moment is extremely brief, and it occurs during the film's opening credits; no such impression ever comes again.
Here in the cast of this unprepossessing small-town story are such singular actors as Mary Steenburgen, Holly Hunter, Kevin Bacon and Levon Helm, whose presence alone ought to be enough to hold the interest.


A Financial Head Start For Campaigns Is Cited
LEAD: Members of the New York City Board of Estimate will have a ''substantial fund-raising head start'' for the 1989 campaign as a result of between-elections contributions, according to an analysis of campaign finance records.


Autopsy Finds Drinking Led To Death of Rutgers Student
LEAD: An autopsy confirms that alcohol consumed by a Rutgers University freshman at a fraternity party led to his death, the Middlesex County Prosecutor, Alan A. Rockoff, said today.


Broken Hill Plan
LEAD: Shareholders of the Broken Hill Proprietary Company have approved a restructuring.
Broken Hill, a steel, oil and mining company, will pay about $1.5 billion for 300 million shares controlled by Robert Holmes a Court, the Australian financier.
It will also pay about $412 million to Elders IXL Ltd., a company run by the entrepreneur John D.


NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 26, 1988
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL


Signs of Spring Erupt in Galleries And Museums
LEAD: THIS is the season when the art world gets a jump on spring.
At the Jewish Museum, Marc Chagall goes heels over head in his ''Homage to Gogol.'' At the New York Public Library, the red-vented bulbul sits high in a custard apple tree as part of the ''Bird Illustrated'' exhibition.
At the Cordier &amp; Ekstrom Gallery, on East 75th Street, Varujan Boghosian tells us the tale of a beautiful young woman with a mantilla of queen-sized butterflies.


Election Unit Eases TV Ad Limit, Rejecting Advice of Own Counsel
LEAD: The Federal Election Commission, rejecting its lawyers' recommendation, today condoned a practice used by two current Presidential campaigns to skirt state spending limits.


Economic Scene; Election Year's Monetary Drama
LEAD: THE conflict between the Federal Reserve and the Reagan Administration over what monetary policy should be and whose monetary policy is it, anyway, can easily be turned into a morality play.


A Recently Healed Boston Is Facing a New Racial Issue
LEAD: With the pain of a decadelong school desegregation battle still fresh, the people of Boston are reluctantly confronting another sensitive and divisive social issue.


A String Quartet Savors the New
LEAD: THERE are those who worry about the future of classical music.
But insofar as the string quartet, the core ensemble of such music, is concerned, their worries seem misplaced.
On both sides of the Atlantic, composers are writing new quartets with beaverish glee and audiences are flocking to hear them.


Halliburton Agrees To Buy Gearhart
LEAD: The Halliburton Company, the large oil-field service concern, has agreed to acquire a smaller rival, Gearhart Industries, for about $276 million.
Gearhart, based in Fort Worth, has lost money for several years and has not paid a shareholder dividend since 1985.
The company stopped servicing its debt in 1986, when oil prices reached a low of $10 a barrel.


ADVANTAGE COS reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANTAGE COS
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
16,438,000
5,779,000
Net inc
b556,000
c281,000
Share earns
.19
-
b-Includes a tax credit of $308,000.
c-Net loss and after a gain on disposal of discontinued operations of $156,000.


AT THE BAR
LEAD: A decade ago, George C. Kern Jr. described his frenetic life as Sullivan &amp; Cromwell's premier corporate takeover lawyer. ''Fulfilling?
Challenging?
Exciting?
You better believe it!'' he gushed. ''Happy?
You betcha!
And the answers would have been the same on any day in the past 28 years.''


Corrections
LEAD: The Briefing column of the Washington Talk page on Wednesday misidentified a rumored candidate for executive director of the National Economic Commission.
He is Stephen E. Bell, head of the Washington office of Salomon Brothers.


BALDWIN &amp; LYONS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BALDWIN &amp; LYONS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
29,352,589
32,473,247
Net inc
b1,377,186
c3,808,000
Share earns
.21
.59
Yr rev
109,450,060
136,803,000
Net inc
b17,557,149
c15,548,652
Share earns
2.71
2.95


Panel Urges Retesting of All New York Physicians
LEAD: All 50,000 physicians in New York State would have to be re-examined to retain their licenses under a plan unanimously agreed on by a state medical panel formed by Governor Cuomo.


The Shrinking Supercomputer . . .
LEAD: Using a supercomputer has always been a little like flying on the Concorde: it may be fast, but traffic can still cause delays on the way to the airport.
The lines of engineers and scientists waiting to get time on the company machine could shrink, however, with the arrival on the market of a new generation of small but extremely fast computers.


Liberace Items at Christie's
LEAD: Objects from Liberace's collection - personalized jewelry, cigarette cases, candelabra, pianos, music stands, sculpture, crystal and porcelains - are to be exhibited tomorrow and Sunday at Christie's, Park Avenue at 59th Street.


Mideast Long Shot Worth Taking
LEAD: Everyone knows that Secretary of State Shultz's foray into the Middle East doesn't stand much chance of success.
But here is a clear case where it pays to fail, and even fail again.
If the United States doesn't make every effort to get an Arab-Israeli peace process under way, the only beneficiaries will be the extremists.


G.I. Who Fled to Soviet Escapes Prison Term
LEAD: An Army private who fled his post in West Germany for the Soviet Union last year was convicted today of having been absent without leave but was cleared of the more serious charge of desertion.


National Rise Reported in Teacher Pay
LEAD: The country's average teacher salary rose 5.3 percent in 1987 while the percentage of students graduating from high school stayed roughly the same, the Department of Education reported today in its annual state-by-state review of public education.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Aaron Spelling Productions Inc. named Douglas S. Cramer vice chairman and E. Duke Vincent president of its executive committee.


Robert Lapham, 58, Demographics Expert
LEAD: Dr.
Robert J. Lapham, an authority on international demographics, died of brain cancer Saturday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 58 years old.


Kentucky Star Sidelined
LEAD: Rex Chapman, Kentucky's standout guard, is expected to be out for two weeks while he recovers from a back injury, the team physician said.
Chapman fractured a small bone next to the vertebrae that is attached to muscle in the lower back, in a 95-69 victory over Louisiana State Wednesday night. ''His return will depend on his comfort and rest over the next few weeks,'' said Dr.


Soviet Indicates Easing of Stand On 'Star Wars'
LEAD: A senior Soviet official indicated today that the Soviet Union might drop a key objection to the American development of a space-based missile defense system by permitting the testing of components in space.


JLG INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JLG INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,551,807
12,885,152
Net inc
752,279
655,186
Share earns
.22
.19
6mo sales
34,903,364
22,534,218
Net inc
1,679,294
170,000
Share earns
.49
.05


Books of The Times
LEAD: UNDER THE EYE OF THE CLOCK: The Life Story of Christopher Nolan.
By Christopher Nolan.
Preface by John Carey. 163 pages.
St.
Martin's Press. $16.95.


Film: 'The Last Minute'
LEAD: IN the last minutes of ''The Last Minute,'' we seem about to be treated to the big soccer match for which we have been prepared by the first hour and a half of the Italian movie that opens today at the Carnegie Screening Room.
And, sure enough, the game starts - only the camera is facing the wrong way.


Viacom Loss For Quarter
LEAD: Viacom Inc. reported a $35.4 million net loss for the fourth quarter, in contrast to a $695,000 profit in the third quarter.
Revenues rose to $265.8 million, from $246.3 million the previous year.


Crude Prices at Year's Low After U.S. Inventory Report
LEAD: Prices of crude oil futures dropped to their lowest levels of the year yesterday after a Government report placed American crude oil inventories at surprisingly high levels.


FLEEMAN AT SPEAKEASY
LEAD: Gregory Fleeman and the Fleewomen are to perform Mr.
Fleeman's songs tonight and tomorrow at Speakeasy, 107 Macdougal Street (598-9670).
Sets are at 8:30 and 11 P.M.; admission is $6 with a two-dring minimum.


Pregame Brawl Studied
LEAD: Bryan O'Neill, executive vice president of the National Hockey League, met with representatives of the Montreal Canadiens and the Quebec Nordiques in Montreal yesterday, seeking explanations for a brawl before their game Tuesday night.
O'Neill said he would announce today whether suspensions would be assessed.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly  COMMITTEE ON PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE: SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL SUBCOMMITTEE - 10:30 A.M.
AND 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN - 10 A.M.
AND 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON CHARTER - 10:30 A.M.
AND 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST APARTHEID - 10:30 A.M.


LYDALL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LYDALL INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
34,755,000
30,668,000
Net inc
2,473,000
980,000
Share earns
.91
.35
Yr sales
134,046,000
113,183,000
Net inc
4,712,000
2,499,000
Share earns
1.70
.87


John Zorn and Trio
LEAD: John Zorn on reed instrtuments, Big John Patton on organ, Bobby Previte on drums and Bill frisell on electric guitar will perform tonight and tomorrow at 9:30 and midnight at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street (219-3055).
Tickets are $7.


CENTOCOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CENTOCOR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,494,618
9,018,831
Net loss
2,142,203
d44,271,602
Yr rev
57,384,918
32,836,935
Net inc
b8,205,781
c39,015,212
Share earns
.71
-
b-Includes a $1,266,963 tax credit.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 26, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Diner's Journal
LEAD: PERIPATETIC nibblers should note the name of a new Spanish tapas bar and restaurant on the Upper West Side: Alcala.


Market Place; Niche Companies In Technology
LEAD: WHILE certain large technology companies reported lackluster operating earnings in their most recent quarter, some smaller companies are expected to experience strong gains in both earnings and stock prices in 1988, benefiting from their niche markets.


Billions Are in Play Today in Mexico's Bond Sale
LEAD: Bankers were playing a guessing game yesterday, trying to gauge how many banks around the world will bid for the novel Mexican bonds being offered today at a special auction and the prices at which they might be offered.


Suns Trade Nance To the Cavaliers
LEAD: The Phoenix Suns, unhappy with the prospect of heading for a fourth consecutive losing season, traded Larry Nance, their All-Star forward and Mike Sanders, another forward, to the Cleveland Cavaliers yesterday.
The five-player transaction also involved the exchange of draft choices.


Film: 'Thy Kingdom Come'
LEAD: A CONGREGATION sings a hymn - its members' heads thrown back, eyes closed, voices raised in ecstasy -and it seems they have surrendered their hearts to Jesus and their minds to their preachers. ''Thy Kingdom Come, Thy Will Be Done,'' Antony Thomas's documentary about born-again Christians and the political right, is powerful enough to lead to that conclusion, and hectoring enough to make us aware of Mr.


Our Towns; Neighborliness, The Homeless And Westchester
LEAD: There are 4,000 homeless people in Westchester right now, and it is projected that by the time President Reagan leaves office there will be 6,000.
Perhaps no suburban area has felt the turmoil of the President's dismantling of Federal low-income housing programs worse than Westchester.
Robert M. Hayes, counsel of the National Coalition for the Homeless, calls


Bridge: New York City Tournament Is Focusing on Newcomers
LEAD: An assortment of events will be provided at the first tournament of the year to be played in New York City, but the focus will be on newcomers - players with little or no experience in serious play.


Memo Urges Justice Department 'To Polarize Debate' on Key Issues
LEAD: An internal Justice Department memorandum urges officials to ''polarize the debate'' on key legal issues such as drugs, AIDS, obscenity and the death penalty and to seek confrontation instead of consensus in the remaining months of the Reagan Administration.


EDO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EDO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
33,950,000
30,971,000
Net inc
1,956,000
1,467,000
Share earns
.30
.20
Shares outst
6,552,947
7,564,015
Yr sales
127,262,000
113,184,000
Net inc
6,954,000
6,328,000
Share earns
1.01
.84
Shares outst
6,910,845
7,548,217


Louis Iacucci, 52, Expert on Italian Wine
LEAD: Louis Iacucci, a wine merchant and an authority on Italian wines, died of a heart attack yesterday after an automobile accident on Tuesday near Siena, Italy, according to his family.
He was 52 years old and lived in Queens.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about Vice President Bush's demand for an apology from Pat Robertson misstated some results of Tuesday's Presidential contests.
The vote percentages given for Albert Gore (8 percent), Paul Simon (6), Jesse Jackson (5) and Gary Hart (5) were for the South Dakota Democratic primary, not the Minnesota caucuses.


AMOSKEAG CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMOSKEAG CO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
394,837,000
347,140,000
Net loss
b2,430,000
c5,514,000
Share earns
-
1.65
Yr rev
1,438,848,000
1,122,978,000
Net inc
305,000
10,001,000
Share earns
.09
3.00


Weekend Show of Antique Fishing Gear
LEAD: THOSE who deal in antique collectibles know that old fishing gear, whether rods, reels, lures or even yellowing tackle catalogues, has become highly prized in recent years.
To this, one may now add antique fish decoys, used, usually through a hole cut in the ice, to lure large fish within range of a spear.


The Way It Oughta Be
LEAD:  John Ziegler  President, National Hockey League  650 Fifth Avenue  New York, N.Y. 10019  Dear John,


Campeau Maneuvers In Bid for Federated
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Brooks Brothers chain to Marks &amp; Spencer P.L.C., the big British retailer, for $770 million if Campeau acquired Federated Department Stores Inc.


CROWN CENTRAL PETROLEUM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CROWN CENTRAL PETROLEUM CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
288,848,000
226,713,000
Net inc
b52,783,000
c10,544,000
Share earns
7.16
-
Yr sales
1,086,805,000
1,023,007,000
Net inc
b31,816,000
c20,231,000
Share earns
3.78
-


DATARAM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATARAM CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,746,000
3,204,000
Net inc
51,000
76,000
Share earns
.03
.04
Shares outst
1,885,000
2,026,000
9mo rev
9,740,000
11,690,000
Net inc
327,000
847,000
Share earns
.17
.42


U.S. Officials Move to Clarify Reagan's Remarks
LEAD: Government officials moved today to clarify statements President Reagan made at a news conference about Palestinian unrest, the Iran-contra affair, terrorism and problems in South Africa.


Infringement Case Ruling Disclosed
LEAD: Genetics Institute Inc., a biotechnology company in Cambridge, Mass., said that a United States district judge had ruled that Amgen Inc. had infringed on its patent covering recombinant erythropoietin, or EPO, a hormone used to treat anemia in kidney dialysis patients.
Amgen, based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., had sued Genetics Institute for infringing on Amgen's patent, which covers the production of the genetically engineered E


AMERICAN NATIONAL INSURNCE CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN NATIONAL INSURNCE CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b6,948,000
c114,585,000
Share earns
.24
3.96
Yr net inc
b92,115,000
c248,351,000
Share earns
3.19
8.59
b-After a net realized investment loss of $18,383,000 for the quarter and a net realized investment gain of $781,000 for the year.


DOTRONIX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DOTRONIX INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,273,511
2,210,266
Net inc
828,413
240,035
Share earns
.26
.11
6mo rev
20,455,767
7,131,660
Net inc
1,527,185
b659,663
Share earns
.51
.30
b-Includes a $35,000 tax credit.


House Panel Chief Questions Pact With Russians on Space Payload
LEAD: The chairman of a House subcommittee criticized the Commerce Department yesterday for granting an export license to an American company that has contracted to fly commercial payloads aboard a Soviet space station.


Art People
LEAD:  Repetitive Sculptures


Correction
LEAD: An editorial yesterday about The New York Botanical Garden's expansion plan overstated the size of the garden's adult education programs.
The programs enroll more students than any other cultural, not eductional, institution in the country.


GENERAL REFRACTORIES CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENERAL REFRACTORIES CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
38,458,000
73,601,000
Net inc
b1,491,000
c709,000
Share earns
.41
.17
Yr sales
209,288,000
310,374,000
Net inc
b42,918,000
c7,452,000
Share earns
10.84
1.78


New Delay Is Seen for Bomber
LEAD: New charges of financial improprieties at the Northrop Corporation may result in a further delay of the first flight of the secret Stealth bomber and could lead to financial penalties against the military contractor, a member of the House Armed Services Committee said today.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Alicia Sherman


New York Transit Chief Wary of Budget Cuts
LEAD: The chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said yesterday that New York City's mass transit system is coming back strong, but is threatened by Federal budget cuts.


Soviet Skiers Score A Sweep
LEAD: Tamara Tikhonova led a Soviet medal sweep in the women's 20-kilometer race today, the final women's cross-country event of the Winter Olympics.


Plan for Rezoning Area Near the Park Is Stalled
LEAD: A plan to ease zoning limits on the size of buildings along much of Central Park's most exclusive East Side properties was dealt a setback last night when the matter was removed from Board of Estimate consideration.


Uptown, Novices and Modern Masters
LEAD: WHEN voices are raised, cooler heads generally prevail.
So it is that with all the high-flown rhetoric one can see nowadays in works on display at galleries along 57th Street and uptown, several of the more soft-spoken artists make the most persuasive statements: at the Cordier &amp; Ekstrom Gallery (417 East 75th Street, through March 19), for instance, are the small, Surrealistic collages of Varujan Boghosian.


Blair Putting Hockey on Hold
LEAD: TELEVISION'S instant ability to create a heroine, a goat, or a meanie has affected what millions of people will see tonight.


UNION CARBIDE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNION CARBIDE CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,845,000,000
1,595,000,000
Net inc
b23,000,000
c495,000,000
Share earns
.17
-
Shares outst
132,735,127
103,874,275
Yr rev
6,914,000,000
6,343,000,000
Net inc
b232,000,000
d496,000,000
Share earns
1.76
4.78
Shares outst
131,396,578
103,776,946


Study Sees Threats to New York Region's Growth
LEAD: Economic growth in the New York metropolitan region is being slowed, and could be stopped, by fundamental problems with education, housing costs and labor shortages, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday.


A Little Time Left
LEAD: There is still time for President Reagan to make sure that a great victory in the making does not become a tragedy.
But not much time.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, the transcript of President Reagan's news conference omitted a section yesterday.
The omitted portion is printed today on page A8.


TV Weekend; Salute to Dizzy Gillespie
LEAD: TIMED to coincide with Black History Month, public television's ''Great Performances'' is presenting - tonight at 9 o'clock on Channel 13 -''Wolf Trap Salutes Dizzy Gillespie: An All-Star Tribute to the Jazz Master.'' The 90-minute special includes highlights from a concert performed last June before a full house at Wolf Trap Park Farm for the Performing Arts in Vienna,


OHIO ART CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OHIO ART CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
21,287,000
16,492,000
Net inc
1,862,000
1,308,000
Share earns
2.94
2.06
Yr sales
63,858,000
47,355,000
Net inc
4,484,000
2,537,000
Share earns
7.06
3.99


BKW SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BKW SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
419,072
863,417
Net inc
7,373
26,813
Share earns
-
.01


One Way to While Away a Late Winter's Day
LEAD: A couple feeding sea gulls yesterday at North Hudson Park in North Bergen, N.J.
A chilly wind made the high of 38 degrees feel a lot colder.
Today should be sunnier but not any warmer. (NYT/Kim Garnick)


Californians Enrich Gulfstream Finish
LEAD: The last seven days of Gulfstream Park's meeting were already going to compose the best racing week of the winter, with seven stakes races worth $1.4 million being offered starting Saturday.
A planeload of California horses that arrived last Sunday will make it even better, the kind of week that less modest tracks routinely call a ''festival of racing.


Isabel Hoopes Grinnell, Art Curator, Dies at 89
LEAD: Isabel Hoopes Grinnell, a former assistant curator in the department of Greek and Roman art at the Metropolitan Museum, died Tuesday at a nursing home in Bethesda, Md.
She was 89 years old and until recently lived in New York City and Waquoit, Mass.


At the Movies
LEAD:  De Palma's New Film


Knicks' Road Slide Ends at 18
LEAD: The Knicks ended an 18-game road losing streak tonight, beating the Los Angeles Clippers, 106-96.
Gerald Wilkins scored 9 of his 25 points in the last five minutes for New York.


Omitted Remarks by Reagan
LEAD: Following is the portion of a transcript of President Reagan's news conference inadvertently omitted yesterday.
Q.
Mr.
President, who precisely are you criticizing when you say that the riots are not homegrown and not spontaneous?
A.
Well, we have had - it's a little difficult for me because I've -there's some things


An Array of Artists, Styles and Trends in Downtown Galleries
LEAD: FOR better and for worse, SoHo is still the place to go for an overview of the current art scene.
Inevitably, there are always exhibitions, representing artists of different generations and styles, that are worth seeing in themselves.
Just as inevitably there are also shows that provide temporarily valuable data, keeping one current with some of the latest trends and fads.


Study Suggests Poor Readers Are Hurt by Teachers' Tactics
LEAD: A new report suggests that poor readers are left at a disadvantage by school teachers who help them figure out hard words but neglect to make them discuss the meaning of the passages the words are in.


New Leaders in Arab Unrest: Radical and Loyal to P.L.O.
LEAD: To find the new Palestinian leadership that is said to be emerging from the protests in the occupied territories, Secretary of State George P. Shultz could look in places like this isolated village off a side road in the stony hills northwest of Nablus.


Thomas Leads Skating; Witt Second
LEAD: She did not receive the scores she wanted, but Debi Thomas of the United States nonetheless moved into the lead in the Olympic women's figure-skating competition tonight.


COMNET CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMNET CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,331,000
10,188,000
Net inc
519,000
303,000
Share earns
.20
.12
9mo rev
32,731,000
29,523,000
Net inc
1,374,000
694,000
Share earns
.53
.28


Salary Rate Of Custodians Is Criticized
LEAD: New York City's Board of Education pays more for its custodial services than other major cities but receives less in return, according to a study released yesterday by a nonprofit group that monitors the public schools.


Bush Makes Big Gains in New York
LEAD: Without a single vote cast, Vice President Bush has within his grasp 45 Republican National Convention delegates from New York State, more than two-thirds the number he has won in bitter primaries and caucuses in Iowa, New Hampshire and other states.


CHAPMAN ENERGY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CHAPMAN ENERGY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,030,931
2,665,694
Net loss
343,546
b19,481,285
6mo rev
5,571,276
5,692,298
Net loss
966,479
21,423,539
b-Includes a $16,089,163 writedown of oil and gas properties.


The Shrinking Supercomputer . . . Will Add to Turmoil in Industry
LEAD: Severe price cutting and the market clutter created by many new products have slowed growth in the mini-supercomputer industry, which many analysts had thought could achieve $1 billion in sales in 1990.
Although demand continues to rise and sales hit $300 million last year, these experts think the industry will not reach the $1 billion benchmark until 1992.


COMMONWEALTH MORTGAGE OF AMERICA LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*COMMONWEALTH MORTGAGE OF AMERICA LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
39,266,000
41,548,000
Net inc
99,000
2,306,000
Share earns
-
.07
6mo rev
83,462,000
80,716,000
Net inc
1,145,000
2,388,000
Share earns
.03
.07


CYCARE SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CYCARE SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,733,000
15,344,000
Net inc
101,000
665,000
Share earns
.02
.13
Yr rev
67,718,000
57,186,000
Net inc
b3,762,000
2,866,000
Share earns
.70
.55


Conner Set to Sail
LEAD: In a change of heart, Dennis Conner, the America's Cup defender, said he would compete in the world 12-Meter championships in northern Sweden June 22 through July 7.
Conner had declined to participate, citing time pressure because he may face a New Zealand challenger in the America's Cup in September.


Gault's Sled Fails In a Bid to Compete
LEAD: For eight years, Willie Gault has been trying to compete in the Olympics.
His quest may have ended today.
In 1980, when he made the United States Olympic track team as a sprinter, the United States boycotted the Moscow Olympics.
In 1984, he was playing wide receiver for the Chicago Bears of the National Football League.


Reading Scores Are Reported For 19 Staten Island Schools
LEAD: Nineteen elementary schools on Staten Island were omitted from a table on Tuesday that listed reading scores for city schools.
They are listed here.


Late Selling Sends Dow Down 22.38, to 2,017.57
LEAD: Stock prices swung widely yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average ahead as many as 33 points before a late-session wave of selling pushed the Dow to a close of 2,017.57, down 22.38 points.


Restaurants; Downtown bistro, uptown Italian.
LEAD: WHEN the French bistro Quatorze opened three-and-a-half years ago along West 14th Street, a Latin-flavored commercial strip of bodegas, cut-rate clothing emporiums and bilingual driving schools, it seemed as incongruous as Yves Montand in a salsa band.
Yet the restaurant was an immediate hit, both for its ingenuous, reasonably priced food and its casual, convivial setting.


Italian Doubles Offer for Belgique
LEAD: Carlo de Benedetti doubled his public offer tonight for Societe Generale de Belgique's shares, from 4,000 Belgian francs a share, or about $113, to 8,000 francs in an attack on the French-Belgian coalition that claims to have 52 percent of the vast holding company's capital.


The Stage: Heiner Muller's 'Quartet'
LEAD: Heiner Muller's ''Quartet'' is a dense, mordant rumination on Choderlos de Laclos's novel, ''Les Liaisons Dangereuses.'' This means that Robert Wilson's production of ''Quartet'' is twice removed from the original novel.
The production at the American Repertory Theater is filtered through two diverse sensibilities, the one German and philosophical, the other American and visual.


SITUATION UNCLEAR
LEAD: Panama's civilian President announced yesterday the dismissal of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the country's principal leader, as commander of the Defense Forces.


4 Drivers Punished
LEAD: The State Racing and Wagering Board announced yesterday that it had revoked the harness-driving license of Henri Filion and upheld 30-day suspensions for three other drivers - Michel Lachance, Rene Poulin and Joe Marsh Jr.
The actions came after the board reviewed a one-month appeals hearing that ended Jan.


Torrence's Streak on the Line
LEAD: Theater tickets?
Perhaps Gwen Torrence might be interested in some otherwise unattainable theater tickets.


Cut in Cable Disrupts Phone Calls in East
LEAD: A cut in a major telephone cable 15 miles south of Newark disrupted communications along the East Coast today, according to American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company officials.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  BOSTON (AL) - Signed Jeff Sellers, pitchers, and Todd Benzinger, outfielder-first baseman, to one-year contracts.
CINCINNATI (NL) - Agreed to terms with Barry Larkin, shortstop, on a one-year contract.
METS (NL) - Signed Rick Aguilera and Terry Leach, pitchers, to one-year contracts.


LIZ CLAIBORNE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIZ CLAIBORNE INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1987
1986
Sales
238,416,000
191,895,000
Net inc
22,458,000
19,321,000
Share earns
.26
.22
Yr sales
1,053,324,000
813,497,000
Net inc
114,414,000
86,194,000
Share earns
1.32
1.00


JONES MEDICAL INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JONES MEDICAL INDUSTRIES
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,971,111
1,594,895
Net inc
270,265
199,037
Share earns
.09
.06
Yr rev
6,786,646
5,785,365
Net inc
872,521
695,398
Share earns
.28
.25


IMS INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMS INTERNATIONAL INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
114,950,000
97,072,000
Net inc
b14,421,000
c14,439,000
Share earns
.34
.34
Yr rev
429,338,000
349,645,000
Net inc
b58,512,000
c38,562,000
Share earns
1.36
.90


OMNI EXPLORATION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OMNI EXPLORATION INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
520,000
533,000
Net loss
81,000
269,000


Islander Accident Is Costly
LEAD: The Islanders scored both goals here tonight, but the final score went into the record books as a 1-1 overtime tie with the Chicago Blackhawks.


CAESARS NEW JERSEY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAESARS NEW JERSEY INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
69,575,000
66,016,000
Net inc
4,153,000
2,924,000
Share earns
.25
.18
6mo rev
160,256,000
147,558,000
Net inc
16,165,000
8,855,000
Share earns
.99
.54


Many Pitfalls on Path From Congress to Court
LEAD: When 110 Democratic Congressmen concluded last fall that the Reagan Administration was conducting operations in the Persian Gulf in defiance of a Congressional resolution, they did what comes naturally to Americans in and out of Congress: they went to court.


TGI FRIDAY'S reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TGI FRIDAY'S (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 28
1987
1986
Revenue
92,105,000
90,333,000
Net inc
b351,000
cd2,032,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr rev
377,998,000
359,846,000
Net inc
b7,860,000
c1,432,000
Share earns
.44
.08


BURNHAM AMERICAN PROPERIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BURNHAM AMERICAN PROPERIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
733,000
-
Net loss
130,000
-
This was the company's first quarter as a real estate investment trust.


Koch and Firefighters Resolve Their Dispute
LEAD: Mayor Koch and the New York City firefighters union yesterday announced the settlement of a two-week-old job action that, in the rosy glow of resolution, neither side seemed willing to acknowledge had occurred.


Salute to Black Dancers At Columbia University
LEAD: Charles Cook, Ernest Brown and the Norma Miller Jazz Dancers are to perform in ''Black History Salute to the Legendary Black Dancers'' on Sunday at 3 P.M. at Columbia University's Wollman Auditorium, 115th Street and Broadway.
Other performers include Juanita Boisseau, a former Cotton Club dancer; Jack Hammer, who will perform a tap-dance homage to Bill Robinson and Baby Lawrence; Melvin Moore, the singer, and Bill Dillard, the trumpet player, and his orchestra.


Israeli Troops Kill 2 Arabs; Palestinian General Strike Protests Shultz Visit
LEAD: Two Palestinian demonstrators were shot and killed by Israeli soldiers in the occupied territories today and 100 were arrested.


Profits Rise in Canada
LEAD: Operating profits of Canadian companies, led by a sharp upturn in mining, rose 11 percent in the last quarter of 1987.
It was the fifth consecutive quarter of strong gains.


Dining Out Guide: 3-Star French, Part 2
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
The date of original publication is listed after the phone number.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.


CAESARS WORLD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CAESARS WORLD INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
198,000,000
187,777,000
Net inc
15,742,000
12,563,000
Share earns
.65
.41
Shares outst
24,295,000
30,302,000
6mo rev
421,608,000
383,280,000
Net inc
45,359,000
27,547,000
Share earns
1.58
.91
Shares outst
28,694,000
30,251,000


BIG GAIN REPORTED ON AIDS PNEUMONIA
LEAD: An antibiotic drug treatment has prevented the onset of a rare but deadly form of pneumonia that is the most common cause of death in AIDS patients, the authors of a new study reported today.


Insurance Plan for Pipeline Involved Israeli Aid Pledge
LEAD: Supporters of an Iraqi-Jordanian pipeline project offered a plan in late 1985 under which Israel would be allowed to pledge American military aid as insurance against an Israeli attack on the project, according to Government officials.


CERPROBE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CERPROBE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,576,908
1,150,298
Net inc
107,261
b54,862
Share earns
.05
-
Yr rev
4,828,821
4,269,682
Net loss
29,535
34,505
b-Net loss  The company said the latest year includes a gain of $169,000, or 8 cents a share, from a change in accounting method.


NORDSON CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORDSON CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
53,907,000
44,850,000
Net inc
6,567,000
4,913,000
Share earns
.63
.47
The latest quarter included a pre- tax gain of $219,000 from currency exchange, compared with a similar gain of $148,000 for the year-ago period.


Foreign Gain In Patents
LEAD: Foreigners won nearly half of the patents awarded by the United States last year, the Patent and Trademark Office reported today.


Saint-Gobain Seeks Rest of Certainteed
LEAD: Compagnie de Saint-Gobain, the large French glassmaker, said it had begun a $41-a-share cash offer for the 42.9 percent of the Certainteed Corporation of Valley Forge, Pa., that it does not own.
Certainteed shares jumped $13.50 each, to $45.125, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, above Saint


Reagan Gets More Than Cues, Scripts Show
LEAD: President Reagan's use of 4-by-5-inch cue cards at meetings is well known, but according to ABC News, the cards are not simply sketched notes but are occasionally word-for-word scripts.


Port Authority Police Officers Protest Stalled Contract Talks
LEAD: Off-duty police officers demonstrating yesterday outside the Park Avenue home of Stephen Berger, the Port Authority's executive director.
About 500 officers gathered to protest an impasse in contract negotiations; the previous contract expired in 1985.
Meanwhile, Mr.
Berger painted a picture of an economic slowdown in the New York metropolitan region as the Port Authority released its annual ''Economic Review and Outlook.


Outrageous Speech? Yes, and Free.
LEAD: When a Supreme Court headed by William Rehnquist declares the deepest commitment to free speech, and does so unanimously, it furthers a thrilling principle of liberty.
Larry Flynt's rancid Hustler magazine may have ridiculed the Rev.
Jerry Falwell in the coarsest and most outrageous way.
But freedom of speech, the Court declares, extends to utterances that are outlandish, even detestable.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about a man whose mental illness improved after he shot himself in the head characterized Physicians Weekly incorrectly.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: *
British Telecom Finance B.V., a unit of British Telecommunications P.L.C., is issuing $200 million of 8 5/8 percent Eurobonds due 1995 at 101 1/8 through IBJ International Ltd.


MIDDLE EASTERN MUSIC
LEAD: Zusaan Kali Fasteau, who plays soprano saxophone, piano and wind and percussin instruments from the Middle East, Japan, Morocco, Brazil and elsewhere, is to lead a trio with Sirone on bass and Badal Roy on Indian tabla drums tonight at 8 at Greenwichh House, 27 Barrow Street.
Tickets are $10; information, 206-1050.


DIAGNOSTIC PRODUCTS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DIAGNOSTIC PRODUCTS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
10,317,000
8,070,000
Net inc
2,598,000
1,816,000
Share earns
.42
.30
Yr sales
36,922,000
29,030,000
Net inc
9,273,000
6,302,000
Share earns
1.50
1.07


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Anthony J. Adams and Paul N. Mulcahy have been named vice presidents of marketing research and advertising, respectively, at Campbell Soup Co.


Richardson Applies
LEAD: After two years, Micheal Ray Richardson formally applied to the Na-tional Basketball Association yesterday for an end to his suspension for drug use and for readmission to the league as a player for the Nets.
Under the drug agreement between the league and the National Basketball Players Association, Richardson, 32 years old, had been banned from the N.B.A.


Mets Ponder Pitching Outlook
LEAD: So what about those eight pitchers who were disabled last year for a combined total of 457 days and who probably cost the Mets the pennant?
Have they recovered?
Are the Mets sure they can go out and start winning again this year?


Approval Is Sought On Foremost Stake
LEAD: Two Texas investors said that they would seek Federal approval to increase their stake in the Foremost Corporation of America to about 15 percent, from 10.1 percent.


Reagan Trade Panel Urges New Move Against Japan
LEAD: An Administration advisory body voted unanimously today to recommend that President Reagan initiate a trade retaliation case against Japan because of deadlocked negotiations on opening its construction market to foreign companies.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.56
6.43
5.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.63
5.62
5.45
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.79
5.77
5.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.02
7.96
6.99
30-YR.


OAKITE PRODUCTS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OAKITE PRODUCTS INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
18,966,000
18,830,000
Net inc
812,000
246,000
Share earns
.50
.16
Yr sales
79,361,000
79,455,000
Net inc
3,978,000
2,597,000
Share earns
2.43
1.60


It's Still a Republic, Not a Corporation
LEAD: To the Editor:


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  TERRA-COTTA BUILDINGS


ANGELL REAL ESTATE reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANGELL REAL ESTATE (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
908,745
-
Share earns
.25
-
Share earnings are in units.
Angell Real Estate converted from Angell Care Master L.P., effective Jan. 1.
This is the company's first full year of operation.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD: Many Strings Attached The 1988 String Band Festival, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street (228-7880).
Fingers will fly at this all-star gathering of bluegrass and old-timey bands.
Breakfast Special, Lazy Aces, the Wretched Refuse String Band and Tony Trischka and Skyline are all trying to bring bluegrass music into the 1980's without losing its essence: close-harmony singing and amazing, virtuosic picking on instruments from the backwoods.


Surgeon Testifies Chambers's Hand Showed Evidence of Punching
LEAD: The chief hand surgeon at the Bellevue Hospital Center testified yesterday that X-ray photographs of the broken bone in Robert E. Chambers Jr.'s right hand showed a ''classic picture of a wild swing of a forceful nature striking a hard object.''


DEWEY ELECTRONICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DEWEY ELECTRONICS CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,893,000
2,625,000
Net inc
18,000
18,000
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo rev
5,677,000
4,717,000
Net inc
20,000
21,000
Share earns
.01
.02


BUSH INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUSH INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 25
1987
1986
Sales
27,739,311
22,336,877
Net inc
1,768,523
1,098,978
Share earns
.59
.38
Yr sales
93,475,311
65,402,877
Net inc
5,550,523
2,505,978
Share earns
1.85
.84


BERCOR INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BERCOR INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Sales
46,530,000
49,498,000
Net loss
b4,167,000
c570,000
Share earns
-
.13
9mo sales
136,138,000
122,575,000
Net loss
b4,552,000
251,000
b-Includes accounting change gains of $61,000 for the quarter and $141,000 for the 9 months.


Profit Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1987
From '86
Caesars World Inc.
$15,700,000
24.6
Crown Central Petroleum
52,800,000
-
Liz Claiborne Inc.
22,500,000
16.6
Neiman-Marcus Group
16,700,000
21.9
Union Carbide Corp.
23,000,000
-
See accompanying notes for special items.....(Loss)  * Loss in year-earlier period.


Mr. Bork Regrets
LEAD: True to his promise when he left the Federal bench, Robert Bork is refighting his unsuccessful battle for the Supreme Court.
In TV appearances, he complains that the Senate's refusal to confirm his nomination has discouraged lawyers from publishing controversial legal articles.
Like Attorney General Meese, who called the Senate's action ''anti-intellectual,'' Mr.


Telephone May Be Helpful in Some Trials
LEAD: The lawyers were surprised at the idea, and the telephone bill has yet to arrive.
But the plaintiff, the defendant and the judge all seem pleased by a recent experiment to hold a trial by phone.


Olajide-Barkley Bout
LEAD: Both Michael Olajide and Iran Barkley lost in their bids for middleweight titles last October, Olajide to Frank Tate for the International Boxing Federation title and Barkley to Sumbu Kalambay for the World Boxing Association title.
But neither sounded like a loser at a news conference yesterday for the Olajide-Barkley bout at the Felt Forum March 6.


Advertising; Chock Full o'Nuts Spot by TBWA
LEAD: New Yorkers may get plenty of Chock Full o'Nuts coffee, but of late they haven't been getting much Chock Full o'Nuts advertising.
And those of you who remember the advertising are probably glad.


Soviet Missiles Withdrawn From East Germany
LEAD: Soviet soldiers preparing an SS-12 nuclear missile for transport yesterday in Bischofswerda.
Thirty-two canvas wrapped containers, said by Communist officials to hold parts of the dismantled missiles, were loaded aboard a train for shipment to the Soviet Union.
In Czechoslovakia, the state-run press said 19 SS-12 missile launchers left Hranice for the Soviet Union.


Corrections
LEAD: A table of New York City school reading scores on Tuesday gave an incorrect ranking for Junior High School 59 in southeastern Queens.
It was 39th.
In addition, the scores for 19 Staten Island elementary schools were omitted.
They are printed today on page B4.


AMERICAN CABLESYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN CABLESYSTEMS (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
25,206,000
13,087,000
Net loss
9,268,000
1,355,000
6mo rev
41,252,000
25,692,000
Net loss
11,310,000
2,699,000


On Stage
LEAD:  'Around the World'


Brawleys Called Willing to Be Jailed
LEAD: Tawana Brawley and her family would go to jail rather than testify to a grand jury empaneled by State Attorney General Robert Abrams, a minister who has been advising the Dutchess County teen-ager said today.


Martin Starts To Grow Impatient
LEAD: Another day passed, and there was still no Rickey Henderson in the Yankees' training camp, and no Gary Ward, either.
With next Tuesday as the deadline for reporting, the absence of Henderson and Ward from the second day of workouts remained a low priority for Manager Billy Martin.
But his patience seemed to be thinning.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: TENNIS  Lendl Is Upset: Sixteenth-seeded John Fitzgerald upset Ivan Lendl, the world's top-ranked player, 7-6, 6-4, last night in the third round of the $600,000 United States Pro Indoor Tennis Championships in Philadelphia.
Lendl had trouble making his first serve and became irritated by distractions from a game on an adjacent court, slamming a ball into the Spectrum's overhead scoreboard.


New AIDS Test Is Being Offered To Confirm Infection With Virus
LEAD: A medical testing company says it has developed a new backup test for AIDS antibodies in the blood that virtually eliminates results that falsely indicate the antibodies' presence and reduces the number of inconclusive results.


CATCH A RISING STAR reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CATCH A RISING STAR
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
326,612
25,000
Net loss
274,128
136,580
9mo rev
868,144
75,000
Net loss
954,198
296,751


Filibuster on Campaign Spending Bill Ends
LEAD: The filibuster that had halted activity in the Senate ended this evening, setting the stage for Republicans to win their effort to stop a bill limiting spending on Congressional campaigns.


C.I.A. Official Who Administered Contra Aid Program Quits Agency
LEAD: Alan M. Fiers, the Central Intelligence Agency official who was in charge of aiding the Nicaraguan rebels and who was reprimanded in the wake of the Iran-contra affair, has resigned from the agency.


College Basketball; Syracuse Trounces Providence, 91-73
LEAD: Steve Thompson scored 18 points tonight as Syracuse used 15-point runs in each half to rout Providence, 91-73, giving the Orangemen their 18th consecutive Big East Conference victory over the Friars.


Woman, 82, Stabbed to Death In a Staten Island Apartment
LEAD: An 82-year-old woman was found stabbed to death in her Staten Island apartment on Wednesday, the police said.
Her body was discovered by neighbors who found her apartment door ajar, Sgt.
Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman, said.


Home Resale Pace Slows
LEAD: Sales of existing homes fell for the third consecutive month, declining 3.6 percent in January, the National Association of Realtors said today.


Henderson Shows Up and Comes Out Swinging
LEAD: He arrived in the early morning, smiling as he always does and simply saying that personal business had prevented him from being here sooner.
But as he dressed and talked, Rickey Henderson seemed to grow more disturbed over the events of last summer that caused him to miss 67 games with a hamstring injury.


GENESCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GENESCO INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
112,955,000
132,428,000
Net inc
b7,439,000
c15,283,000
Share earns
.45
.97
Yr sales
405,844,000
514,589,000
Net inc
b11,444,000
c20,426,000
Share earns
.61
1.20


Buyer Sought For Magazine
LEAD: Psychology Today, the 21-year-old monthly magazine owned by the American Psychological Association, has been put up for sale, according to Dr.
Gary R. Vandenbos, the association's executive director for publications and communications.


Excerpts From the Statement By Gorbachev to Armenians
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a message by Mikhail S. Gorbachev to the Soviet republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan, as read in Russian over the Yerevan radio by a Politburo member, Vladimir I. Dolgikh, and monitored and translated by the British Broadcasting Corporation:


BUILDERS TRANSPORT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUILDERS TRANSPORT (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
47,051,000
42,205,000
Net inc
217,000
772,000
Share earns
.05
.16
Shares outst
4,394,378
5,043,190
Yr rev
185,258,000
151,858,000
Net inc
b6,422,000
c5,277,000
Share earns
1.32
1.05


Pop: Springsteen Starts First Tour in 2 Years
LEAD: Bruce Springsteen wants to grow up, settle down and remind his huge audience that there's no escape from responsibility. ''One of the hardest things for me over the past 10 years,'' he said Thursday as he introduced and partly disavowed a song from 1975, ''Born to Run,'' ''has been trying to understand what growing up and being a man is all about - trying to make some kind of home for myself and then trying to hold on to it.


Study for Regents Finds Higher Scores and Cut in Dropout Rate
LEAD: The State Education Department said today that scores on standardized state tests were rising, annual dropout rates were declining and class sizes were shrinking.


Stop Meddling With the Fed
LEAD: President Reagan seems not to know that his Administration still has problems with the Federal Reserve Board.
Carping from the Treasury and the Council of Economic Advisers continues, even though all board members are now Reagan appointees with a Reagan chairman, Alan Greenspan.
The President needs to brush up - on current events and on proper policy roles.


St. Patrick's Program Planned for Radio City
LEAD: The Irish tenor Frank Patterson will be featured in a St.
Patrick's Day celebration of music and dance, March 16 at 8 P.M. at Radio City Music Hall, Avenue of the Americas at 50th Street.
Mr.
Patterson, who has been a singer since childhood, has performed for the Pope, for President Reagan, and at churches and concert halls in the United States and Europe.


Lyrical Plea to Preserve Fabric of Small Farms
LEAD: All afternoon Wendell Berry, a literary man capable of wielding a pen or a plow with equal artistry, talked about farming and the unbraiding of the strands of rural culture.


TEMCO SERVICE INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TEMCO SERVICE INDUSTRIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
27,540,741
24,965,889
Net inc
231,043
182,839
Share earns
.40
.31
Shares outst
584,134
594,564


SANTA ANITA COS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANTA ANITA COS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
12,728,000
11,970,000
Net inc
5,287,000
c9,098,000
Share earns
.63
1.09
Yr rev
90,562,000
85,497,000
Net loss
4,855,000
cd18,170,000
Share earns
-
2.20


GRAPHIC SCANNING CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRAPHIC SCANNING CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
30,146,000
30,209,000
Net inc
b13,067,000
c101,227,000
Share earns
.35
2.05
Shares outst
39,186,000
30,209,000
6mo rev
57,610,000
61,005,000
Net inc
b65,352,000
c97,487,000
Share earns
1.65
2.03
Shares outst
40,705,000
50,248,000


Pat Robertson: A Candidate of Contradictions
LEAD: By now Pat Robertson has made clear that he cannot be written off as an electronic Elmer Gantry, a colorful distraction from the rest of the Republican Presidential field.


Visa Charges Increase
LEAD: United States Visa card holders charged nearly $100 billion last year, a $13 billion increase over 1986. the company said Thursday.
Third- and fourth-quarter volumes set records and exceeded expectations by more than 50 percent, Charles T. Russell, president of Visa U.S.A.
Inc., said.
The number of card holders increased from 98.2 million in 1986 to 106.5 million in 1987, including more than five million Premier Visa card holders, the company said.


Santucci Urges A Judge to Quit An Abuse Case
LEAD: The Queens District Attorney, John J. Santucci, has demanded that a state judge remove himself from a child molestation case because the judge has advocated allowing the defendant to lecture on pedophilia in place of serving a prison sentence.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Begley Co., Richmond, Ky., a drugstore chain, said that it had agreed in principle to sell its drugstore business for $19,950,000 to Rite Aid Corp.


VILLAGE SUPER MARKET INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*VILLAGE SUPER MARKET INC
Qtr to Jan 16
1988
1987
Sales
152,820,000
143,128,000
Net inc
1,851,000
918,000
Share earns
.55
.39
6mo sales
286,013,000
265,170,000
Net inc
3,061,000
1,665,000
Share earns
.91
.71
Shares outst
3,343,376
2,343,376


Societe Generale
LEAD: The Brussels bourse halted trading at the start of business today in shares of Belgium's biggest company, Societe Generale de Belgique, the object of a five-week takeover battle between Italy's Carlo de Benedetti and an array of rivals.
Bourse officials suspended stock of Societe Generale, a huge conglomerate, when it jumped 15 percent, to a new high of 8,060 francs, or about $228.32, a share.


Recital: Victor Derevianko
LEAD: Victor Derevianko's program of Brahms and Liszt at Alice Tully Hall Wednesday night was narrow in its choice of repertory but probably said the most any music could about his tastes and skills.
Mr.
Derevianko, who is a pianist, teacher and chamber player in Israel, has the bigness of sound and gesture we associate with the Russian school, but his playing is refreshingly free of the leaden aggression that so often accompanies it.


LITTLE PRINCE PRODUCTIONS LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LITTLE PRINCE PRODUCTIONS LTD
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
72,948
7,372
Net loss
88,463
c858
9mo rev
90,941
9,363
Net loss
b86,613
9,692
b-Included a non-recurring investment loss of $186,015.
c


Second Gold Won in Slalom
LEAD: All the talk revolved round her Swiss teammates, Maria Walliser and Michela Figini, two bitter rivals trying to become the first woman to win three gold medals in Alpine skiing at the Winter Olympics.


Knicks Top Warriors, 125-119
LEAD: Gerald Wilkins scored 8 of his 34 points in the final 6 minutes tonight, leading the Knicks to their third straight victory, a 125-119 decision over the Golden State Warriors.


Teresa Berganza Replaced
LEAD: The American mezzo-soprano Florence Quivar is to replace Teresa Berganza, who is ill, as guest soloist with the Chamber Orchestra of Europe in a concert at Carnegie Hall Thursday at 8 P.M.
Miss Quivar is to sing Mahler's Ruckert Lieder.
The orchestra, under the direction of Claudio Abbado, is also to play Prokofiev's Classical Symphony, Schoenberg's Three Pieces for Orchestra, and Mendelssohn's Symphony No.


Soviet Clinches Gold in Hockey
LEAD: When the buzzer sounded and they knew for sure that hockey's Olympic gold medal once again belonged to the Soviet Union, the players in red jerseys dropped their sticks and embraced.


TV: HBO's 'On Location' Presents Dennis Miller
LEAD: On NBC's ''Saturday Night Live,'' Dennis Miller is the ''Weekend Update'' anchor, reviewing the week's headlines with a flip grin that challenges the audience to realize just how clever he is.
On his first solo television special, ''Mr.
Miller Goes to Washington,'' he brings the same carefully honed manner to his stand-up comedy act.


LIQUID AIR CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LIQUID AIR CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
143,122,000
114,746,000
Net inc
9,872,000
c8,487,000
Share earns
.70
.59
Yr sales
562,243,000
539,525,000
Net inc
b36,598,000
c34,680,000
Share earns
2.57
2.42


Screenwriters' Contract to Expire on Monday
LEAD: Contract talks with 9,000 movie and television writers are coming down to the wire, but the negotiations have none of the soap-box orations and hysteria that accompanied the bargaining with directors last June.


Farley Considers a Bid For Montgomery Ward
LEAD: Farley Inc., the controlling shareholder of Fruit of the Loom Inc., said today that it was exploring the possibility of buying the Montgomery Ward &amp; Company subsidiary of the Mobil Corporation.


French Inflation Down
LEAD: French consumer price inflation fell sharply, to an annual rate of 2.4 percent last month from 3.1 percent in December, the National Statistics Institute said today.
It attributed the fall mostly to exceptionally high price rises recorded in January 1987, which had an inflation rate of nine-tenths of 1 percent.


Consumer Price Index Rose by 0.3% in January
LEAD: The Consumer Price Index climbed three-tenths of 1 percent in January as higher charges for a broad range of goods and services were substantially offset by the second straight month of lower energy costs, the Labor Department reported today.


Donald C. Adams, Banker, 83
LEAD: Donald C. Adams, a retired vice president of the Irving Trust Company, died Wednesday at the Holy Spirit Hospital in Camp Hill, Pa.
He was 83 years old and lived in Westport, Conn.


HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN OF THE ROCKIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN OF THE ROCKIES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
289,000
b1,088,000
Share earns
.53
-
Yr net inc
1,587,000
b645,000
Share earns
2.96
-
b-Net loss  The company said the provision for loan losses was $243,000 and $498,000 in the latest quarter and year, respectively, compared with $1,439,000 in the year-ago quarter and $1,701,000 in the year.


For Israeli Settlers, Resolve To Stay Means 'This is War'
LEAD: The Israeli woman who identified herself as Aviva from Ofra seemed frail as a bird next to her friend with the Uzi submachine gun, but her words bore a message as blunt as the weapon's snout.


Dr. Perihan Rosenthal, Psychiatrist, Dies at 55
LEAD: Dr.
Perihan Aral Rosenthal, a children's psychiatrist, died Tuesday of a brain tumor at her home in Short Hills, N.J.
She was 55 years old.


ICN BIOMEDICALS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ICN BIOMEDICALS INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,200,000
11,000,000
Net inc
1,100,000
721,000
Share earns
.13
.09
Yr sales
42,745,000
41,144,000
Net inc
b3,877,000
c3,761,000
Share earns
.44
.52
Shares outst
8,803,000
7,283,000


Torrence Keeps Streak Alive
LEAD: More than the prizes and the money, the purpose of coming to Madison Square Garden yesterday, on a stop somewhere on the way to Seoul, South Korea, was to complete the indoor track and field season in one piece.


Delay on Heart-Aspirin Data Wasn't Fatal
LEAD: To the Editor:





Lucille Lortel's Elixir of Youth: Enthusiasm
LEAD: You would think it was her first stage production instead of her 500th.


Mystery Writers Select Nominees for Awards
LEAD: Nominees for the 1988 Edgar Allan Poe Awards were announced this week by the Mystery Writers of America.


Henry Okamoto, Artist, 65
LEAD: Henry Okamoto, an artist who founded the Clay Art Center in Port Chester, N.Y., died of cancer of the colon last Saturday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 65 years old.


FOR ARMENIANS IN U.S., AN ISSUE OF SOLIDARITY
LEAD: Thousands of Armenian immigrants here, and children and grandchildren of immigrants, are watching the Armenian protests in the Soviet Union with anticipation, concern and frustration.


NORANDA INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NORANDA INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,890,000,000
1,490,000,000
Net inc
121,400,000
b9,600,000
Share earns
.79
-
Yr rev
7,370,000,000
6,200,000,000
Net inc
343,500,000
43,300,000
Share earns
2.14
.02


Plaza Hotel May Be Sold for Co-ops
LEAD: The Plaza Hotel, an 81-year-old symbol of Edwardian elegance on Fifth Avenue, could be sold within weeks and converted partly to cooperative ownership if intensifying negotiations prove successful.


BOSTON DIGITAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOSTON DIGITAL CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
3,962,000
3,449,000
Net inc
109,000
b92,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo sales
11,925,000
8,814,000
Net loss
319,000
486,000
b-Net loss  The company said the latest quarter includes a provision for an unrealized gain on marketable securities of $45,000.


Helicopter Crash Under Investigation
LEAD: Texas Department of Public Safety officers comforting one of the victims of the crash of an Army helicopter Thursday in Chico.
Ten soldiers were killed and eight were injured after the CH-47D Chinook burst into flame and fell into a pasture.
A team of investigators from the Army Safety Center at Fort Rucker, Ala., was sent to investigate.


SEIZURE OF MARINE IS DIVIDING SHIITES
LEAD: A conflict among Lebanon's Shiite Moslems over the abduction of an American marine has grown into an armed confrontation and led to a rift in the main Shiite militia.


ONEIDA LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ONEIDA LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
81,684,000
62,149,000
Net inc
6,550,000
b8,358,000
Share earns
.81
-
Yr sales
314,102,000
267,092,000
Net inc
16,690,000
b7,258,000
Share earns
1.97
-


Church Elders Reject Leniency For Swaggart
LEAD: The elders of the Assemblies of God today rejected a recommendation of lenient punishment for the Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart and returned the issue to Louisiana church officials for reconsideration.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An obituary of the artist Isabel Bishop on Monday omitted the sponsor of an achievement award she received from President Jimmy Carter in 1979.
It was the Women's Caucus for Art.


YESTERDAY'S MEDAL WINNERS
LEAD:  Alpine Skiing: Women's Slalom  Gold: Vreni Schneider, Switzerland  Silver: Mateja Svet, Yugoslavia  Bronze: Christa Kinshofer-Guetlein, West Germany  Biathlon: 30-km Relay  Gold: Soviet Union  Silver: West Germany  Bronze: Italy  Speed Skating: Women's 1000-Meters  Gold: Christa Rothenburger, East Germany  Silver: Karin Kania, East Germany  Bronze: Bonnie Blair, United States


CORRECTION
LEAD: A dance review of the Ballet of Los Angeles on Monday carried an incorrect reference, taken from the program notes, to an event in which two guest artists won silver medals last year.
It was the New York International Ballet Competition.


Jersey Panel Backs Shift in Tax Burden From Towns to State
LEAD: A panel endorsed, 23 to 4, a $1.1 billion proposal today to assist counties and municipalities by cutting property taxes and shifting many expenses to the state.


Federated, Campeau Near Deal
LEAD: Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Campeau Corporation yesterday moved close to a $6.3 billion merger that would be the biggest ever in American retailing.


Dollar Posts Broad Decline; Gold at 10-Month Low in U.S.
LEAD: The dollar slipped yesterday against most major currencies in quiet trading.


AYDIN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AYDIN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
41,410,000
34,405,000
Net inc
1,823,000
1,585,000
Share earns
.51
.42
Yr sales
149,240,000
136,791,000
Net inc
b14,806,000
6,952,000
Share earns
3.93
1.81


German Steel Week Cut
LEAD: West German steelworkers agreed with employers today to cut the workweek in the troubled industry to 36.5 hours, the shortest ever, beginning Nov. 1.
The agreement, covering the majority of West Germany's 150,000 steelworkers, is expected to be ratified by union members on Tuesday.
The powerful I.G.


SEOUL DECLARES AN AMNESTY, BUT NOT FOR EVERYONE
LEAD: In the first major test of its follow-through on election pledges, the new Government announced an amnesty today for hundreds of political prisoners.
But by refusing to release many dissidents, including several prominent ones, it faced charges of having reneged on commitments.


Coping: With a Consumer Problem
LEAD: It happens to every consumer: a transaction goes awry, an injustice is suffered.
Redress may be yours for the asking, but you have to know how to ask.


KELLOGG CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KELLOGG CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
965,000,000
809,300,000
Net inc
82,300,000
70,400,000
Share earns
.67
.57
Yr sales
3,793,000,000
3,340,700,000
Net inc
395,900,000
b318,900,000
Share earns
3.20
2.58


U.S. to Offer Proposals to Fight Piracy
LEAD: The Reagan Administration, estimating that American business is losing more than $60 billion a year from the piracy of patents and intellectual property, said today that it was pressing for an international mechanism to suppress the practice with economic deterrents.


Personal but Not Confidential: A New Debate Over Privacy
LEAD: The privacy of personal records -those collected by employers, insurers, retailers and other private organizations - is primarily protected by the lack of interest in them, not by law.
When curiosity or a business interest develops, privacy may vanish.


LOGITEK INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LOGITEK INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
1,043,605
1,031,450
Net inc
121,592
191,178
Share earns
.07
.11
6mo sales
1,790,544
1,388,804
Net inc
130,714
81,899
Share earns
.08
.05


Soviet Captures Biathlon Relay
LEAD: The Soviet Union took the lead on the second lap and coasted to victory by 1 minute 7.4 seconds over West Germany today in the 30-kilometer freestyle biathlon relay at the Olympic Winter Games.


Category Widened of Cubans Who Can Be Deported Home
LEAD: Cuban immigrants who commit crimes in the United States can be deported to their homeland, even if they have obtained United States citizenship, the Commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service has said.


Bronx Courthouse Named for Former District Attorney
LEAD: Tullia Merola with a bronze plaque bearing the likeness of her late husband, District Attorney Mario Merola, at a ceremony yesterday.
Mr.
Merola was the prosecutor at the building at 161st Street and the Grand Concourse for 14 years before his death in October. ''This fortress represents the indomitable spirt of the Bronx and of its namesake, Mario Merola,'' said Paul Gentile, his successor.


WEAN INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WEAN INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,929,000
35,613,000
Net loss
b11,187,000
2,958,000
Yr sales
83,449,000
140,309,000
Net loss
b11,603,000
c8,380,000
b-After gains of $267,000 for the quarter and $790,000 for the year representing cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Bid for Atlas Stake
LEAD: A New York investment firm, the Tweedy Browne Company, said that it had rejected an offer from the Edgar Bronfman family to buy its 20 percent stake in the Atlas Corporation for $34 a share.
But the firm also said it was actively seeking to sell its stake in the gold-exploration concern, which is based in Princeton, N.J.


XEBEC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*XEBEC CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1988
1987
Sales
7,600,000
27,500,000
Net loss
1,068,000
966,000
The latest quarter results included a net gain of $4,360,000 stemming from the settlement of the Xebec development partners dispute and $676,000 of charges from the settlement of the KS xA marketing judgment against Xebec.


Restoring Abyssinian Church's Stature
LEAD: During 34 years of charismatic and controversial leadership under the Rev.
Adam Clayton Powell Jr., Harlem's Abyssinian Baptist Church came to be regarded as black New York's most influential institution.
The church stood alone as the epitome of the civil rights movement in the area, its influence extending from the network of black churches to City Hall and


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA WATER CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA WATER CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
18,076,000
18,640,000
Net inc
2,318,000
2,173,000
Share earns
.74
.73
Yr rev
77,730,000
73,687,000
Net inc
b9,945,000
7,057,000
Share earns
3.17
2.43
Shares outst
3,097,000
2,413,000


GOLDEN VALLEY MICROWAVE FOODS INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOLDEN VALLEY MICROWAVE FOODS INC (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
100,210,000
47,900,000
Net inc
12,347,000
4,900,000
Share earns
1.04
.51


GORBACHEV URGES ARMENIANS TO END NATIONALIST FUROR
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev, faced with one of his most difficult challenges since taking office, called on Armenians today to end nationalist protests that have disrupted two Soviet southern republics.


Baker Presses Seoul to Spur Imports
LEAD: Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d told South Korea's new Government today that the United States expected it to move quickly to accept more imports and to strengthen the value of its currency, the won.


Judge Bars U.S. Damages in Shuttle Suit
LEAD: The widow of an astronaut who was killed when the space shuttle Challenger exploded cannot sue the Government for damages because her husband was on military duty at the time, a Federal district judge has ruled.


TELEVIDEO SYSTEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TELEVIDEO SYSTEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 29
1988
1987
Sales
24,510,000
27,072,000
Net loss
4,475,000
b163,000
b-Net income


CONCHEMCO INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CONCHEMCO INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,564,000
5,606,000
Net inc
417,000
366,000
Share earns
.73
.64


Spending And Income Rise 0.3%
LEAD: American personal income and consumer spending both rose at moderate rates of three-tenths of 1 percent in January, less than half the increases posted in December, the Commerce Department reported today.


Death on Slopes Is Ruled Accident
LEAD: Officials said today that no one appeared to be to blame for the death of the Austrian Olympic team's physician in a skiing collision Thursday.


A 'Puppet' Turns Patriot in Panama
LEAD: President Eric Delvalle acted in Panama's best interests Thursday when he tried to dismiss Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega as head of the military.
But Noriega loyalists won't go along, and Panama moves closer to a showdown.
Washington's best stance for now is to continue backing the democrats while staying out of the field of fire.


Rumania Rejects U.S. Trade Benefits Over Human Rights Dispute
LEAD: Apparently rebuffing American demands for improvement in human rights policies, Rumania has told the United States it no longer wants the trade benefits that Washington links to such policies, the State Department announced today.


The Calgary Spirit
LEAD: Measured in gold, silver and bronze, the United States hasn't gotten the kick out of Calgary's Olympics that it did from the one-sided extravaganza at Los Angeles four years ago, or from the spectacular American victory in hockey at Lake Placid in 1980.
But who cares?
Calgary has been what the Olympics ought to be - a test of the best, and a great show.


GBI INTERNATIONAL INDUSRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GBI INTERNATIONAL INDUSRIES INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,704,280
-
Net loss
b376,769
-
9mo net loss
b264,479
-
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $181,812 for the quarter and $496,104 for the 9 months.


Books of The Times; A Happy Ending
LEAD:  THE HEARTS AND LIVES OF MEN. By Fay Weldon. 357 pages. Viking. $18.95.


About New York; Suing the Hand That Insists On Feeding Them
LEAD: Even the soreheads who live in St.
Margaret's House, a low-income, congregate-care, pretty fair deal across the street from the South Street Seaport in lower Manhattan, thank their lucky stars for the blond brick building.
The best part of it is that no one's rent is more than 30 percent of his income.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday with an article about the alignment of political convention delegates in New York misidentified a Democratic candidate for delegate for the campaign of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.
He was Allen Roskoff.


Good Fortune: The Leap Year Saves Tax Rise
LEAD: In Dogpatch, the comic strip environs of Li'l Abner, leap year signals Sadie Hawkins Day, a special celebration.
In New York City, human error could have cost the city a bundle in real-estate taxes, but leap year saved the day.


Choosing Up Sides: What a Poll Found
LEAD: Robertson backers are more likely to call themselves independent, Bush Republicans are younger, and more Dole supporters are women.


Cocoa Plunges on Reports Of High Estimate on Surplus
LEAD: Prices of cocoa futures dropped sharply yesterday amid fears that a London trading house was preparing to release an estimate showing a jump in surplus production.


BLOCK, H &amp; R INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BLOCK, H &amp; R INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
118,652,000
101,721,000
Net loss
11,173,000
8,228,000
9mo rev
325,400,000
276,050,000
Net loss
17,607,000
17,056,000
The company said that during its latest first quarter it reduced its effective income tax rate to reflect the effect for the full fiscal year of the lower corporate tax rates provided by the 1986 Tax Reform.


George J. Charles, 69, A Television Producer
LEAD: George Joseph Charles, a television producer and director, died Monday of a heart attack at Lancaster General Hospital in Lancaster, Pa.
He was 69 years old.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I call on you to display civic maturity and restraint, return to normal life and work, and observe social order.'' - Mikhail S. Gorbachev, in address to Armenians.  [ 1:4. ]


3 Judges Concern U.S. Coach
LEAD: Despite Debi Thomas's slim lead in the Olympic figure-skating competition, her coach said today that he doubted she would prevent Katarina Witt of East Germany from winning her second Olympic gold medal when competition ends Saturday night with the freestyle program.


Broker in Winans Case Is Sentenced
LEAD: Peter N. Brant, a former stockbroker who was a major prosecution witness in the R. Foster Winans case, was sentenced yesterday to eight months in prison for trading stocks using inside information about forthcoming articles in The Wall Street Journal.


Darkly Go The Cubbies
LEAD: Highpockets doesn't understand why the Cubs are doing what they're doing.
Highpockets has lived in Chicago all of his life, and for him lights in Wrigley Field are not, as some believe, a matter of coming out of the Dark Ages.


P A M TRANSPORTATION SERVCES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*P A M TRANSPORTATION SERVCES INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,931,119
12,428,473
Net inc
142,653
556,224
Share earns
.03
.11
Yr rev
68,738,529
42,382,559
Net inc
2,553,924
2,643,578
Share earns
.52
.69
Shares outst
4,891,929
3,846,134


NOBILITY HOMES reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NOBILITY HOMES
Qtr to Oct 31
1987
1986
Sales
4,098,933
6,057,423
Net inc
b129,500
c236,333
Share earns
.10
-
Yr sales
17,843,742
18,517,701
Net inc
b91,169
c1,243,436
Share earns
.07
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $15,300 for the quarter and year.


PRICE INDEX JUMPS IN NEW YORK AREA
LEAD: Consumer prices for the New York-northeastern New Jersey area rose twice as fast as those in the rest of the country in January, spurred largely by increases in housing and grocery costs, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said yesterday.


BRALORNE RESOURCES LTD reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BRALORNE RESOURCES LTD (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
80,061,000
100,986,000
Net loss
b28,572,000
b60,572,000
b-Includes extraordinary charges of $14,417,000 for the latest year and $22,031,000 for year-earlier period.


Soccer Plan for Pay Cuts
LEAD: The Major Indoor Soccer League said yesterday that it would go out of business in June unless the league's players' union agreed to reduce each team's salary cap from $1.275 million to $898,000.
The league gave the Players Association until April 15 to respond.


Of Political Flip-Flops in the '88 Democratic Race
LEAD: After campaigning more or less at arm's length for months, three of the main Democratic Presidential candidates began slugging it out in earnest this week with direct attacks on one another's records.


NORIEGA PREVAILS AS ASSEMBLY PICKS A NEW PRESIDENT
LEAD: After rebuffing a presidential move to oust him, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega appeared today to have solidified his power as Panama's principal leader.


Rangers Move Up As Devils Drop
LEAD: The Rangers climbed into a potential playoff spot for the first time since Nov. 1 and the Devils fell into the cellar of the Patrick Division for the first time this season as a result of New York's 2-1 triumph tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Musical for Children
LEAD: ''Simple Things,'' an original musical for children, will begin Monday at the Manhattan Children's Museum, 314 West 54th Street.
The production, which has a medieval theme, will be presented by the Children's Musical Entertainment.
The show was jointly created by Sherry Edelman, Lynn Schnurnberger, Emily Squires and Seymour Wishman.


Poll Finds Sharp Differences Among Supporters of Presidential Candidates; Democrats Have Distinctive Bases
LEAD: Democrats used to complain that their Presidential candidates were too much alike.
That is still a matter of debate, but it is clear that their supporters are different.


Chrysler Seeks Growth in China
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation hopes to add passenger cars to the line of Jeeps that it produces in China, a top official of the auto maker said.
Gerald Greenwald, head of the Chrysler Motors division of the Chrysler Corporation, said his company had been negotiating with First Automotive Works of Changchun, in northeast


HURCO COMPANIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HURCO COMPANIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,523,000
10,852,000
Net inc
b657,000
b124,000
Share earns
.15
.02
Shares outst
4,002,000
3,673,000
b-Includes tax credits of $197,000 for the latest quarter and $80,000 for the year-earlier period.


Blair Third to East Germans
LEAD: Maybe there was too much peanut butter on her sandwich.
Or not enough jelly.
Or maybe it was just too much East German speed.
Whatever it was, Bonnie Blair had to be satisfied with a bronze medal tonight in the 1,000-meter sprint of the XV Olympic Winter Games.


Unanswered Questions
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Warns Aspirin Makers On Heart Attack Advertising
LEAD: Federal regulators warned major aspirin makers Friday that advertisements asserting that aspirin prevents heart attacks might be harmful to public health and a violation of Federal law.


Behind the Timetable
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mimi Moody, Puzzle Creator, 62
LEAD: Mimi Moody, a composer of crossword puzzles for newspapers, including The New York Times and The International Herald Tribune, died of emphysema Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Campaign Spending Bill Is Lifted After Vote Fails to End Filibuster
LEAD: Democrats withdrew a bill to limit spending on Congressional elections today after failing for the eighth time to break a Republican-led filibuster against the measure.


Rock: Peter Blegvad Sings
LEAD: At Peter Blegvad's show at Drums on Wednesday, a person unaware of Mr.
Blegvad's earlier avant-rock credentials would have heard one more talented, if collegiate, singer and songwriter, working with a bland, mid-70's sound.


HUFFY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HUFFY CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
75,266,000
63,837,000
Net inc
1,690,000
1,367,000
Share earns
.30
.25
Yr sales
340,551,000
294,698,000
Net inc
10,091,000
5,907,000
Share earns
1.83
1.10


New Ban on Activity of Foes Has '60 Root
LEAD: The South African Government's crackdown this week on anti-apartheid groups is in many ways a logical progression of the process that began with the outright banning of the African National Congress and the Pan Africanist Congress in 1960.


AM INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AM INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Revenue
300,694,000
291,757,000
Net loss
b3,131,000
cd2,669,000
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
605,507,000
569,289,000
Net inc
b3,462,000
d8,217,000
Share earns
-
.09


NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 3-6, 32  In Panama's power struggle, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega appeared to cemented his place as principal leader after rebuffing a Presidential move to oust him.
Instead, the President himself was declared removed by the National Assembly.
Page 1  Support for civilian rule in Panama was voiced by the Reagan Administration.


Hospital Head Forced to Quit
LEAD: New York City officials have forced the head of Goldwater Memorial Hospital to resign amid a prosecutor's investigation into a private group associated with the institution.


PULITZER PUBLISHING CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PULITZER PUBLISHING CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
99,334,000
92,603,000
Net inc
5,703,000
4,258,000
Share earns
.55
.47
Yr rev
367,349,000
329,115,000
Net inc
15,320,000
16,443,000
Share earns
1.46
1.22


N.H.L. Suspends Two
LEAD: Twice in three days over the last week, John Kordic of the Montreal Canadiens and Gord Donnelly of the Quebec Nordiques squared off, once before the opening face-off last Saturday and the other time just after it last Tuesday.
Yesterday, both were suspended for five games each by Brian O'Neill, the National Hockey League vice president.


Justice Kennedy Shuns Special Prosecutor Case
LEAD: Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, who joined the Supreme Court last week, has disqualified himself in one of the most momentous cases the Court has faced in years, the challenge by the Reagan Administration and others to the constitutionality of the special prosecutor law.


Film: William Richert's 'Reardon'
LEAD: ''A Night in the Life of Jimmy Reardon'' is hardly the first film about the sexual exploits of a very busy adolescent boy, and it won't be the last.
But since it's the work of William Richert, director of the unforgettably nutty little masterpiece ''Winter Kills,'' it's anything but standard issue.


AMERICAN INTEGRITY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN INTEGRITY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
16,596,000
19,605,000
Net loss
b713,000
c2,390,000
Yr rev
74,740,000
70,419,000
Net inc
b3,105,000
c5,489,000
Share earns
.46
.82
b-After realized investment gains of $25,000 and $75,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Nance's New Home
LEAD: Acknowledging that the move was contrary to his franchise's commitment to build with young players, Wayne Embry, general manager of the Cleveland Cavaliers, said he traded to obtain Larry Nance because Nance was the best small forward the team could expect to find for several years. ''We thought that it was an opportunity to get an All-Star small forward,'' Embry said.


INSIDE
LEAD: Hockey Gold for Soviet  The Soviet Union beat Sweden to clinch first place in the Olympic hockey tournament, Vreni Schneider won her second Alpine race and Bonnie Blair took the bronze medal in 1,000-meter speed-skating.
Page 51.
Co-ops at the Plaza?
Two Manhattan real-estate developers say they are close to buying the Plaza Hotel for $400 million to $500 million and are considering converting some of its rooms to cooperative apartments.


NL INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NL INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
360,030,000
299,861,000
Net loss
b30,593,000
c10,728,000
Yr sales
1,371,469,000
1,283,203,000
Net loss
b19,913,000
c324,195,000
b-After a pre-tax gain of $27.3 million on curtailment or settlement of pensions for the quarter and year, and after a pre-tax loss of $718,000 for the quarter and a pre-tax gain of $3,882,000 for the yeart from the sale of business units, and a loss from discontinued operations of $30,025,000 for the both periods.


Estonians Remember Their Independence Day
LEAD: A crowd of about 5,000 gathered near the Estonia Theater in Tallin Wednesday night to mark the 70th anniversary of the Estonian declaration of independence from Russia.
Estonia is now part of the Soviet Union.
The picture was taken by a Finnish photographer from a nearby hotel. (AP)


U.S. Puts Full Support Behind Delvalle
LEAD: The United States threw its full support today behind Panama's civilian President, Eric Arturo Delvalle, in his attempt to dismiss Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega and remain in power himself.


PAUL HARRIS STORES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PAUL HARRIS STORES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
59,321,000
53,801,000
Net loss
437,000
c2,823,000
Share earns
-
.31
Yr sales
190,242,000
160,966,000
Net inc
b4,750,000
6,157,000
Share earns
.52
.68


Head of Mecham's Defense Quits, And New Team Seeks Trial Delay
LEAD: Gov.
Evan Mecham's chief attorney has withdrawn from the impeachment case of the Governor, and a new defense team asked the Arizona Supreme Court to stay the Senate trial scheduled to begin Monday.


IRT PROPERTY CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IRT PROPERTY CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
6,924,280
4,942,818
Net inc
1,368,005
b4,104,792
Share earns
.14
.43
Yr rev
26,768,236
17,170,753
Net inc
7,897,978
c10,055,274
Share earns
.83
1.18


Bridge:; When a Foursome of Norths Get Together to Play a Game
LEAD: A tourist postcard recently arrived from Charles Coon of Gloucester, Mass., who represented the United States in world championship competition 26 years ago.
It came from the tiny town of Porvenir on the Chilean island of Tierra Del Fuego, his last civilized port of call en route to the South Pole.


Ford to Overhaul 2 Plants in Ohio
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would invest $320 million in two Ohio plants that are to manufacture a new-generation Ford Thunderbird and Mercury Cougar.


Living With Violence: Disbelief and Fear Shake South Jamaica
LEAD: When the man known only as Arjune and his family moved into a vacant three-story house on Inwood Street and 107th Avenue in South Jamaica, Queens, last September, the double lot was overgrown with weeds and littered with whisky bottles and vials for crack.
He cut back the brush, cleaned the lot and had the house painted and remodeled.


JAMES ROSATI, 76, SCULPTOR NOTED FOR MONUMENTAL WORKS, IS DEAD
LEAD: James Rosati, a sculptor whose monumental yet precisely crafted geometric works stand in the gardens and plazas of many art museums and corporate headquarters, died Wednesday of a heart attack at his home in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 54.


Maurizio Pollini to Play Beethoven Sonatas
LEAD: The pianist Maurizio Pollini will play Beethoven's middle sonatas in three recitals at Carnegie Hall, March 9, 14 and 21, at 8 P.M.
The first program will comprise Sonatas Nos. 12-15; the second, Nos. 16, 17, 18 and 21, and the third, Nos. 22-26.


Most Latin Nations, Ending Reticence, Back Deposed Panamanian
LEAD: Most Latin American Governments today condemned the move to dismiss Panama's civilian President in a confrontation with the military ruler.


GUEST SUPPLY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GUEST SUPPLY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
15,234,000
8,100,000
Net loss
2,390,000
b9,000
b-Net income  The company said the loss for the latest quarter includes non-recurring charges of $890,000 for severances, consulting fees and costs associated with the proposed divestiture of its retail division.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD:  Questions appear on page 18.


Ruling Allows Immediate Use Of Barge as Jail
LEAD: An appeals court said yesterday that New York City could begin transferring jail prisoners immediately to a temporary prison barge moored in the East River on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.


Poll Finds Sharp Differences Among Supporters of Presidential Candidates; Robertson Republicans Stand Out
LEAD: It's not always easy to tell a Bush Republican from a Dole Republican.
But Pat Robertson's supporters really stand out, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll of people who say they vote in Republican primaries.


INTELOGIC TRACE INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTELOGIC TRACE INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 30
1988
1987
Revenue
32,841,000
33,719,000
Net loss
447,000
b435,000
Share earns
-
.03
6mo rev
64,396,000
68,528,000
Net loss
3,236,000
b2,921,000
Share earns
-
.17


Piano: Nina Tichman
LEAD: The shimmering textures of Claude Debussy's piano works can seem three dimensional in the right hands, yet many pianists present the music's intricacies as if through a layer of gauze.
Wednesday evening, in the second of three Merkin Concert Hall recitals devoted to Debussy's complete piano music, Nina


SOVIET TO HOLD ART AUCTION IN PACT WITH SOTHEBY'S
LEAD: The Soviet Culture Ministry and Sotheby's auction house announced an agreement today to hold the first international art auction in Moscow since the Bolshevik Revolution.


Ex-Commuter Pained
LEAD: To the Editor:


LYNCH CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LYNCH CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,210,000
3,244,000
Net inc
b721,000
337,000
Share earns
.52
.24
Yr rev
16,558,000
11,327,000
Net inc
b906,000
898,000
Share earns
.66
.65
b-Includes an extraordinary credit of $362,000 for both the quarter and year.


Rio Journal; A City Awash in Beauty and Deluged With Peril
LEAD: Carlindo Teixeira, a man of few means but great love for Rio de Janeiro, has to make some hard choices this week.


Drug Smugglers Used Cuban Base For U.S. Shipment, Jury Charges
LEAD: Two Federal indictments unsealed today charge 17 people with smuggling Colombian cocaine into Florida through a Cuban military base.
A Federal drug official said the operation apparently had official cooperation in Cuba.


Federal Action Seen as Option In Brawley Case
LEAD: Saying he did not want Tawana Brawley to become ''a pawn in a political shell game,'' a lawyer for the black Dutchess County teen-ager said yesterday that he would turn to Federal officials if Governor Cuomo did not replace the State Attorney General, Robert Abrams, as the special prosecutor in the case.


Couple Is Slain in Brooklyn
LEAD: An elderly couple were fatally stabbed yesterday in their Brooklyn apartment, the police said.
The couple's son was arrested in the slayings.
The victims, Michael Gaurilou, 81 years old, and his wife, Theresa, 78, were stabbed about 4:30 P.M. in an apartment at 765 Ninth Street in the Kensington section.


Dispute in South China Sea
LEAD: Vietnam says China has landed troops on two reefs in the South China Sea claimed by both countries, according to a Communist Party newspaper.
The paper, Nhan Dan, said Chinese had landed on the reefs in the Spratly Islands between Vietnam and Malaysia.
The area is said to have oil deposits.


IVACO INC reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IVACO INC
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,170,000,000
1,940,000,000
Net inc
b33,337,000
b44,092,000
Share earns
.55
1.11
b-After a special charge of $5,014,000 for the latest year and special gains of $1,035,000 for the year- earlier period.


Music: Ronstadt in Mariachi Show
LEAD: As Linda Ronstadt has floated from one musical genre to another over the past decade, she has often exuded the aura of a privileged storybook princess wafted by magic carpet from enchanted world to enchanted world. ''Canciones de Mi Padre,'' the elaborately produced show of Mexican mariachi music that she brought to the City Center Theater on Thursday for a four-night run, carries Ms.


Specialist Sanction
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that a fifth firm of specialists - market makers on the floor of the exchange - would lose the right to deal exclusively in a stock because of poor performance during the market collapse last October.


Fiona and Nicola, Venitia and Pilla
LEAD: I am helplessly in love with English women.
Well, not with the women themselves but with their names.
The names, in solitary splendor, unconnected to any face or body, float by me every morning in the Forthcoming Marriages announcements in The Times of London.


Music: The Berg Quartet
LEAD: It made perfect sense that the Alban Berg Quartet, whose playing often resembles a civilized discussion among amiable gentlemen, should decide to begin its all-Beethoven program at Carnegie Hall on Thursday evening with the String Quartet No. 2 in G (Op. 18, No. 2), sometimes known as the ''conversation quartet.


Shamir Resists Shultz on Parts Of Peace Plan
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz was reported to have met resistance today from Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to at least two key elements of American proposals aimed at starting Arab-Israeli peace talks.


Metromedia Is Buying Chain of Steakhouses
LEAD: In a foray into a business far removed from its history, the former media giant, the Metromedia Company, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the company that owns the Ponderosa restaurants.


NATIONAL ENTERPRISES BANK reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL ENTERPRISES BANK (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
20,635,000
21,277,000
Net loss
b4,946,000
c233,000
Yr sales
90,241,000
84,230,000
Net loss
3,975,000
c3,254,000
Share earns
-
.21
b-After an extraordinary loss of $350,000.


Bush, a Cautious Front-Runner Again, Avoids Attacks and Personal Campaigning
LEAD: George Bush is back to broad themes, attacks that leave his targets unnamed and campaign events that do not include much handshaking with the voters.


Obituary of James Marcus Seemed an Editorial
LEAD: To the Editor:


FINANCIAL CRISIS IN SAN FRANCISCO
LEAD: Mayor Art Agnos said today that San Francisco faced a $172.4 million deficit in the next fiscal year and city workers would have to be furloughed, city services reduced and transit fares increased.


USLICO CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*USLICO CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
112,375,000
146,278,000
Net inc
b7,450,000
c7,589,000
Share earns
.67
.68
Yr rev
483,571,000
542,285,000
Net inc
b36,714,000
c31,914,000
Share earns
3.27
2.77


REDKEN LABORATOREIS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*REDKEN LABORATOREIS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
28,004,000
29,208,000
Net inc
387,000
1,147,000
Share earns
.14
.38
Shares outst
2,796,000
3,020,000
6mo sales
58,621,000
58,563,000
Net inc
1,780,000
2,406,000
Share earns
.62
.80
Shares outst
2,893,000
3,019,000


4 More Palestinians Killed in Protests
LEAD: Four Palestinians were killed today as widespread protests continued in the Israeli-occupied territories.


It's All in Genesis
LEAD: To the Editor:


Officer Guarding Drug Witness Is Slain
LEAD: A rookie New York City police officer was shot to death early yesterday as he guarded the home of a Queens man who had complained to the police about crack dealers bedeviling his South Jamaica neighborhood.


U.S. to Order P.L.O. Mission Closed
LEAD: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d has decided to close the Palestine Liberation Organization's observer mission to the United Nations but is prepared for the P.L.O. to take legal action that may delay the closing for several months, Reagan Administration officials said today.


3 Guitarists
LEAD: Jimmy Ponder, Rodney Jones and Bobby Broom, three guitarists, are to play a tribute to the guitarist Wes Montgomery tonight at the Jazz Center of New York, 380 Lafayette Street (505-5660).
Sets begin at 9 and about 10:30 P.M.; tickets are $10.


GASCARD INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GASCARD INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,175,924
1,810,253
Net loss
1,792,365
730,011
9mo rev
3,619,908
4,994,819
Net loss
4,239,000
2,407,371


Donald S. Macdonald, Real-Estate Broker, 82
LEAD: Donald S. Macdonald, a real-estate executive, died of emphysema Thursday at Sarasota (Fla.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Siesta Key, Fla.


DATA I-O CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATA I-O CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
16,936,000
17,852,000
Net loss
5,638,000
b1,169,000
Share earns
-
.12
Yr sales
66,271,000
66,464,000
Net loss
4,280,000
b4,528,000
Share earns
-
.45


Photo of Dalit Paz Warshaw (NYT/Dith Pran); Music Prodigy, 13, Reflects on Her Work
LEAD: Dalit Paz Warshaw was about a year old, in bed with a high fever, when her aunt put on a record of Israeli songs.
The infant heard it once, ''perking right up,'' her mother said. ''Then she sang half the record back - on pitch of course, and remembering all the Hebrew words.'' That's when Ruti Warshaw began to suspect her baby daughter might be a genius.


UNIVERSAL MATCHBOX GROUP LTD reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNIVERSAL MATCHBOX GROUP LTD (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
60,000,000
88,900,000
Net loss
b10,140,000
c8,975,000
Share earns
-
.92
Yr sales
221,600,000
257,500,000
Net loss
b35,742,000
c16,574,000
Share earns
-
1.78


Lone Officers Aren't Unusual, Authorities Say
LEAD: New York City Police Department officials said yesterday that it is not unusual for a sole police officer to be assigned to guard a witness's home, as Officer Edward Byrne was when he was killed early yesterday.


Pirates Sign Berenyi
LEAD: Bruce Berenyi, who last pitched in the major leagues with the Mets in 1986, has signed a minor league contract with the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Berenyi, a right-hander with a 45-55 record in seven major league seasons, is 33 years old.
He went to spring training with Montreal last year, but underwent shoulder surgery in March and did not play.


First-Run Syndicators Find Tight TV Market
LEAD: In recent years, the business of making programs for local television stations has been one of the fastest-growing segments of the entertainment industry, if also the least glamorous.


BUSINESSMAN BOUGHT WHITE ROCK IN 50'S
LEAD: Alfred Y. Morgan Jr., chairman of the White Rock Products Corporation, died of cancer Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.


INFOTECHNOLOGY reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INFOTECHNOLOGY (OTC)
As of Dec 31
1987
1986
Assets
69,183,485
42,624,636
Share earns
9.46
8.28
Shares outst
7,311,759
5,147,000
Assets represent net assets.


Life Insurance Sales Rise 11%
LEAD: New sales of life insurance increased 11 percent in 1987, to $11 billion, an industry group reported this week.
In releasing its figures


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Why the Embargo
LEAD: To the Editor:


Resorts Holder Rejects Trump Bid
LEAD: Dale V. Scutti, an investor based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said he would not tender his 5.6 percent stake in Resorts International Inc. class A common stock to the New York real estate developer Donald J. Trump.


School Boards Favor AIDS Mandate
LEAD: Local school boards normally resist orders from above, but many say they need strong state leadership to overcome community obstacles to teaching children about AIDS.


HARLEYSVILLE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HARLEYSVILLE GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
58,543,000
43,143,000
Net inc
b4,208,000
c12,732,000
Share earns
.59
1.78
Yr rev
207,752,000
154,680,000
Net inc
b14,834,000
c21,526,000
Share earns
2.07
3.46


Dance: Peridance Offers Work Based on Folk Mass
LEAD: Peridance is a company connected with a popular Manhattan dance school of the same name.


Guidepost; Saving Your Shoes
LEAD: Pavement, rain and snow can damage shoes quickly.
With preventive care each season, it's possible to avoid buying new shoes every year.
The cost of repairs should be a guide to whether the shoe is worth fixing.
Do-it-yourself maintenance can delay professional repairs.
Frequent polishing of shoes is the best way to preserve them, industry experts say.


A Killing Mutes 'Joyous' Event Of Police Dept.
LEAD: The slaying of a rookie police officer who was guarding the home of a witness in a drug case in Queens yesterday cast a pall over a promotion ceremony for 91 people at Police Headquarters, where the Police Commissioner, Benjamin Ward, had planned a congratulatory speech.


U.S. to Require Wider Security for Largest Airports
LEAD: The Government is drafting regulations that will require the nation's largest airports to install new security systems to screen the movements of airport and airline workers.


Music: English Chamber Orchestra
LEAD: The English Chamber Orchestra is one of the quality brand names for record buyers in this country, so it was no surprise to see a healthy crowd on hand for the orchestra's first Manhattan concert of the season Wednesday night at Avery Fisher Hall (it will also appear at Carnegie Hall tonight).


Sale of Prescription Drugs by Mail Booming but Some Warn of Risks
LEAD: In an effort to hold down their health-care bills, people with chronic diseases are increasingly buying prescription drugs from mail-order houses that offer bulk discounts.


INTERSTATE GENERAL C O L P reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*INTERSTATE GENERAL C O L P (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,295,000
8,100,000
Net inc
3,126,000
1,257,000
Share earns
.31
.16
Shares outst
9,900,000
7,900,000
Yr rev
41,655,000
39,556,000
Net inc
10,217,000
5,950,000
Share earns
1.05
.75


Memphis Slim, Singer Of Blues, Is Dead at 72
LEAD: Memphis Slim, an American blues singer who lived in Paris for more than two decades, died Wednesday in Necker Hospital here, his family announced today.
He was 72 years old.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption in The Home Section on Thursday about decorative rose patterns gave an incorrect price for a Bellini ceramic pitcher and washbowl set.
It is $90 at Bloomingdale's.


PIEDMONT NATURAL GAS CO reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PIEDMONT NATURAL GAS CO (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
141,178,925
150,673,855
Net inc
17,864,992
14,442,139
Share earns
2.00
1.66


Cassini Drives a Winner
LEAD: He's 74 years old, the oldest man to be given his first driving license in harness racing, and he was coming off an inauspicious debut the day before.
Besides, his career had been built on fashion lengths, not racing lengths.
No matter.
Oleg Cassini drove a 10-1 shot to victory at Freehold Raceway Thursday, the second day of his career as a professional harness racing driver.


College Students in Ohio Protest C.I.A. Recruiting
LEAD: William C. Schuerman, dean of the University of Dayton, talking to students in the president's office.


TONKA CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TONKA CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
208,500,000
71,700,000
Net loss
12,200,000
b3,400,000
Share earns
-
.45
Yr rev
382,600,000
293,400,000
Net loss
7,500,000
b22,300,000
Share earns
-
3.04


Military Manufacturers Warned on Reliability
LEAD: The head of the Tactical Air Command says he has told companies producing fighter planes and other war materiel that he will no longer accept their products unless they are made more reliable.


New York City Fights For 4,600 Jobs at Chase
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Bank, which may relocate 4,600 of its Manhattan employees, is becoming a cause celebre among New York City officials trying to attract more development to the boroughs outside Manhattan.


Uncle Sam, Statesman - and Sucker
LEAD: Every American President has to decide what the nation's interests are in a given foreign country and how much influence the U.S. can have over that country's policies.
President Reagan this week demonstrated reasonable success in his calculations concerning South Korea - and ugly failure in his miscalculations concerning South


Sun Ra and Arkestra
LEAD: Sun Ra leads his Arkestra tonight and tomorrow at Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street (242-1785).
Sets are at 10 and 11:45 P.M. and 1:30 A.M; there is a $12 cover and a $6 minimum.


NATIONAL GYPSUM CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NATIONAL GYPSUM CO
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
352,118,000
358,101,000
Net loss
b4,588,000
c97,189,000
Yr sales
1,379,786,000
1,432,276,000
Net loss
b22,409,000
-
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $6.6 million resulting from the repurchase during the latest fourth quarter of $120.1 million face value of 15 1/2 percent discount debentures.


Art Show on the Seasons
LEAD: Winter in the city - as well as summer, spring and fall - can be seen in a free photography exhibition that opens March 8 at the Arsenal Gallery in Central Park, at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street.
About 30 photographs by Jonathan Weld that capture the seasons' changes are featured in the show, which will be up through April 1.


The Day of Light
LEAD: When Democrats talked about holding a brokered convention they thought of Mayor Daley and a smoke-filled room, forgetting that Mayor Daley was dead and that nobody smoked anymore.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


The 'Secret' Warranty
LEAD: How long does an automobile warranty last?
Sometimes a lot longer than the document states.


Treasury Bond Prices Up Sharply
LEAD: The Treasury securities market rebounded sharply yesterday, largely in reaction to further declines in the price of energy and gold.
But the bond market largely ignored another key inflation indicator, the Consumer Price Index, which rose a modest three-tenths of 1 percent in January.


Farm Export Gains Seen
LEAD: The Agriculture Department has predicted that the value of United States agricultural exports will rise to a four-year high in the fiscal year 1988.


Army to Reduce Officer Corps
LEAD: The Army, in a budget move, has announced plans for cutting the number of officers including appointment of a board to select more than 350 lieutenant colonels and colonels for early retirement.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Nordiques Beat Red Wings: Michel Goulet's 35th goal of the season, 5 minutes 57 seconds into the second period, broke a 2-2 tie last night and Quebec held on for a 3-2 victory in Detroit.
Mario Brunetta, the Nordiques' goalie, stopped the final 27 shots he faced as Quebec won for only the second time in its last six games.


Wrestling Benefit
LEAD: The 1984 Olympic gold medalist in heavyweight freestyle wrestling, Bruce Baumgartner, was named yesterday to lead a 10-man team against 10 wrestlers from the Soviet Union in a meet March 29 at Madison Square Garden.
The meet is a benefit for the Kiwanis' Say No to Drugs Foundation, the United States Olympic wrestling team and the Metropolitan Wrestling Association.


Common Market Makes Deal With Moroccans on Fishing
LEAD: Morocco and the European Community reached an agreement on Thursday that will allow thousands of Spanish and Portuguese fishermen to resume fishing in Moroccan waters.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
7.50
DISCOUNT RATE
6.00
6.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.54
6.60
6.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.59
5.63
5.45
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
6.76
5.79
5.44
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.95
8.02
6.97
30-YR.


USG Rejects Bid by Desert
LEAD: The USG Corporation, the nation's leading maker of gypsum board, today rejected a $2.1 billion takeover bid from Desert Partners L.P., telling the investment group that it had ''no interest in discussing your proposal.''


Q-MED INC reports earnings for Year to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Q-MED INC (OTC)
Year to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
13,897,884
7,092,176
Net loss
1,934,075
b946,568
Share earns
-
.17
b-Net income and after a tax credit of $465,539.
The year-ago results restated to reflect the 100 percent stock dividend paid May 11, 1987.


Trash Cargo Returning
LEAD: A cargo ship laden with refuse is abandoning its 18-month, six-nation quest for a place to dump 15,000 tons of Philadelphia incinerator ash, a Coast Guard official said today.


ERC INTERNATIONAL INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ERC INTERNATIONAL INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
31,981,000
23,558,000
Net inc
907,000
bc1,347,000
Share earns
.22
-
Yr rev
121,291,000
95,280,000
Net inc
4,981,000
c337,000
Share earns
1.13
.08


Judge Drops Murder Charges In the Hurricane Carter Case
LEAD: A Superior Court judge today formally dismissed 22-year-old triple murder charges against Rubin (Hurricane) Carter a week after prosecutors said they would not seek a third trial of the former boxer.


A Downhill Sport, a Rising Business
LEAD: Snowboarding, a relatively new winter sport that combines elements of surfing, skateboarding and sailboarding, has grown so popular that it is creating a new industry built around the boards and bringing new consumer money to ski shops and resorts.


William Harold Cox, Outspoken U.S. Judge
LEAD: William Harold Cox, a Federal district judge who enraged civil rights advocates with his remarks about blacks but presided over a 1967 trial that convicted eight members of the Ku Klux Klan of killing three civil rights workers, died Thursday at his home here.
He was 87 years old.
Judge Cox, the son of a Sunflower County sheriff, had a successful practice in corporate and civil law before being named to the Federal bench in 1961.


RIO ALGOM LTD reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RIO ALGOM LTD (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,530,000,000
1,360,000,000
Net inc
93,100,000
70,200,000
Share earns
2.12
1.58
The results are in Canadian dollars.


Israel Liberated Gaza From a Nightmare
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nets Lose; 1-25 on Road
LEAD: Rick Mahorn scored 13 of his career-high 34 points in the first quarter tonight as the Detroit Pistons beat the Nets, 137-109, handing them their 25th road loss in 26 games.


ITT FINANCIAL CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ITT FINANCIAL CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
37,700,000
b10,500,000
Yr net inc
154,200,000
b122,600,000
b-After an extraordinary net charge of $29.3 million for retirement of high coupon public and private debt for both the quarter and year.


MACGREGOR SPORTING GOODS INC reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MACGREGOR SPORTING GOODS INC (AMEX)
Year to July 31
1987
1986
Revenue
77,254,977
78,182,064
Net loss
b18,000,058
559,287
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $495,312.


New Financial Tool Revives Old Block
LEAD: Five years ago, the block on Underhill Avenue in the Prospect Heights section of Brooklyn looked like many streets in New York City's most devastated neighborhoods.
Opposite an elementary school stood two small apartment buildings that, though deteriorating, were still occupied.
They were flanked by three abandoned shells.


AMERICAN WOODMARK CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN WOODMARK CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
29,951,000
26,198,000
Net inc
725,000
1,143,000
Share earns
.11
.17
9mo sales
96,022,000
86,483,000
Net inc
4,428,000
5,285,000
Share earns
.64
.79


IU in Reversal On Buyout
LEAD: IU International Inc. said this evening that its board had withdrawn its approval of a $21.50-a-share leveraged buyout led by the Dean Witter Capital Corporation.
The bid, made on Monday, was immediately topped by an unfriendly offer of $22-a-share by Neoax Inc.


3 From S.I. Indicted In Stolen-Car Case
LEAD: Three men from Staten Island were indicted yesterday on charges that they had failed to report $1.4 million in income from a stolen-car ring.
They are also under indictment in North Carolina, where, United States Attorney Andrew J. Maloney said, they sold cars stolen from New York.


Concerns Agree to Quit Kosher Meat Business
LEAD: Three companies accused of fraudulently selling as kosher thousands of pounds of non-kosher poultry have agreed in a legal settlement to leave the business, officials said today.


Mexico Plan On Bond Bids
LEAD: The Government will announce by next Friday its response to foreign banks' secret bids for bonds offered by Mexico in an innovative plan to reduce its $105 billion in foreign debt, the Treasury Department said.


NEW YORK MARINE &amp; GENERAL INURANCE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEW YORK MARINE &amp; GENERAL INURANCE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
19,782,644
16,189,030
Net inc
b3,835,127
c3,218,769
Share earns
.44
.37
Yr rev
75,986,279
63,082,408
Net inc
b14,726,519
c11,425,058
Share earns
1.70
1.33


Cubs and Commitment
LEAD: Mayor Eugene Sawyer of Chicago said yesterday he will not sign the ordinance allowing the Cubs to play at night unless they agree to stay until 2002. ''I am convinced they will sign'' such an agreement, Sawyer said. ''I heard from them last evening.'' The City Council approved Sawyer's plan to allow 8 night games this year and 18 each subsequent year until 2002, but the Mayor said, ''We won't sign unless we get a commitment from the Cubs that they will stay.


ADVANCED POLYMER SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADVANCED POLYMER SYSTEMS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
934,000
95,000
Net loss
796,000
929,000
Yr rev
1,684,000
489,000
Net loss
3,841,000
2,211,000


FLEXI-VAN CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FLEXI-VAN CORP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
16,667,000
16,123,000
Net inc
4,076,000
2,291,000
Share earns
.59
.31
Shares outst
6,938,000
7,450,000
Yr rev
66,525,000
61,494,000
Net inc
13,038,000
6,086,000
Share earns
1.78
.82
Shares outst
7,328,000
7,450,000


U.S. Curbs Movements Of Its Forces in Panama
LEAD: Defense Department officials said today that United States military personnel in Panama had been ordered to remain circumspect and stay out of the political turmoil there.


The Political Children Of George Washington
LEAD: To the Editor:


Huge First Boston Losses In Mortgage Securities Seen
LEAD: The First Boston Corporation stands to lose as much as $30 million because of problems in its mortgage securities trading division, executives at the firm said yesterday.


To Emanuel Ax, the Future Is Increasingly the Present
LEAD: ''Wouldn't it be unbelievable,'' muses Emanuel Ax, ''for someone to read that there was this fine pianist in Beethoven's time but he never actually opened a piece of Beethoven's?'' Contemporary music has a new, if unlikely, champion.
Though he has built his considerable reputation interpreting the works of Chopin, Brahms, Beethoven and Mozart, Mr.


Year-Round on the Ocean: Condos for Long Branch
LEAD: Every apartment of the High Horizon condominium in Long Branch, N.J., will face the ocean, but its developer expects few to be used as summer homes.
Jeffrey Aidekman, vice president of Mountain Development Corporation, said a survey indicated 70 percent of potential buyers for the 58 two- and three-bedroom units, priced from $195,000 to $400,000, would live in the beachfront community year round.


WHEN BAD NEWS WAS NO NEWS
LEAD:  UNCOVERING SOVIET DISASTERS  Exploring the Limits of Glasnost.
By James E. Oberg.
Illustrated. 317 pp.
New York: Random House. $19.95.


East German Wins Gold
LEAD: Katarina Witt winning the gold medal for figure skating last night at the Olympics. (Reuters) Section 5.


Outdoors; Exposition in Suffern Is Largest in the Northeast
LEAD: A visit to the 11th annual World Fishing and Outdoor Exposition in Suffern, N.Y., Wednesday to Sunday, might help persuade you that spring is nigh.


FRAMES OF MIND
LEAD: BARBRA STREISAND'S lawyer in the movie ''Nuts,''


Those Good Old Free Speech Days at De Witt Clinton High
LEAD: To the Editor:


Two Men Rob Jeweler of $4 Million in Gold
LEAD: Gold chains, estimated to be worth $4 million, were taken Friday afternoon from a safe in a midtown jewelry business after two gunmen tied up the owners.


TV COMPETITION SERVES THE ISLAND
LEAD: The article examining News 12  [ ''Cable News Station Catching On,'' Jan. 24 ]  provided valuable information about the nation's first (and excellent) 24-hour all-news regional service.


ON TRAIL AND MEADOW
LEAD: BACK-COUNTRY skiing is cross-country skiing in areas that are not groomed and tracked by machines.
You can do back-country skiing in three kinds of areas: public parks and state forests, where bridle paths and carriage roads become perfect ski trails in winter, touring centers that have back-country trails linked to their main trail systems, and true wilderness regions, which may involve skiing up and down mountains on hiking trails.


Comedy's Bad Boys Screech Into the Spotlight
LEAD: Resplendent in glittering rock-star garb, Eddie Murphy prowls the stage in his hit concert movie, ''Raw,'' like a sleek young lion.


Waste-Site Agency Job Thankless
LEAD: FORMER State Senator Frank J. Dodd has spent much of the last six years as one of the most unpopular men in New Jersey.
By his own description, he is ''The King of the LULU's.''


WOTAN WANTS HIS TOYS BACK
LEAD:  EXPECTING SOMEONE TALLER  By Tom Holt. 218 pp.
New York: A Thomas Dunne Book/St.
Martin's Press. $15.95.


Cornell Clinches Tie for Ivy Title
LEAD: Sam Jacobs scored 29 points and James Paul had 20, both career highs, as Cornell stretched its winning streak to 11 games and clinched a share of the Ivy League title tonight with a 94-84 victory over Brown.


Not All American Jews Think and Act the Same
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Driving to Music


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: The Swaggart Case; When a Religious Leader Strays, What Path Should Be Followed?
LEAD: FROM the anguished Rev.
Dimmesdale of Nathaniel Hawthorne's ''The Scarlet Letter'' to the urbane Rev.
Tom Marshfield of John Updike's ''A Month of Sundays,'' the drama - or melodrama - of men of the cloth brought low by the sins of the flesh has captured the American imagination.
And ever since Sinclair Lewis charted the rise and fall of Elmer Gantry and H.


Dutch Skater Wins Again
LEAD: Only two months after surgery on her right foot, Yvonne van Gennip of the Netherlands tonight created the opportunity to win three speed-skating gold medals in the XV Olympic Winter Games.


PROSPECTS
LEAD:  Advice for a New President


DATA UPDATE: February 28, 1988
LEAD:
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*Residential in millions of dollars)
Jan. 88
Jan. 87
Change
New York
101.9
93.1
9%
New Jersey
191.8
190.3
1%
Connecticut
83.4
108.6
-23%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES
(Averages)


John Guinness, 52, Irish Banker, Dies in Fall
LEAD: John Guinness, an Irish banker and a cousin of the Guinness brewing family, was fatally injured today in a 500-foot fall on Snowdon Mountain in northern Wales, the police reported.
He was 52 years old.


No Smoking Or No Work
LEAD: MANY companies restrict smoking on the job.
The USG Corporation may be the first in the nation to ban it outright - after work as well as at work.


WHAT'S NEW IN CORPORATE DINING
LEAD: ''FEEDING employees is part of the corporate culture,'' said Stephen Elmont, president of Creative Gourmets Ltd., a Boston contractor that provides corporate food services. ''Business and industry will continue to provide food.
How they'll provide it is the question.''


When the Brainchild Has Been Neglected
LEAD: THE player who has introduced a new move - and presumably has analyzed it with at least reasonable thoroughness - should normally be expected to handle his brainchild's resulting complications better than his surprised opponent, yet there are exceptions.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: The Practical Traveler column on Jan. 31 gave an incorrect price for the rental directory of the Recreation Vehicle Dealers Association of North America.
It is $5.


Jewels to Go
LEAD: JEAN FORMAN is a jeweler with a mission. ''These are the kinds of things people should wear when they travel, so they can feel relaxed and don't have to worry about hiding them,'' she said. ''Or they might be just the thing for someone who has the originals in the vault.''


Debate in London: Can Good Books Be Popular?
LEAD: In 1942 George Orwell, deploring Kipling's mass appeal, wrote, ''It is no use pretending that in an age like our own good poetry can have any genuine popularity.''


The Markets Need Stricter Regulation
LEAD: WELL before last October, many seasoned investment professionals worried that newly developed techniques and instruments for trading stocks would destabilize markets.
Now studies of the October crash by the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Brady Commission and others conclude they were right.


Hong Kong Tunnel Will Link 2 Towns on Kowloon in '91
LEAD: Hong Kong will spend more than $512 million on a 2 1/2-mile toll tunnel linking two towns on the Kowloon Peninsula, an official said today.


BLUE SKY
LEAD: Simple or zany, sparkling or smooth, familiar or foreign - whatever the angle, if a new spring style is good, it's got a sunny-side-up quality.
This sense of high spirits, of having a bit of fun with fashion, pervades the best of the new clothes.
It can come from the cut and shape of the shoulders, the skirt or the sleeves.


Miss Martell Is Affianced
LEAD: The engagement of Karen Jean Martell to Timothy Paul Angelotti, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas C. Angelotti of Midland, Mich., has been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Martell of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.


Pilgrim Mothers
LEAD: To the Editor:


When the Ballets Russes Danced Round the World
LEAD: So much important informa-tion is being brought to light that conferences of dance historians are becoming exciting occasions.


Trina Schreier to Wed R. K. McKeever, Artist
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Weeks of Buffalo have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Weeks's daughter Catherine Callanan Schreier to Robert King McKeever, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher K. McKeever of Water Mill, L.I.
The couple plan to marry in May.


Tobacco on Trial
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Vietnamese, Realism Is in Short Supply
LEAD: VIETNAMESE officials ask American visitors, over and over: Why does Washington put such effort into improving relations with Moscow and Beijing, but not with us?


He Peered Into The Souls of Russia's Artists
LEAD: The exhibition of paintings and drawings by Leonid Pasternak that can be seen at the Jewish Museum through May 22 will be irresistible to those who prize the long-lost and quite irretrievable world of the pre-revolutionary Russian intelligentsia.
It was both a completely cosmopolitan world and a world without prejudice.


Iraqi Planes Attack Teheran; Raids on Refineries Reported
LEAD: Iraq said its warplanes pounded Iran's major oil refineries in a wave of air strikes today that also attacked Teheran.
Iran vowed to hit Baghdad in retaliation.


Life on Midwest Farms Is Reaping Loneliness
LEAD: Allen Adair is a tall, strapping 30-year-old bachelor with a square jaw, an honest smile and a steady job.
He is just the kind of man many single women say they can't seem to find.


For Democracy
LEAD: As Roh Tae Woo took over as President last week in the first peaceful transfer of power in South Korea's history, he served notice that his tolerance for violent dissent would be limited.
Mr.
Roh, a former general who once participated in a military coup, promised an era of ''democratic reforms and national reconciliation,'' but said the days were over when civil unrest could be ''irresponsibly created on the pretext of freedom and participation.


Abduction Renews Hostage Policy Debate in U.S.
LEAD: The abduction of yet another American in Lebanon has renewed debate in foreign policy circles about President Reagan's handling of hostage situations and the effectiveness of his ''no deals'' approach.


RUNNING OUT OF TIME AND LANDFILLS: Incinerators: Safety Issue in Congress
LEAD: WITH budget cutting and contra aid behind it for the moment, Congress is about to focus its energies on new matters, among them a lack of safety standards for the disposal of garbage.


Behind the Hits
LEAD: To the Editor:


The State Must Help the Mentally Ill
LEAD: GOVERNOR KEAN'S failure, in his recent budget proposal, to provide adequate financing for New Jersey's mental-health system demonstrates a startling insensitivity to the needs of the mentally ill men and women of this state.


Accounting 101
LEAD: To the Editor:


Conversion to Offices Debated
LEAD: THE future of a century-old Hempstead house has become the focal point of a larger issue: the conversion of old houses into offices and the consequent change in patterns of neighborhoods within the village.
The Zoning Board of Appeals is scheduled to decide the house's status Thursday.


Trump's Vision: Pro and Con
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Discovery' and Rediscoveries In Two Shows in the County
LEAD: FRANK S. HERRMANN, at the White Plains Public Library, is an artist brought back from the dead.
The 11 painters and sculptors forgathered at the Hudson River Gallery in Ossining are rediscoveries, too, although very much alive.
Herrmann, who lived from 1866 to 1942, never had to worry about money, while the Ossining artists can have worried about little else in their early years, because all worked for the Works Progress Administration's Federal Art Project.


'88 WINTER OLYMPICS: Sports of The Times; Steinbrenner Becomes the New Olympic Baron
LEAD: On a Sunday afternoon late in 1986 in the Las Vegas airport, George Steinbrenner was discovered sitting patiently between flights. ''I'm on my way to Tampa,'' he explained. ''I just flew down from Reno, where I attended a United States Olympic Committee meeting.''


Morocco Cliff Slide Kills 21
LEAD: A cliff, weakened by days of rain, collapsed today onto a shanty settlement, killing at least 21 people and injuring 6 others, the authorities said.
Rescue workers dug through ruins in search of other victims.
Those left homeless by the disaster and numerous families whose homes were threatened were evacuated and given temporary refuge in the suburbs.


Pop: Daugherty and Field
LEAD: THE fact that Bill Daugherty and Robin Field do almost one song every minute during the hour that they are onstage at the Ballroom might simply suggest that they sing very fast.
But nothing could be farther from their intention.


For Families Of Hostages, Ire and Hope
LEAD: An acquaintance stopped Marilyn Langston at her local supermarket yesterday to ask how her father was doing.
She had to pause a moment to control her temper and keep from shouting the response that first came to mind: ''How's he doing?
He's being held at gunpoint, is that good enough for you?''


Bukharin's Rehabilitation Foreshadowed in 'Darkness at Noon'; Another Perestroika
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE NATION: Meese as Target; Democrats Intend to Use 'Sleaze Factor' as an Issue
LEAD: AT his news conference Wednesday night, President Reagan did not hesitate to defend his Attorney General, Edwin Meese 3d.


May Wedding Planned By Beth Whittingham
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Whittingham of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Elizabeth Whittingham to Charles Frederick Goehring, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford Goehring of Falmouth, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.


FROM FIVE DEVICES, A WORLD OF MACHINES
LEAD: NO flashing lights or electronic marvels are in the new exhibition at the Thames Science Center in New London.
Featured instead are such items as scissors, nutcrackers and a doorknob.


Weicker and Lieberman Shape Images for Senate Campaign
LEAD: WHEN Attorney General Joseph I. Lieberman announced in Hartford last week his campaign for the United States Senate, he presented himself as ''the people's lawyer'' who worried about such issues as high housing costs and who would fight for ''everyday pocketbook concerns.''


NAVY AND MAINERS CLASH ON MISSILES
LEAD: Stephen Bean likes to think he's a patriotic fellow.
He served in the Air Force doing maintenance on B-52's and he believes people sometimes have to put up with some inconveniences for national defense.
But cruise missiles over Maine?
He's not too sure about that.


Question of the Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: As long as George Steinbrenner is alive.  HARVE KAYE  Brooklyn


Canada Has Hard Time Deporting Palestinian
LEAD: After weeks of embarrassment over its efforts to deport a convicted Palestinian terrorist inadvertently accepted in Canada as an immigrant last year, the Canadian Government is pondering how it bungled a 7,000-mile round trip that took him from Toronto to London and back in 24 hours.


Broader Day Care Is Aim of Harvard Union Drive
LEAD: American labor's fight for new members is crystallizing around a new issue, affordable child care, on an unlikely battleground, Harvard University.


Question of the Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: I do not think he will make it to opening day.
FRANCIS W. RODGERS  Rensselaer, N.Y.


Trident Missile Succeeds
LEAD: A Navy Trident 1 missile was launched successfully today from a submerged submarine off Cape Canaveral, after two failed launchings last year and one on Feb. 6, officials said.
The missile was fired down the Air Force Eastern Space and Missile Test Range at 10:27 A.M. from the U.S.S.
Stonewall Jackson and landed in the Atlantic.


Troupe Tries to Preserve Old Style of Operettas
LEAD: WHAT is operetta?
Who's to say when old Broadway musicals like ''Carousel'' and current hits like ''Les Miserables,'' all all with serious and symbolic overtones, are being so classified?


Moscow Opens Door a Bit to Former Citizens
LEAD: For more than 50 years, citizens of the Soviet Union who were allowed to leave understood that they would not be welcome back as visitors.
But over the last year or two significant numbers of recent Soviet emigres have been permitted to return to their homeland for short visits.


Constance Smith And Bank Official To Marry in June
LEAD: Constance Gene Smith's engagement to Hollis Winslow Plimpton 3d, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Plimpton Jr. of Chestnut Hill, Mass., has been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
James W. Smith of Greenwich, Conn.
The couple plan to marry in June.
Miss Smith, an associate production manager at Harrison Services in Manhattan, a publisher of fashion catalogues, attended the Chapin School and graduated from the Greenwich Country Day School, Miss Porter's School and the University of Richmond.


Where Do the Wires Go? A Guide
LEAD: BY making a map of your home's electrical circuits, you can know at a glance which paths of wiring routed throughout the house serve which outlets.
A map can also help you determine whether any circuits supply too many outlets and thus are overloaded.


Smile! Your House Is on the Assessor's Tapeb
LEAD: THE newest use of videos has nothing to do with rock-and-roll music.
Assessors are increasingly using taping to help them in compiling revaluation records.


Miss Bentsen Has Wedding
LEAD: At the First Presbyterian Church in Houston, Elizabeth Jean Bentsen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth E. Bentsen of Houston, and Stephen David Newton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philippe W. Newton of Bethesda, Md., were married yesterday by the Rev.
John W. Lancaster.
Molly Bates Bentsen was her sister's maid of honor, and Richard Philippe


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  'A COUNTRY GARDEN'  One early harbinger of spring for the past 28 years has been the Greenwich Greenfingers Garden Club Show.
This year's theme is ''A Country Garden.''


Distracting Details
LEAD: 'We waste a lot of rhetoric and excessive time on a couple of little issues while the forest behind us is burning. '


Woman Injured by Escargot While Dining at a Restaurant
LEAD: A woman celebrating her birthday was burned and temporarily blinded by a snail that burst on her plate at a restaurant here, the police said today.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Some of the floorboards in our house have raised slightly at the edges, and they often break when stepped upon.
As a result, we now have spaces between the boards.
This condition seems to have developed after the floors were stained.
Can you help us solve this problem?


Student Drinking Creates Problems for Colleges
LEAD: The alcohol-induced death of a Rutgers University freshman earlier this month underscored one of the most persistent frustrations of college officials: Despite their best efforts, there is often little they can do to prevent underage drinking and fraternity hazing.


Florida Favorite Is Facing Big Test
LEAD: By Land By Sea, who had been knocking heads with Very Subtle in California all winter, had an easy time with a softer field today and scored a front-running 2 1/4-length victory over Queen Alexandra in the $200,000 Rampart Handicap at Gulfstream Park.


Beer Is Excellent as, Yes, an Ingredient
LEAD: ALMOST every nation in the world makes beer of some sort.
And these days it seems that they are all being sold here.


Selling Your Sanity With the House
LEAD: THE telephone rings.
After a few terse words, you dash around the kitchen storing your half-cooked dinner in the refrigerator and everything else, including the baby's toys, in the dishwasher.


Bad Approach To Hockey
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Lauren Razook Becomes Bride Of John M. Roth
LEAD: St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Lauren Claudia Razook, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Razook of Rye and Lake Placid, N.Y., to John Michael Roth, a son of Mrs.
Robert E. Roth Jr. of St.
Louis and the late Mr.
Roth.
The Rev.
Gary P. Fertig performed the ceremony.


Early Music Is Icumen In on New Disks
LEAD: Early music is flourishing on recordings.
The term early music serves as a convenient label for the vast number of works composed before the universal adoption of our modern scales, around the time of Bach.
Pre-Bach music is based on scales that differ significantly from our present major and minor, and therefore often sounds strange to modern listeners.


MR. GIBBON AND THE HUNS
LEAD: This, I think, is a very reasonable passage of English prose:


For March 8, A Screen Test That's Crucial
LEAD: Obsessed with secrecy and armed with the latest technology, the electronic hucksters of the 1988 Presidential campaign have been working feverishly on a remarkable political challenge: how to advertise their candidates for a single day's set of contests that span more than 150 television markets.


New York Area Is Ranked High on Environment
LEAD: For the second year in a row, New York, New Jersey and Connecticut ranked among the top six states in efforts to establish and enforce environmental programs, according to a report released this week.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  FORGING PEACE: The Challenge of Central America.
By Richard R. Fagen. (PACCA/Basil Blackwell, Cloth, $24.95; Paper, $7.95.) For Americans seeking an alternative to the ''covert intervention, surrogate war, and systematic deceit'' that brand our Government's policy in Central America (as George McGovern puts it in the foreword to ''Forging Peace''), this political primer offers some refreshing ideas for reform.


Pop: Paul Carrack and Band
LEAD: PAUL CARRACK, a gifted English soul singer, songwriter and keyboardist, has been assiduously plying his talents on records for 18 years.
But it was not until this winter that he finally scored a top-10 hit as a soloist, with ''Don't Shed a Tear.'' An impeccably crafted blue-eyed soul ballad, the record distills Mr.


Rome
LEAD: To the Editor: Several inaccuracies should be noted in Paul Hofmann's article ''Agrippa and the Hamburger'' (Travel, Jan. 24).
The Pantheon is on what is properly called the Piazza della Rotonda, and only two of Italy's four kings are buried there: Vittorio Emmanuele II (d. 1878) and Umberto I (d.


Lauren Teschemacher to Marry in July
LEAD: Lauren Elizabeth Teschemacher and Robert Andrew Casey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. Casey of Westwood and Edgartown, Mass., plan to marry in July, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Carl A. Teschemacher of Chatham, N.J., and Jupiter, Fla., have announced.


Health Insurance
LEAD: To the Editor: I have good news for millions of Americans insured by Blue Cross and Blue Shield.


Hardy Flower Seed to Plant Now
LEAD: LAST call to start seed indoors of petunias, snapdragons, impatiens, coleus, salvias, begonias, lisianthus, ageratums and geraniums, which need a long season to grow and set flower buds.
Use sterile mixes and keep seed pans moist and warm to hasten germination; once seeds have sprouted, put them under fluorescent lamps to accelerate growth.


MIND, INTUITION AND FEET
LEAD:  DAYS ON EARTH  The dance of Doris Humphrey.
By Marcia B. Siegel.
Illustrated. 333 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $30.


'Japan-Bashing' Becomes a Trade Bill Issue
LEAD: A GROUP of congressmen swinging sledgehammers demolished a Toshiba radio on the Capitol steps last summer, acting out their anger at disclosures that a subsidiary of the Japanese electronics conglomerate had joined a Norwegian consortium to illegally sell submarine technology to Moscow.
No similar demonstration was mounted against the Norwegians or, later, against a French arms company that sold similar equipment to the


PROTEST LEADERS AGREE TO SUSPEND ARMENIAN UNREST
LEAD: After receiving assurances from Mikhail S. Gorbachev that he would personally study their grievances, Armenian nationalist leaders called today for a one-month suspension of the demonstrations that have shaken two southern Soviet republics, Armenian representatives said.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: FRANK LANGELLA still hasn't forgiven a girlfriend of many years ago who persuaded him to get rid of the romantic letters he had received from other women.


JAMES WEBB'S NEW 'FIELDS OF FIRE'
LEAD: BATTLE SHIP gray clouds lay at anchor in the Annapolis sky.
On the Severn River, beyond the parade ground where the Secretary of the Navy, James H. Webb Jr., stood at attention, sailboats sauntered by.
Midshipmen passed in review, dark sleeves and starched white trousers swinging in unison to the martial beat of the Marine Corps Hymn.


Nancy Abelson to Wed Broker
LEAD: The engagement of Nancy Stanton Abelson to Avery Fabyan Knox, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour H. Knox 3d of Buffalo, has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel O. Abelson of New York.
An October wedding is planned.


Touching All the Bases At the Five Level
LEAD: NOBODY noticed it at the time, but one deal in the 1987 world championships in Jamaica, shown in the diagram, produced a combination of circumstances that is probably unique on a major occasion: At all four tables in the semifinal play-offs the five-level was reached.
All four suits were selected for the final contract.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Old Orchard Beach; Condo Auction: Pro and Con
LEAD: LEO A. MOREAU had his eye on a particular condominium in this Maine community for some time - a two-bedroom unit on the seventh floor of an eight-story stucco building, with a majestic view of the Atlantic.


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Trump's Vision: Pro and Con
LEAD: To the Editor:


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Suburban Offices; 25% Vacancy Rates Starting to Worry Developers
LEAD: SAY this about 1988 within the suburban office markets of New York City: At least it is not 1986, when developers put up far too many buildings.
Or 1987, when the stock market crash shattered the expansion plans of many companies.


WHEN THE U.N. TOOK THE FIELD
LEAD:  THE FORGOTTEN WAR  America in Korea 1950-1953.
By Clay Blair.
Illustrated. 1,136 pp.
New York: Times Books. $29.95.


A Banker With A Gift for Giving, A Golden Touch And a Taste For Dining Well
LEAD: AT THE VERY HEART OF the financial district of London, known as the City, there is an intersection where eight streets converge.
Approach it from the west, with the Bank of England on your left and the Mansion House - the Lord Mayor's residence - on your right, and you will find yourself facing the Royal


Opera: New Cast for Met 'Siegfried'
LEAD: THE Metropolitan Opera's current production of Wagner's ''Siegfried,'' unveiled two weeks ago, was offered Thursday evening with an almost entirely new cast.
Only Wolfgang Neumann, as Siegfried, and John Macurdy, as the offstage voice of Fafner, remained from the original lineup.


AU REVOIR TO IDEOLOGY
LEAD: IT WAS WITH SOME amusement that Roland Dumas, an urbane lawyer who served as Foreign Minister under the Socialists, recently recalled the roiled and polarized political climate of France's last presidential campaign, in 1981. ''I know people in the liberal professions, friends of mine, who quit France, went to England or elsewhere after Mitterrand was elected,'' said Mr.


Big East Conference; St. John's Loses to Boston College
LEAD: Dana Barros scored 27 points to lead Boston College to a 74-65 Big East Conference victory over St.
John's tonight in a game played at Boston Garden.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  2 MUSICAL GENERATIONS  Experienced and novice musicians star in two concerts this afternoon.
Unfortunately, a scheduling conflict makes it impossible for music lovers to be able to contrast what was and is with what is and will be; audiences will have to choose between the Senior Citizens Pops Orchestra and the Training Orchestra.


'Womansword' in China
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 New International Magazines to Open
LEAD: A NEW magazine called Northeast International Business - said by its founders, David E. Moore and David L. Hall, to be the country's first regional/international business publication - will be delivered Tuesday to 40,000 targeted business people.


In the Occupied West Bank, Another Day of Bloodshed
LEAD: The battle started at about 1 P.M. with an obscene gesture from an Israeli soldier, and rocks hurled by Palestinians brandishing their flag.


Rightists Rally in Pretoria, Urging a White State
LEAD: More than 6,000 flag-waving, cheering members of the Afrikaner Resistance Movement, South Africa's far right wing, mounted a show of strength here today to demand an all-white state.


U.S. CHARGES CUBA SMEARS DELEGATE
LEAD: The Cuban Government has begun a campaign to discredit a former Cuban political prisoner and writer chosen by the Reagan Administration to lead the United States delegation to this year's meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva, according to American diplomats.


The Right Fight Against AIDS; As the Admiral Says, Focus on Addicts
LEAD: Through the fog of fear and ignorance, the AIDS epidemic in America is taking clearer shape.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article on Feb. 14 about a proposed reorganization of the White Plains school system incorrectly described Richard H. Bernstein, who spoke at a public hearing.
Mr.
Bernstein, a parent who lives in the city's Mamaroneck Avenue School district, urged the school board to consider proximity as one factor in matching students to a school.


Jerry Zaks, Guide to 'Wenceslas Square'
LEAD: IN LARRY SHUE'S PLAY ''WENCES-las Square,'' opening Wednesday at the Public Theater, a narrator recalls the 1974 trip he took to Czechoslovakia as a college student, along with a professor named Vince Corey, who was finishing up a book about the Prague Spring and its aftermath.
The narrator (Victor Garber) is now a scenic designer whose artistic ambitions were fueled and whose maturity was shaped during this visit to Prague, and he tells his story as a kind of tribute to Vince Corey, his onetime mentor.


Looking Ahead at 94
LEAD: WHEN my Uncle Alex moved to Bellport in the fabulous 50's, I was approaching my roaring 20's and he was approaching his sizzling 60's.
He was old, or so I thought.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption accompanying an article on the USA/Mobil indoor track and field championships in some copies of yesterday's Sports Pages misidentified the runners who finished in a dead heat in the women's 55-meter dash final.
Evelyn Ashford was in lane six and Gwen Torrence was in lane four.


Outrageous Remark on TV
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Santana Comes Full Circle
LEAD: Rafael Santana pointed casually toward a distant corner of the Yankee clubhouse today, and suddenly the memories returned.
It was 1980.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: A Great Day for the Polish NEW YORK STATE has added a commemorative day to honor Polish-Americans, but no one has bothered to tell Long Island's Polish-Americans about it.


Trump's Vision: Pro and Con
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Family Marks Its Horse-And-Carriage Sesquicentennial
LEAD: THE Farclough clan is preparing to celebrate the sesquicentennial of a family tradition.


Beer Is Excellent as, Yes, an Ingredient
LEAD: ALMOST every nation in the world makes beer of some sort.
And these days it seems that they are all being sold here.


From Hits To Misses, But Why?
LEAD: There was a time when he cared only about dreaming up new ideas and persuading friends and relatives to work for nothing, but that was before he got lucky.
That was before his sleeper, his pet project, his low-budget labor of love became an overnight sensation.
After that, studio executives pursued him tirelessly and the press sang his praises; everyone seemed to share the single happy hope that this golden goose would repeat his miracle.


Nina A. Katzander to Marry Jason Curtis Gold, Architect
LEAD: Nina Adler Katzander, a senior at Hunter College of the City University of New York, and Jason Curtis Gold, an architect with the firm of Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill in New York, plan to marry in June.
The future bride is the daughter of Barbara Adler Katzander of New York, who has announced her engagement, and the late Howard L.


Tobacco on Trial
LEAD: To the Editor:


Arafat Names a Delegation to Meet Shultz
LEAD: Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, said today that a delegation of Palestinians had been named to meet Secretary of State George P. Shultz during his Middle East tour, but that Mr.
Shultz had not said whether he would see them.


SEEKING AN END TO UNWANTED MAIL
LEAD: A few weeks ago you published a very interesting article about direct mail  [ ''Behind the Flood of Mail: Name Brokers,'' Jan. 24 ] , and the companies who provide us with the wealth of catalogues which we -even I - receive daily.
Some are addressed to people whom I call ''ghosts'' because they lived at this address long before me, the ''current resident.


Playing to a Parade of Different Tastes
LEAD: LATE last year, in the plush 60th-floor aerie that is the executive dining room for Chase Manhattan Bank, the Canteen Company, which has 1,600 corporate clients, sponsored its seventh annual culinary contest.
Canteen chefs for dining rooms of businesses and government agencies were able to exchange ideas and show off their skills before customers, peers and a panel of six judges.


INFORMER HOVERS ON TIGHTROPE AS DEFENSE WITNESS
LEAD: A mob informer who is no longer cooperating with the Government has appeared in the dramatically different role of a defense witness in a drug trial.


Hometown Is Preparing for the Eagle to Land
LEAD: This staid old spa town was delighted, though surprised, to discover that the Winter Olympics best-loved loser is a native son.


HORST: A MAN OF STYLE
LEAD: COCO CHANEL ONCE explained to Horst the essence of elegance. ''If you walk into a room and people say, 'What a marvelous dress,' you are badly dressed,'' the designer told the photographer. ''If they say, 'What a marvelous woman,' you are well dressed.''


Deborah Strauss Weds Craig Cogut
LEAD: The marriage of Deborah Charlotte Strauss, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Strauss of Riverdale, the Bronx, to Craig Myles Cogut, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Justin Cogut of Roslyn, L.I., took place last evening at the Harmonie Club in Manhattan.
Rabbi Emily Korzenik performed the ceremony.


MULTIPLEX CINEMA FEATURES TRAFFIC
LEAD: Your recent article about the new All-Westchester Saw Mill Multiplex Cinema in Hawthorne  [ About Westchester, Jan. 31 ]  completely missed what is, in our view, the most significant feature of the new center: traffic access in and out of the mammoth parking lot is entirely inadequate.
Our recent visit to the complex on a Saturday night provoked vivid and heated comparisons to a descent into hell, as we waited, and waited, for the traffic to inch down into the packed and poorly laid-out parking area.


National Hall: Westport Revival
LEAD: National Hall in Westport, Conn., is on the Saugatuck River, but no one need look outside to realize that. ''The basement is tidal,'' said Peter F. Tauck, general manager of the company restoring the structure, which is in a historic district. ''When the tide comes up, the cellar fills up.'' A leaky foundation is only one of troubles plaguing the one-time home of The Westport News, the Westport Bank and Trust and the Westport High School.


Knight Rerouted
LEAD: After driving nine hours down the length of Florida to report to the Baltimore Orioles' training camp in Miami, Ray Knight found out that he had driven about four hours too far.
The Orioles are still in Miami, to be sure, but while the former Mets star was on the road from South Carolina with his wife, Nancy Lopez, and their two daughters, the 35-year-old third baseman was being traded to the Detroit Tigers, whose camp is in Lakeland, Fla., 200 miles to the north of Miami.


THE WORLD: Arab and Israeli - The Roots of the Conflict; The Battleground from the Jordan to the Sea
LEAD: IN the West Bank, Gaza and Jerusalem, the conflict between Israeli and Palestinian is being shaped by a fratricidal agony: competing, centuries-old claims to the same precious strip of land between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean, and the right to exist there as a nation.


Moving Up Fast in the Software Sweepstakes
LEAD: WHEN the marketing folks at the Oracle Systems Corporation describe their impact on the competition, they like to talk about ''the autobahn effect.''


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Florham Park  $425,000  2 Lauri Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old ranch; c/a, fireplace in family room, 2-car attached garage; taxes $3,319.
Montclair  $150,000  43 Gray Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old colonial; den, porch, full basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,045.


CLOSE-UP LOOK AT POLAR BEARS IN MANITOBA
LEAD: YOU don't have to look far to see polar bears when you camp out with them on the shores of Hudson Bay near Churchill in Manitoba province.
Even at the cocktail hour, when you're having a snotch (Scotch poured over a cup of snow) and a smoked oyster, you're likely to hear and feel half a ton of bear slam against the school bus that serves the camp's meals and smack its black snout against a frosted windowpane inches from your face.


For Stylish Women, Jackets Required
LEAD: THIS season marks the return of the dinner suit, an ensemble that evokes the long-legged, cigarette-in-a-holder look of New York in the 40's.
Not many cigarette holders are in evidence these days (nor many cigarettes, for that matter), but the suit still wafts up its share of heady, nighttime-in-the-big-city sophistication.


Bukharin's Rehabilitation Foreshadowed in 'Darkness at Noon'
LEAD: To the Editor:


FAR AWAY FROM THE LONG LIFT LINE
LEAD: BEFORE they invented triple chairlifts and 45-minute lift lines, rear-entry plastic boots and step-in bindings, before ticky-tacky condos, discotheques and hot tubs displaced the forests, before snow reports on the radio, artificial powder on the slopes and pilferage in the parking lot, there existed a sport called skiing.


THE NATION: Regional Appeals; Candidates Try to Draw A Winning Map of U.S.
LEAD: GEORGE BUSH has campaigned as a Connecticut Yankee and a Texas cowboy.


Angry Crowd Disrupts Rally By Ku Klux Klan in Dallas
LEAD: A Ku Klux Klan protest against the Dallas Police Department's new affirmative action hiring plan turned into a melee today when a crowd of about 200 people charged the hooded Klansmen and other white supremacists.


Take Away the Fed's Independence
LEAD: THE popular version of the political economy in the 1980's describes a moral drama in which the good guys won.
The politicians, it is said, were wildly irresponsible in their conduct of fiscal policy, but Paul Volcker and the Federal Reserve saved us from ruin.


There We Go Again On Private Contra War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pro-Iran Kurdish Group Frees Three Italian Hostages in Iraq
LEAD: A pro-Iranian Kurdish group today released three Italian engineers who were taken hostage in Iraq last fall to protest Italian warships patrolling in the Persian Gulf, the Foreign Ministry reported.


Question of the Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: By April Fools Day.
That's when George Steinbrenner will inform us that Billy's hiring was a big joke.
JEFFREY DIAMANT  Staten Island


THE HIGH COST OF THINNESS
LEAD: SUCTIONING fat from the thighs, rump, knees and face may seem an extreme way to pursue good looks.
But the American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery announced recently that this technique, called liposuction, is ''safe and effective.'' Only 11 deaths, the surgeons said, have been reported since liposuction was imported from


AYCKBOURN'S LAUGHTER HAS A BITTER EDGE
LEAD: Last year, in an interview, Alan Ayckbourn said that he did not think he would ''ever write, or want to write, really heavyweight pieces,'' and categorized his forthcoming play as ''middleweight.'' He has now written three such plays in a row - ''A Small Family Business,'' ''Henceforward'' and ''Woman in Mind'' (now at the Manhattan Theater Club).


4 New One-Acters Enliven the Season
LEAD: A QUARTET of new one-act plays is not only enlivening the state's theater season, but also fortifying a modest emerging professional company now in its third year here.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  MABEL MERCER: A Life.
By James Haskins. (Atheneum, $19.95.) Mabel Mercer was the antithesis of a show-business personality.
She was shy, self-conscious and had little confidence in her singing talent.
She never reached a wide audience, but was a strong influence on singers who did - singers such as Frank Sinatra and Peggy Lee, who appreciated her superb craftsmanship.


Reed to Arrive Today and Is Likely to Get Nets' Coaching Job
LEAD: Willis Reed will be the next coach of the Nets.
The only thing holding up the official announcement, a source close to the negotiations said tonight, was finishing touches on a three-year contact.
The contract is expected to be approved Sunday by Darwin Dornbush, who has been representing Reed.


Fitting In on Campus at Princeton and Bard
LEAD: If there is anything that unifies all great college campuses, it is a sense of wholeness - a sense of place, a feeling that the identities of individual buildings have been played down in favor of something larger.
It is not that all the buildings on the best campuses look the same, although often enough they do.


Q and A
LEAD:  Uptown Landmark


CARVING UP AFRICA
LEAD:  THE RACE TO FASHODA  European Colonialism and African Resistance in the Scramble for Africa.
By David Levering Lewis.
Illustrated. 304 pp.
New York: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $24.95.


NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 1988
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-23


Special Today; Fashions of The Times - Magazine Part 2
LEAD: * The imaginative new spring fashions from Paris and New York.


THE REAL KEY WEST
LEAD: THE ''CONCH REPUBLIC'' is the only place in the United States where you can stroll past shrimp-pink houses shaded by chocolate-colored orchid trees and eat ''jelly'' coconuts with a spoon.
The Conch Republic is better known as Key West, where native islanders call themselves Conchs, after the giant sea snails that once sustained pirates and other renegades, and now feed tourists with conch chowders, fritters, salads, steaks, burgers and pizzas.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  UFO-ABDUCTIONS: A Dangerous Game.
By Philip J. Klass. (Prometheus, $18.95.) In his new book the U.F.O. debunker Philip J. Klass examines the current wave of reported contacts with unidentified flying objects, including the tale told by Whitley Strieber in his best-selling book ''Communion.'' Mr.


A FEW GOOD WOMEN
LEAD:  SOUND OFF!
American Military Women Speak Out.
By Dorothy Schneider and Carl J. Schneider. 259 pp.
New York: E. P. Dutton. $18.95.


The Heartland Still Belongs to Trains Ives (pg. 39)
LEAD: The most haunting sound ever made by an instrument of human devising is the far-off whistle of a steam locomotive.
The impact is doubled if the locomotive is visible in the middle distance, pulling a fast train from one city to another, blowing for every curve and crossing.
It's tripled if all this happens at night, so that you wake at 2 A.M.


A Contralto, 2 Pianists And a Horn Player
LEAD:  Anne Gjevang


Sunday Observer; Intimations of Mortality
LEAD: AS THE YEARS passed, it became increasingly obvious that if I died it would be my own fault.
This saddened me.


Bush Shows Strength in Maine
LEAD: Vice President Bush maintained a solid lead today in Maine's Republican caucuses, forging occasional alliances with Senator Bob Dole's supporters to fend off a strong challenge from Pat Robertson.


U.S. Film Stars Delight Muscovites
LEAD: Daryl Hannah, swathed in white from her cotton jacket and pants to her high-top sneakers, appeared center-stage at the Zaryade movie theater just as the lights went back on and the credits rolled for ''Roxanne.''


You Pays Yer Money
LEAD: YOU PAYS YER mon-ey and you takes yer choice,'' I wrote in this space recently, using what I assumed to be an old Americanism meaning, as the oddsmakers say, ''Pick 'em.''


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I think there has been, in great part, a ceding of the black vote to Jesse.''  -Bill Campbell,  a City Councilman in Atlanta.  [ 28:2. ]


A First for the National Park Service
LEAD: SIX paintings in one of the richest art competitions in United States history appear on the first National Park Service stamps.
The stamps will be used to validate the $25 Golden Eagle Pass that entitles holders to free access for one year to all areas of the National Park System and National Wildlife


Canada Tops Czechoslovakia in Quest for Bronze
LEAD: The possibility that his team might still snare a bronze medal was all that Andy Moog could think about after Canada's energetic 6-3 defeat of Czechoslovakia this afternoon.


Beheading a Tower to Make It Legal
LEAD: Lopping the top 12 stories off the ''too tall'' condominium building on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and rebuilding the roof would be a project unprecedented in the New York construction industry.


The Paradoxical Hemingway
LEAD: To the Editor:


Life on the Edge At Channel 13
LEAD: In a hidden corner just outside the president's office at WNET/Channel 13, a gray metal device called a Ketch-All - ''the world's best automatic mousetrap'' - has been quietly doing its work.
In one particularly bountiful day recently, the Ketch-All hauled in four luckless city-variety mice. ''In many respects,'' said William F.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart with the Travel Advisory column on Jan. 31 about air fares to Australia misstated terms of Air New Zealand's lowest fare.
No stops en route are permitted.


About Those Irritating Gremlins
LEAD: IT was a little more than a year ago that my mother entered the brave new world of point-and-shoot photography.
She did it in high style, with a Pentax IQ Zoom, which can boast of being the first simple, automatic camera to sport a zoom lens.
The IQ Zoom has been widely successful and widely imitated; several manufacturers are introducing versions of their own this weekend at a trade show in Las


MINOR POET IN THE FAMILY
LEAD:  THREE NIGHTS IN THE HEART OF THE EARTH  By Brett Laidlaw. 255 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $15.95.


THE REGION: Two Approaches to Housing Families; Ending the Dependency on Welfare Hotels
LEAD: WHAT should government be doing about the families living in New York City's welfare hotels?


President Suharto Replaces Commander of Indonesia Armed Forces
LEAD: Gen.
Benny Murdani, until recently considered the second most powerful man in Indonesia after President Suharto, was replaced today as armed forces commander.
The move is seen as a prelude to more Government changes in the next few weeks.


HE LIKED HIS MEAT POACHED
LEAD:  ONE LIFE AT A TIME, PLEASE  By Edward Abbey. 225 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company.
Cloth, $17.95.
Paper, $7.95.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Feb. 7 about a New York State Bar Association conference on AIDS misstated findings of a report by the state Department of Correctional Services.
It found that inmates with AIDS survived about one-third as long as other AIDS patients.


Large and Small Gifts Aid the Neediest Cases
LEAD: Ten-year-old John S. Machell of Glens Falls, N.Y., sent $5 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund with a request that the money go to help the homeless.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  PLAYING GOD: The New World of Medical Choices.
By Thomas Scully and Celia Scully. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) Thomas Scully, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Nevada School of Medicine, and the freelance writer Celia Scully have written a medical handbook for consumers that is laced with useful tips for improved communication between health professionals and their clients.


Music: Trinity-St. Michael's
LEAD: THE Orchestra at Trinity-Saint Michael's is a 23-member ensemble from Fairfield, Conn., that performed in Merkin Concert Hall on Thursday evening under the baton of its able young music director, Duilio Dobrin.


Trooping the Color
LEAD: To the Editor: In the Jan. 31 Travel Advisory was an article on how to order tickets in the lottery for Trooping the Color in June.


Miss McNeeley, Student, Marries
LEAD: The marriage of Elizabeth Adair McNeeley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. McNeely of Newark, Del., to Jack Scott Snoeyink, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Snoeyink of Grand Rapids, Mich., took place yesterday in Palo Alto, Calif.


S.I. Woman, 82, Slain In Apartment by Man
LEAD: A 31-year-old man was charged yesterday in the stabbing death of an 82-year-old woman in her Staten Island apartment.


Greenspan And His Fed Call Shots in Political Year
LEAD: IF the President's economists and other politically interested parties would just clam up, Alan Greenspan said darkly last week, he could get on with the business of keeping the economy afloat.
Otherwise, he implied, the whole thing could sink, regardless of which party ends up in the White House.


Beer Is Excellent as, Yes, an Ingredient
LEAD: ALMOST every nation in the world makes beer of some sort.
And these days it seems that they are all being sold here.


What Makes a Good School Principal?
LEAD: NEW JERSEY may soon push Humpty Dumpty off the wall.
Despite volumes of evidence and testimony documenting the importance of principals as instructional leaders, the state's Board of Education is being asked to approve a plan that would eliminate classroom teaching experience as a requirement for those who would lead our state's schools and would require all prospective principals to pursue the equivalent of a Master of Business


Question of the Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: Until three things are exhausted: Tommy John's arm, Ron Guidry's shoulder, and last, but never least, George Steinbrenner's patience.
BILL WADE  East Hartford, Conn.


Lisa Rose Curran Planning to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Lisa Rose Curran to Michael Aaron Sexter, a son of Dr.
Jay Sexter and Deborah Sexter of Grandview-on-Hudson, N.Y., has been announced by the parents of the future bride, Dr.
Roseann Cappella of East Stroudsburg, Pa., and Dr.
Charles C. Curran of Lexington, S.C.
An August wedding is planned.


3 Talented Pianists In Transition
LEAD: Three youthful, Soviet-schooled pian-ists recently passed through the revolving door that is New York's concert scene, none for the first time but each at an age when seismic changes can take place in an artist's thinking.
Vladimir Feltsman and Alexander Toradze, both Soviet emigres in their mid-30's, played concertos with the New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall.


Gunborg Klason Weds
LEAD: Gunborg Marie Klason and Eric Hubbard Litchfield were married yesterday at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn., by the Rev.
Richard F. Van Wely.
Mrs.
Litchfield is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hans Klason of Norrkoping, Sweden.
Mr.
Litchfield, a partner in Fine Wines and Spirits in Greenwich, is a son of Philip Axel Litchfield of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and Isabel Crouse Litchfield of Greenwich.


O'Neill and Dodd Confer On Convention Hopefuls
LEAD: GOVERNOR O'NEILL and Senator Christopher J. Dodd have been meeting privately to avoid a split among Democrats such as the one in 1984, when they endorsed different Presidential candidates, the Senator said last week.


Budget Offers Insights Into Reagan as A Visionary
LEAD: AS a blueprint for the Government, President Reagan's latest budget, for a fiscal year that begins just before he leaves office, will have only limited influence.
But as a reflection of his view of the world, it is a matchless source of insights.


4 Sentenced in Plotting Escape at Leavenworth
LEAD: The leader of a Puerto Rican independence group and three sympathizers who plotted to help him escape from prison with rockets, grenades and a helicopter have been sentenced to up to 15 years in prison.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Some of the floorboards in our house have raised slightly at the edges, and they often break when stepped upon.
As a result, we now have spaces between the boards.
This condition seems to have developed after the floors were stained.
Can you help us solve this problem?


Vineyarders Call For Ban on Growth
LEAD: Residents of Martha's Vineyard, faced with a report that their county has the highest growth rate of any county in New England, are calling for a one-year halt on most development and sweeping changes in government.


Question of the Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: Billy Martin will bring the Yankees to the World Series and will get into some kind of fight with George Steinbrenner and be dismissed.
GEORGE FULTON HELLER  Summit, N.J.


Stephanie K. Sosnow, Teacher, to Wed Actor
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Sherman F. Sosnow of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Stephanie K. Sosnow to Ernest Raymond Pysher 3d, a son of Mrs.
Pysher Jr. of Youngstown, Ohio, and the late Mr.
Pysher.
The wedding is to be late next month.


About Cars; Newsletter Helps Drivers Adjust to Speed Limits
LEAD: All right, the name is silly, but the organization does serve a purpose.
It is called the Radio Association Defending Airwave Rights, the acronym being RADAR, and it is headed by Janice Lee, who used to work for Electrolert, the company that makes Fuzzbuster radar detectors.


BEARING WITNESS
LEAD: Congratulations to George Whitmore on a superb piece of journalism (''Bearing Witness,'' Jan. 31).
Many of us in the gay community and in the AIDS service community have long cried out for coverage that goes beyond superficiality and sensationalism.


Stockbroker Turned Winemaker Finds Success in Vermont Apples
LEAD: Joseph Cerniglia knew nothing about making wine when he decided to build a winery here two years ago.
He didn't know anything about apples, either, when he decided to buy an orchard here in 1978.


PANAMA PRESIDENT FLEES FROM HOME
LEAD: Military officers arrived today at the home of the ousted President, Eric Arturo Delvalle, apparently to detain him, but they found that he had fled during the night.


Seton Hall Rolls Against Villanova
LEAD: When Seton Hall defeated St.
Peter's to begin its winning streak, skeptics said the Pirates were simply a better team from a stronger conference.


For Consideration
LEAD: Judith Campbell Exner, who has claimed that she was having an affair with John F. Kennedy when he was elected President, says that with her death from cancer imminent, she has another tale to tell.
Mrs.
Exner said in an interview published last week in People magazine that Kennedy had her arrange more than 10 meetings with Sam Giancana, a Chicago mob boss who Mrs.


Joan Baez Apologizes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Panama's Mad Crisis
LEAD: For the moment, Panama's Gen.


Trantino Parole Opposed
LEAD: A PETITION drive to keep Thomas Trantino - convicted of killing two Lodi police officers in 1963 - from being paroled has collected 22,000 signatures, and its organizers promise to soon deliver double that.


Trump's Vision: Pro and Con
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jacquard Coverlets Weave a Spell
LEAD: In a sense, the Hirschl &amp; Adler Folk Gallery is attempting to do for Jacquard coverlets what the Whitney Museum of American Art did for quilts in its 1971 exhibition ''Abstract Design in American Quilts'': elevate the craft to an American art form.
The show of 55 Jacquard coverlets opened yesterday at the gallery (851 Madison Avenue, at 70th Street), where it will run through March 26.


'Woo 'em or Lose 'em' to Local Delis
LEAD: THE EASTMAN KODAK COMPANY has the nation's largest self-operated food service for its employees.
At its Rochester headquarters, 45,000 employees frequent 56 dining areas and use 1,300 vending machines.


LEARNING BY DOING
LEAD: ALTHOUGH COMPUTERS CAN now coordinate such crucial variables as floor plans and color selections, decorating is still an old-fashioned profession, based on the ancient system of apprenticeship.
Those just starting out generally spend their time sorting through fabric samples and measuring rooms, overseeing workmen and running errands, all under the critical eye of a mentor.


WEST BERLIN
LEAD: Paris, Venice, Rome, Athens.
Berlin is often omitted from the list of great cultural cities of Europe.
In the early 20th century, just when it seemed the city on the Spree would succeed the city on the Seine as the cultural center of the Continent, the Nazis stifled expression throughout the country.


Westchester 2000: A Five-Year Endeavor Evolves Into Action
LEAD: FIVE years after the first group of citizen volunteers helped frame the first questions, the county's massive self-evaluation known as Westchester 2000 is showing results.


Hemlocks Threatened By Aphids
LEAD: OVER the years, Gun Sharp has had to contend with swarms of gypsy moths, spiders and fungi that have attacked the trees and shrubbery around her Stamford home.
This year, she said, she is fighting her worst insect battle yet: a white, dot-size aphid called adelgid that kills hemlock trees.


James H. Douglas Jr. Dead at 88; Served Presidents and the Military
LEAD: James H. Douglas Jr., a lawyer, investment banker and former Secretary of the Air Force and Deputy Secretary of Defense, died of cancer Wednesday at his home in Lake Forest, Ill.
He was 88 years old.


Where Do the Wires Go? A Guide
LEAD: BY making a map of your home's electrical circuits, you can know at a glance which paths of wiring routed throughout the house serve which outlets.
A map can also help you determine whether any circuits supply too many outlets and thus are overloaded.


Housing Panel Offers Carrot and Stick
LEAD: THE state's Blue Ribbon Commission on Housing will recommend this week a package of largely voluntary programs to increase affordable housing, but also plans to warn that the state will eventually have to intervene in local zoning if the housing crisis is not eased.


Classical
LEAD: String quartets are busy this week in New York City.
If one keeps moving Sunday, it is possible to begin at Alice Tully Hall in the afternoon and hear the Alban Berg Quartet play three works from the Beethoven canon and later on advance into the 20th century with an evening by the Arditti String Quartet.


Opera: 'Fairy Queen,' in Philadelphia
LEAD: Henry Purcell wrote only one theater piece we would describe as opera, but his interest in the musical stage kept alive the dying tradition of the masque. ''The Fairy Queen'' - written in 1692 and presented by the Pennsylvania Opera Theater tonight - hangs somewhere between his wholly operatic ''Dido and Aeneas'' and these earlier mixed-media entertainments of the


Dr. Ruth Gershen To Marry Rabbi
LEAD: The engagement of Dr.
Ruth Susan Gershen to Rabbi Hillel David Gold, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Raphael Gold of Savannah, Ga., has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin E. Gershen of Princeton, N.J., and Palm Beach, Fla., parents of the bride-to-be.
A June wedding is planned.


Learning From a Fall
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Honoring the Builders: Hall of Fame
LEAD: Cornelius Vanderbilt, John D. Rockefeller Jr. and Dewitt Clinton are some of the ''creators of New York'' who will be inducted Tuesday into a new hall of fame sponsored by the Real Estate Board of New York.


THE FOOD OF THE ROMAN GHETTO
LEAD: IN Roman restaurants the versatile artichoke appears in all sorts of guises -over fettuccine, in omelets, stuffed with garlic and mint, drenched in olive oil and displayed at the entrance of even the most humble trattoria.
But no artichokes undergo such a spectacular transformation as ''carciofi Romani alla giudia,'' Roman artichokes,


Of Grand (Piano) Nights for Singing
LEAD: Evie Stern stood under the spotlight in the cocktail lounge and belted out a soprano version of ''Ain't Misbehavin' '' to a hushed crowd.


Tomba Captures 2d Gold
LEAD: It has been said that the Olympics lacked a compelling figure, someone whose signature of success could be stamped on the Winter Games.
The search could have very well ended on the slopes of Mount Allan today, where Alberto Tomba of Italy won his second gold medal, prompting a wild celebration that turned the base of a ski trail into a street festival.


STORIES MAKE A FAMILY
LEAD: Elizabeth Stone's article ''Stories Make a Family'' (Jan. 24), awakened wondrous memories in me.
I stared at those beautiful dark eyes in the photograph and remembered the magical tale I would beg my mother to tell me over and over.
My grandfather, a wealthy landowner's son, had fallen in love with a beautiful peasant girl.


Food Inspection Results
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 29 food establishments cited for violating the health code.


Laurie E. Strauch And Wayne Dix Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Berish Strauch of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laurie Ellen Strauch, to Wayne Gardner Dix, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Dix of Manchester, Mass.
The couple plan to marry in September.


Cable TV
LEAD: Alfred Hitchcock fans - and who isn't? -can sample a revealing batch of the director's early thrillers this Wednesday on Bravo.
And there's a bonus on Friday.


Dr. Taya Glotzer Wed to M. S. Sommer
LEAD: Dr.
Taya V. Glotzer, a resident in internal medicine at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, and Michael S. Sommer, a law clerk to Judge Miriam G. Cedarbaum of Federal District Court in New York, were married last evening.
Rabbis Judah Nadich and Hershel E. Portnoy officiated at Beth Emeth Synagogue in Larchmont, N


Mary Dunhill; Business Executive, 81
LEAD: Mary Dunhill, the last surviving child of Alfred Dunhill, founder of the tobacco and pipe-making company, died Wednesday, death notices said today.
She was 81 years old.
The only daughter among Dunhill's four children, Ms.
Dunhill joined the board of Dunhill Holdings in 1944, explaining ''they were rather short of men,'' and in 1961 became chairman, succeeding her eldest brother, Alfred.


Change Advised for New York Middle Schools
LEAD: Sweeping changes are needed in the way New York City's middle schools -intermediate and junior high schools -are run, according to a Board of Education report released last week.


U.S. Ends Exemption for Young School Bus Drivers
LEAD: The Labor Department has announced that 17-year-olds must stop driving school buses in North and South Carolina after April 1, ending exemptions to the child labor laws that the two states enjoyed for two decades.


Beating Across the Sound, Boats Against the Winter
LEAD: FRED HALL'S taste for bad weather is odd, yet understandable.
In the winter, he is happiest when it is snowing, raining or sleeting.


A Pair of Rehnquist Opinions Sets Legal Experts Buzzing
LEAD: CHIEF Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote two decisions issued last Wednesday, involving free speech and rent control, that did not sound like the Court's most predictably conservative member.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Feeling Like a King  With a Presidential election approaching, it should be particularly interesting to us to know how political leaders feel about their vocation.
This is a passage from the memoirs of Louis XIV, written for his son, describing a time when he had resolved to be a conscientious, hard-working king.


Talking: Conversions; A Fourth Option for Insiders
LEAD: Until recently, most tenants of rental buildings going co-op in New York City had only three options: buying at the insider price, staying on as a regulated tenant or selling their purchase rights to an outsider - a move that normally required giving up the apartment.


BEST SELLERS: FEBRUARY 28, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
17
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom
Wolfe. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.95.) A bond
trader caught in the jungles of New York.
2
3
36
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.


What the Child Hears Sounds Right to the Man
LEAD: Being some four dec-ades removed from childhood myself, and not being on a basis of daily intimacy with childish ways, I have come late to the phenomenon of Raffi.
But to judge from the enthusiasm of my 19-month-old niece, and the long-suffering tolerance of her parents, who have heard Raffi's album ''The Corner Grocery Store and Other Singable Songs'' more times than they ever thought they'd listen to any album in their lives,


An Arcade That Gleams Only in Memory
LEAD: ARCADE wasn't always a suffix for video.


Edward Knabusch, 88; Founder of La-Z-Boy
LEAD: Edward M. Knabusch, who began making chairs in a garage in the 1920's and later founded the La-Z-Boy Chair Company with a cousin, died here Thursday.
He was 88 years old.


MECHAM TO SEEK TO BLOCK HIS TRIAL
LEAD: Two days before the scheduled start of his impeachment trial in the state Senate, Gov.
Evan Mecham said he was preparing to ask a Federal court to halt it.
He said he feared his constitutional rights would be trampled in ''a lynch-mob atmosphere.''


Miss Lovell Is Engaged To Douglas R. Hiscano
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Lovell Jr. of New Vernon, N.J., and Raymond, Me., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kimberly Whyte Lovell to Douglas Ralph Hiscano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raphael A. Hiscano of Short Hills and Andover, N.J.
The couple plan to marry in April.


Question of the Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: I fully expect Billy Martin to be the Yankees' manager for many, many years. (Unless, of course, they lose the home opener.)  DAN BERNSTEIN  Philadelphia


Battle for Crack Trade in Queens May Hold Key to Officer's Killing
LEAD: The brazen slaying of a rookie police officer as he guarded a drug witness may have been an outgrowth of turf wars among crack dealers in southeastern Queens, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.


Revival for Serino's in New Haven
LEAD: SERINO'S, that fine, cozy Italian restaurant in Branford, has moved to New Haven.
Its new venue is the former home of another familiar Italian restaurant, the long departed and lamented L'Avventura.


Alisa Newhouse Bride Of Mark Haskell Smith
LEAD: Alisa Newhouse, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Newhouse of New York and Block Island, R.I., was married last evening to Mark Haskell Smith, a son of Mrs.
Ward Dengler of Kansas City, Kan., and Jackie Lee Smith of Boise, Idaho.
Judge Phyllis Gangel-Jacob of New York City Civil Court performed the ceremony at the Newhouse home in New


Forty Years Later, A Grand Occasion
LEAD: I TURNED the radio louder.
A familiar melody from my childhood burst forth.
Hearing Ponchielli's ''Dance of the Hours'' was like stepping into a time machine: Suddenly I remembered those long-forgotten piano lessons.


'Peace' for Ex-Soldier After A Soviet Odyssey
LEAD: Wade Evan Roberts, the American serviceman who defected to the Soviet Union last year, is leaving today for West Germany, where, he said, he hopes, at last, that he and his wife can ''live at peace.''


Witt Is Gold Medalist for a Second Time
LEAD: It all came down to the long program.
Katarina Witt of East Germany, the defending women's figure-skating champion, skated well tonight, but nothing like she or a sellout audience in the Saddledome expected, nothing close to her glittering standards.
If Debi Thomas nailed her routine, the gold medal in the 1988 Winter Games could be hers.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Mayotte Advances: Tim Mayotte, the defending champion, defeated sixth-seeded Christo van Rensburg, 6-2, 7-5, yesterday in the semifinals of the United States Pro Indoor tournament in Philadelphia.
Mayotte, who extended his winning streak to 14 matches, rallied from a 2-5 deficit in the second set to take the 1-hour-19-minute match.


Mark Stone Wed To Miss Hellmold
LEAD: At the Harvard Club of New York City, Margery Hellmold, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Hellmold of Leonia, N.J., and Mark Jonathan Stone, a son of Marion L. Stone of Stamford, Conn., and Elhanan C. Stone of Mount Washington, Mass., were married yesterday by Judge Jacqueline Silberman of Civil Court in


ARMENIA AT A GLANCE
LEAD:  The People


Dina Meryl Schupak Weds Daniel Alan Leyden on L.I.
LEAD: Dina Meryl Schupak, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Schupak of Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to Daniel Alan Leyden, a son of Harriet Leyden of New York and Stuart Leyden of Ocean, N.J.
Cantor Sol Zim performed the ceremony at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.


WHEN FEAR CONQUERS: A DOCTOR LEARNS ABOUT AIDS FROM LEPROSY
LEAD: THE LAST THING I WANTED TO DO at 3:30 in the morning was replace an intravenous line on an AIDS patient.
It was the kind of summons I had come to receive with a feeling of injustice.
Why hadn't it been checked earlier?
Why did it have to be an AIDS patient?
And why was it my responsibility?


AN INNOCENT AMONG COPS
LEAD:  MAN WITH A GUN  By Robert Daley. 475 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


Soviet Reports Fatal Jet Crash
LEAD: An Aeroflot airliner carrying 51 people on a 1,600-mile flight across the western Soviet Union crashed on landing today at its final stop in Siberia, and some passengers were killed or injured, the official news agency Tass reported.


D'Amato Strays, Willfully, From New York Party Line
LEAD: ON the surface, the New York Republican Presidential primary pits Vice President Bush against Senator Bob Dole.
Just beneath the surface, however, is an increasingly bitter struggle between Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and the state Republican establishment.


Richard Lee Kauffman, an Executive, And Ellen Jewett Plan to Wed in June
LEAD: The engagement of Ellen Jewett, an associate in municipal finance at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York, to Richard Lee Kauffman, a vice president of the First Boston Corporation in New York, has been announced by Constance Comly Jewett and Dr.
Frank Sniffen Jewett, both of New York, parents of the bride-to-be.


Funds on the Defensive
LEAD: THE bull in the Merrill Lynch television commercial, which galloped along a breezy coast while a woman sang, ''To Know No Boundaries,'' is off the air.
Today, Merrill's ads feature straight-talking financial consultants with no music and sober advice.
One of them might be speaking for the whole mutual fund industry when he intones, ''These are uncertain times.


The Mini-Series: A Hymn to Consumerism?
LEAD: Way back when, Mickey Rooney taught Elizabeth Taylor to ride in the movie ''National Velvet.'' That was a delight - warm and sentimental, and when Ms.
Taylor won the Grand National you cried.
In ''My Friend Flicka,'' Roddy McDowall cried.
In movies, the care, feeding and ownership of horses has been steeped in family feeling.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Chappaqua, N.Y.  $450,000  123 Commodore Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old frame contemporary; greenhouse alcove, keeping room, pool and spa, .93 acre; taxes $8,264.
North Tarrytown, N.Y.  $245,000  6 Spruce Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 58-year-old masonry colonial; sun room, porch, basement studio apartment; taxes $2,668.


TROUBLED DREAMS IN INDIA
LEAD:  FROZEN MUSIC  By Francis King.
Illustrations by Patrick Procktor. 143 pp.
New York: Harper &amp; Row. $10.95.


Insurance Loans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Virus Discoveries Help an African Outpost of AIDS Research Gain Notice
LEAD: Scientists here have helped to discover two viruses similar to the main AIDS virus -one in humans, the other in monkeys -and in doing so have focused attention on a rare outpost of AIDS research in Central Africa.


Halpin Outlines a Different Agenda
LEAD: IT was in a small conference room, minutes after Suffolk County Executive Patrick G. Halpin delivered his recent State of the County speech, that the most telling moment of the afternoon took place.


Terri Ann Bantle Engaged To E. Christopher Walker
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Louis F. Bantle of Darien, Conn., of the engagement of their daughter, Terri Ann Bantle, to E. Christopher Walker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen S. Walker, also of Darien.
The couple plan to marry June 25.


Listening to Opportunity
LEAD: In today's society, two of the most often encountered feelings are lack of confidence and poor self-image.
I think this is especially true of people at the point in their lives where they are facing new challenges.


Baby-Sitting Grandchildren: Love Them and Leave Them
LEAD: I AM not fond of baby-sitting.
It is anxiety producing.
I have no problem speaking to large audiences.
I conduct myself admirably in interviews.
I give dinner parties with appropriate ease.
I drive without flinching at tailgating trucks.


Elster Hoping To Fill Key Job
LEAD: When the Mets open the season in Montreal on April 4, only one rookie will be in the lineup, maybe only one on the 24-man squad: Kevin Elster, the 23-year-old ''shortstop of the future.''


HOW THEY TOOK OVER THE STATEHOUSE
LEAD: THE SUN SET OVER MISSISSIPPI last Nov. 6, Ross Robert Barnett, the fire-and-brimstone segregationist who made that state a civil rights battleground in the 1960's, drew his last breath and, at the age of 89, quietly died in a hospital bed in Jackson.
At his side, his son, Ross Jr., couldn't help but note the symmetry of the moment.


Thankless Task
LEAD: Don't blame the arbitrator for the arbitration award, and don't blame the arbitration award for a rise in the price of beer.
That, essentially, is the plea from Thomas Roberts, a Los Angeles lawyer who has served as one of baseball's most visible arbitrators.


John Savage Uses Film To Help His Neighbors
LEAD: THE theater was a dimly lighted room in the basement of a church in Manhasset, L.I.
The star - John Savage, best known for his roles in films like ''The Deer Hunter'' and ''Salvador'' - arrived two hours late.
And the audience and critics - a group of teen-agers, parents and youth workers - sat on legless couches and discarded pews.


CABLE TV FAILS IN MANHATTAN
LEAD: Cable television service to 218,000 customers in Manhattan was disrupted for about two hours yesterday shortly before the broadcast of the gold medal figure skating competition at the Winter Olympics.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  EVOLVING CATSKILLS  The Hudson River Museum in Yonkers has organized an exhibition, opening today and on view through May 29, that documents the development of the Catskills from a wilderness in 1820 to a back-to-nature environment for tourists by 1895.
Following the Westchester showing, it will travel to the Strong Museum in Rochester, the Albany Institute of History and Art, and the Everson Museum in


Agriculture Is Learning to Fight Nature With Nature
LEAD: IN Maryland, crab shells are being turned into a natural insecticide.


Big Drop In Scaup, A Fowl Of Shore
LEAD: WILDLIFE biologists noticed during a recent survey of waterfowl an alarming drop in the number of scaup duck, a diving bird usually common along the Connecticut shore.


Question of the Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: How many angels can dance on the head of a pin?  BARBARA LEVI  New York


HARTFORD WEIGHS INSURANCE CURBS
LEAD: Here in this city long synonymous with insurance, women's rights groups have run into their toughest opposition yet in an already difficult struggle to ban what they assert is sex discrimination by insurance companies.


Finding Ways To Meet the Needs Of Potential school Dropouts
LEAD: AS the new legislative session gathers momentum, it seems appropriate to outline the legislative agenda for public education in New Jersey.


E. Landzberg to Marry Laurence Friedman
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham H. Landzberg of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Judith Ellen Landzberg to Laurence Matthew Friedman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Friedman of Bedford Hills, N.Y., and Gentle Winds Estate, St.
Croix, V.I.
The couple plan to marry May 14.


Wandering Ash Ship From Philadelphia Abandons Its Quest
LEAD: A cargo ship laden with refuse is abandoning its 18-month, six-nation quest for a place to dump 15,000 tons of Philadelphia incinerator ash, a Coast Guard official said Friday.


Individually and Corporately, We're Not Saving; Capital or Income
LEAD: To the Editor:


Music: Maryanne Amacher
LEAD: AT times during Maryanne Amacher's hour-and-a-half show at the Kitchen (where she kicked off a two-week festival of electronic music), the room seemed literally filled with sound - sound became tactile.


Next Week; What Was Good and Bad in the Olympics?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Alzheimer's Care Facility Opens in Maine Town
LEAD: Sally Fitzgerald's life had settled into a grueling routine: leave work, fix supper for her ailing father; wake early on weekends, fix breakfast for her father.


I.O.C. Acts to Halt Drug-Test Dodging
LEAD: The International Olympic Committee said today it would punish laboratories that conduct pre-event checks to help athletes avoid controlled drug testing and the penalties involved.


Perspectives: Low-Income Co-ops; Easing the Path to Tenant Ownership
LEAD: ''We still need a front stoop, and we need a paint job inside,'' said Jeanine Kelley-Williams, president of the co-op corporation at 364 West 120th Street, a five-story walk-up in West Harlem. ''But we're running well now.
We're not going to give up.''


IT'S THE CUT THAT COUNTS
LEAD: AS ANY WOMAN WHO has wielded a can of mousse, a tube of gel and a blow-dryer knows, styling products today have their virtues, but efficiency may not be one of them.
In fact, these items bear a striking similarity to the hair sprays and teasing combs of the 1960's.


U.S. INDICTS FOUR IN A PAYOLA CASE
LEAD: A Federal grand jury here has indicted two music promoters, the wife of one of them and a former radio executive on charges of tax evasion and paying more than $260,000 in cash and cocaine to get records played on the air.


THE HOW OF THE WORD
LEAD:  WORKS AND LIVES  The Anthropologist as Author.
By Clifford Geertz. 157 pp.
California: Stanford University Press. $19.95.


Will Fetisov Cross to U.S. Ice?
LEAD: Vyacheslav Fetisov, the comrade from Moscow who is ''Kaptain'' of his nation's hockey team today but may become a skating quarterback for New Jersey tomorrow, is hunched over his stick, which for reasons of his own he wraps in neon orange tape.
He idles himself near his blue line, not quite at rest, his eyes fastened on the puck, his skates twitching.


A RISK OF UNREST SEEN IN EAST BLOC
LEAD: Reagan Administration officials who analyze political and economic trends in Eastern Europe say they believe three of the six Warsaw Pact countries face domestic instability, mainly as a result of deterioration in their economies.


India Lawyer's Handcuffing Spurs Bitter Fight
LEAD: It began with an arrest for what the police said was a case of petty theft.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  NEW ENGLAND NOW


Where Do the Wires Go? A Guide
LEAD: BY making a map of your home's electrical circuits, you can know at a glance which paths of wiring routed throughout the house serve which outlets.
A map can also help you determine whether any circuits supply too many outlets and thus are overloaded.


Practical Traveler; In Sunny Spots, Room at the Inn
LEAD: A TOURISM official for one Caribbean country said candidly that it had so far been a ''soft'' season, and she did not mean the weather.
But her unhappiness at the slowness of business translates into good news for people who find themselves sick of winter at the end of February but still with no reservations for a sunshine fix.


BEARING WITNESS
LEAD: George Whitmore's perspective will prove of inestimable value - particularly to those of us who share the journey of persons with AIDS, and their families, but who will do so from a vantage point that is second-hand -the vantage point of the healthy.


COGNAC IS...
LEAD: GERARD Allemandou recent-ly moved his little fish restaurant, La Cagouille, from the rue Daguerre to the Square Brancusi, and it lost a lot of its charm.
The rue Daguerre was old Paris; the Square Brancusi, just around the corner, is a neighborhood of ugly new apartment buildings, in one of which the restaurant is now quartered.


Time to Buy Oil and Gas Income Funds?
LEAD: WORLD oil prices are dropping again.
Not to worry, say the sponsors of the new wave of oil and gas income funds.
That just means that those who buy into the funds now will make that much more money later, when oil is sure to rebound.


Digging Out After the Storm In England
LEAD: WHEN gale-force winds ripped across southern England last fall, they destroyed in a few hours what generations of gardeners and landscape planners had labored to achieve.
Thousands of trees - some of them planted centuries ago - were felled in gardens and parks.
Ornamental avenues were battered, rare species damaged or destroyed.


In Texas, Two Kings of the Beauty Queen Business
LEAD: IN a brownstone office in the center of this city stand three cardboard women in evening gowns.


Auld Lang Syne
LEAD:  GUY LOMBARDO AND HIS ROYAL CANADIANS  Produced for Swingtime Video's Meet the Band Leaders series by Wally Heider.
Black and white. 1955.
Kartes Video. 54 minutes. $19.95.


Pamela Kripke to Wed R. N. Chimbel in April
LEAD: Pamela Gwyn Kripke's engagement to Robert Neil Chimbel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Chimbel of Torrington, Conn., has been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
David C. Kripke of Scarsdale, N.Y.
An April wedding is planned.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.52
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
6.35
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
5.75
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
11.07
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
13.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
14.00
Bank of America, San Francisco
17.75


The Chief Justice
LEAD: The Supreme Court's decision last week in the Jerry Falwell case was seen at once as a landmark reaffirmation of American principle.
In this country we are free to subject public personalities to the most caustic comment.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Some of the floorboards in our house have raised slightly at the edges, and they often break when stepped upon.
As a result, we now have spaces between the boards.
This condition seems to have developed after the floors were stained.
Can you help us solve this problem?


Understanding A Mother's Death
LEAD: THE sun shines on a sparkling carpet of snow.


Question of the Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: If Billy and the Yankees post higher figures in the lost column:


Saudis Debate How to Handle Iran Pilgrims
LEAD: Saudi Arabia is struggling with ways to handle tens of thousands of Iranian pilgrims who will arrive for the annual pilgrimage, or hajj, to Mecca in July.


Dance: Jane Comfort Company in a Yuppie 'Macbeth'
LEAD: MACBETH wore a business suit.
The witches were punk rockers who predicted he would become chief executive officer - news that greatly pleased the social-climbing Lady Macbeth.


Beyond White Rats and Rabbits
LEAD: FOR years, an emotionally charged ethical debate over the morality and reliability of animal testing has bedeviled the cosmetics, chemical and pharmaceutical industries.
Nevertheless, the tests have remained firmly entrenched as the underpinning of the nation's efforts to insure that new products work as intended and that consumers are not harmed by them.


RESIDENTIAL RESALES
LEAD:  Closings in the week ending Feb. 13  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $145,000  234 West 21st Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 650-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; large windowed kitchen, high-ceilings; maintenance $363, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Sulzberger-Rolfe)  Chelsea


Stalking the Woolly Hemlock Killer in New York
LEAD: Like a detective looking for a criminal, Michael S. Birmingham was on the road the other day, checking the trail of the deadly hemlock woolly adelgid, an insect that kills hemlock trees.


Theater
LEAD: The vitality of youth in black South Africa is celebrated in ''Sarafina!'', a musical with a message that reverberates long after one has left the theater. ''Sarafina'' is a song of freedom, persisting in spite of years of repression.
Watching the show, one is saddened by the slowness of change in South Africa, at the same time one is uplifted by the idealism on stage.


DUKAKIS TOUGHENS STANCE IN DEBATE
LEAD: The Democratic Presidential candidates, led by an increasingly aggressive Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, battled today in a debate that at times turned sharp, angry and personal.


THE WORLD: Nicaragua; Pushed From Left or Right, Masaya Balks
LEAD: SANDINISTA army recruiters swept through neighborhoods of Nicaragua's towns and villages in the last month, stopping buses and lying in wait outside cinemas.
Sometimes they used force as they rounded up young men for military service, and there were occasional confrontations.
But only in the town of Masaya, 19 miles southeast of the capital of


Wedding Planned By Stacey Raider
LEAD: The engagement of Stacey Raider to Richard Henderson Gowen, a son of R. Harold Gowen of Portland, Me., and the late Marian E. Gowen, has been made known by the mother of the bride-to-be, Mrs.
Leonard J. Raider of New York and Milford, Pa.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Raider, also the daughter of the late Dr.


For Communism
LEAD: As Andrei A. Gromyko tells it, Mao Zedong believed the Chinese could win a nuclear war even before China became a nuclear power.
Mr.
Gromyko, who became President of the Soviet Union 1985 after nearly 30 years in the more important position of Foreign Minister, includes his surprising report about Mao in a forthcoming political memoir.


CLARIFYING CURLING
LEAD: The article on curling by Jack Cavanaugh on Jan. 24 (''A Little Notice for a Little-Known Sport'') captured the essential flavor of curling and focused attention on a game that suffers from a lack of exposure in the United States.


'Don't Put Away the Snow Shovels Yet'
LEAD: MELVIN GOLDSTEIN, or Dr.
Mel as he is known to most people, is one of the state's most popular meteorologists.


Mimi Dore Bride Of D. J. O'Connell
LEAD: Mary Ann Dore, the daughter of Mrs.
Edward J. Dore Jr. of Bloomfield Hills and Glen Arbor, Mich., and the late Mr.
Dore, was married yesterday to David James O'Connell, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence O'Connell of Yonkers.
The Rev.
Anthony Tocco performed the ceremony at St.
Hugo of the Hills Roman Catholic Church in Bloomfield


Notebook; Teams' Play in Spring Is No Gauge of Autumn
LEAD: Teams begin playing exhibition games later this week, but anyone looking for clues to the coming season's division champions should not waste too much time on the spring training standings.
No correlation exists between a team's success in spring training and its performance during the season.


Mental-Health Budget Protest
LEAD: REPRESENTATIVES of New Jersey's principal mental-health advocacy groups, furious that Governor Kean had trimmed to $1.8 million a request for a $33 million increase, gathered here last week to demand that he spend more on community-based mental-health programs.


Trump's Vision: Pro and Con
LEAD: To the Editor:


Two Concerts for Four Hands
LEAD: UNUSUAL keyboard duos frame the week in the county.
David Friddle and Gregg Redner divide their musical ministrations among harpsichord, organ and virginal today at 4 P.M., while Gary Steigerwalt and Dana Muller apply their four hands to one piano next Sunday, also at 4 P.M.


Brawley Lawyer Urged as Prosecutor
LEAD: Governor Cuomo should ''deputize'' a lawyer for Tawana Brawley as a special prosecutor to investigate what the black Dutchess County teen-ager says was a sexual attack on her by six white men, a minister who has become involved in the case said at a rally here today.


Reassuring Record for the Neediest
LEAD: The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund opened its 76th annual drive last fall with some trepidation.


Officials Say Ortega Will Name Economic Chief
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra will soon shake up his Cabinet and may name a senior former guerrilla to a new post overseeing all economic policies, officials say.


Individually and Corporately, We're Not Saving
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME VIDEO
LEAD:  The Lost Boys  Starring Jason Patric, Dianne Wiest, Corey Haim, Barnard Hughes, Kiefer Sutherland, Corey Feldman, Jamison Newlander, Jami Gertz, Edward Herrmann.
Directed by Joel Schumacher. 1987.
Warner Home Video. 98 minutes. $89.95.
Rated R.


Radio's Global Earful
LEAD: When public con-fidence in the government is shaken, it seems that people are eager to hear what is said about us in other countries.
That's why the sale of shortwave radios perks up during political crises.
For example, during last year's Congressional investigation of arms sales to Iran, there was a run on such radios, and - according to trade reports - they have been selling briskly since.


Builders Battle 'Takings' of Property
LEAD: Last February, G. K. Hunnewell, president of Kendall Homes Inc., gave the Independence, N.J., Township Committee preliminary notice that he planned to build 59 houses costing about $400,000 on 100 acres that he had bought a month earlier.


Top Gelding Dies
LEAD: Zany Tactics, thoroughbred racing's world-record holder for six furlongs on dirt, has died of an apparent heart attack after a workout at Santa Anita.


Catherine Bolton Is Wed
LEAD: Catherine A. Bolton, the director of corporate development at Channel 13 in New York, was married yesterday to Richard Bolus, president of Richard Bolus Imports of Scranton, Pa., an automotive importer.
The Rev.
Robert Woods performed the Episcopal ceremony at Sardy House in Aspen, Colo.
The bride is the daughter of Mrs.


Lois M. Cross Is Engaged To Gregory Tilford Willis
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Cross 3d of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of Mr.
Cross's daughter Lois Moore Cross to Gregory Tilford Willis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Willis Jr. of Greenwich and Seal Harbor, Me.
A May wedding is planned.


THAT OLD BLACK MAGIC
LEAD:  AL-KEMI  Hermetic, Occult, Political, and Private Aspects of R. A. Schwaller de Lubicz.
By Andre VandenBroeck.
Illustrated. 286 pp.
Great Barrington, Mass.: Inner Traditions/ Lindisfarne Press. $22.95.


A Mother Wins a Timeout From Soccer
LEAD: SUDDENLY, I'm a free woman.
No, I have not become single.
My children haven't prematurely flown the coop or otherwise become minors of (financially) precociously independent means.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: FEBRUARY 28, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
DESTINY, by Sally Beauman. (Bantam, $4.95.)
The 30-year romance of a couple with diverse
backgrounds and ambitions.
2
5
OUTBREAK, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.)
Tracking down a deadly disease that
ophthalmologists pass on to their patients.


THE GARDEN PATH TO EUROPE
LEAD: FOR gardeners and garden lovers, Europe is the place.
Its gardens not only display some of the finest collections of rare plantings but also reveal the development of landscape design.
Some encompass flowing fountains and conservatories; others are nestled in woodlands and parks; many feature rock gardens, herbaceous borders and topiary as well as carpets of dazzling blooms.


Flight Attendants At Northwest Delay Strike Over Wages
LEAD: Northwest Airlines planes continued flying today and a union spokesman said strike preparations by 6,700 flight attendants had been ''put on hold'' even though all-night contract talks had hit a snag.
The union had set a strike deadline of 12:01 A.M. today.


Ms. Idzik to Wed Harry T. Bahr 3d
LEAD: Rebecca J. Idzik, a daughter of Ann Beckner Idzik of Rye, N.Y., and Daniel R. Idzik of Stamford, Conn., and Harry Theodore Bahr 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bahr Jr. of Bronxville, N.Y., plan to be married June 11.


European Ensemble to Visit State
LEAD: THE American itinerary of the visiting Chamber Orchestra of Europe lists just nine cities and two of them are in Connecticut.


For Those Passionate About Pasta
LEAD: RISTORANTE IL POZZO in Hauppauge was conceived with love.
At its heart is the owner, Pat Zummo.
He is everywhere: greeting diners, table hopping in the dining room and on weekends popping out from the kitchen in his chef's whites.
On a slow night, diners might find his gregariousness a mite intrusive, but he has a genuine enthusiasm for food and his restaurant that's contagious.


BEARING WITNESS
LEAD: When the history of the 1980's is written and the heros that everyone is supposedly looking for are found, I believe they will be personified by people like George Whitmore, fighting the ultimate battle with grace, fortitude and wisdom.
STEVEN MULLER  Richmond Hill, Queens


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article in The Times Magazine today - ''James Webb's New 'Fields of Fire' '' - describes tensions between Secretary of the Navy James H. Webb Jr. and his superiors.


VENI, VIDI, LEGI
LEAD: THE Italians over the years have adorned their historic buildings with countless inscriptions: So-and-So lived here, So-and-So built (or rebuilt) this building, here lies So-and-So, and the like.
Before the 19th century virtually all such inscriptions were written in Latin.
This used to mean that they could be read by all literate people, from anywhere.


Attack on a Black Woman Stuns A Mostly White New Jersey Town
LEAD: An assault this month on a 50-year-old black woman by two white men has stunned and drawn together black and white residents of her hometown, Newton, N.J.


Where Do the Wires Go? A Guide
LEAD: BY making a map of your home's electrical circuits, you can know at a glance which paths of wiring routed throughout the house serve which outlets.
A map can also help you determine whether any circuits supply too many outlets and thus are overloaded.


U.S. Says It Can Do Little About Noriega
LEAD: As Panama's leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, continued to hold the reins of power in his country, Reagan Administration officials said today that the United States has little leverage to force him from power.


NATO Unity Is Called Problem for Next President
LEAD: The Center for Strategic and International Studies released a bipartisan report this week warning that political cohesion of the NATO alliance will be a major problem for the next administration, regardless who is elected President.


Plane Crash in Cyprus Kills All 15 on Board
LEAD: A Boeing 727 owned by a Turkish charter company crashed into mountains today near the coastal resort city of Kyrenia in northern Cyprus, killing all 15 people aboard, rescue officials said.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''The economy doesn't exhibit the geriatric characteristics of the very late stage of an economic expansion.''


Life in a Remote Village
LEAD:  JOHN AND THE MISSUS  Starring Gordon Pinsent (in photo), Jackie Burroughs, Randy Follett, Jessica Steen, Roland Hewgill.
Directed by Gordon Pinsent. 1987.
Cinema Group. 98 minutes. $79.98.
Rated PG.


A Florida Landmark Restored
LEAD: AT first glance Coral Gables appears more likely the goal of upwardly mobile Miami residents than the destination of winter vacationers.


Purdue Winner After Scare
LEAD: Troy Lewis made a pair of 3-pointers to cap a 13-point run that opened the second half as second-ranked Purdue rallied for a 69-51 victory over Northwestern today.


DATA BANK: February 28, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
IV Q'87
III Q'87
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,870.0
$3,835.9
$3,702.4
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.5
4.3
1.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'87
II Q'87
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$141.9
$134.5
$130.2


The Sounds of Music
LEAD:  For Promising Talent


The Industry Comes to the Mountain
LEAD: MORE than 400 of the most powerful figures in the business gathered at the 11th annual Personal Computing Forum last week - the industry's winter summit meeting.
They came to the Gulf Coast of Florida to cut deals, settle old scores, form alliances and try to anticipate where the PC market is headed.


Jersey Asserts Tidal Land Rights After U.S. Ruling
LEAD: When the United States Supreme Court ruled last week that Mississippi owned all lands affected by the ebb and flow of the tides, officials in all coastal states, including New Jersey, heaved a collective sigh of relief.


Traffic Stalls Royal Visit
LEAD: Britain's Prince Andrew and his wife, Sarah, began a 10-day visit to Southern California today, and they were greeted by a freeway traffic jam that delayed their arrival at a City Hall ceremony by 25 minutes.
The car carrying the Duke and Duchess of York had to make a detour around the congestion on the trip from the royal yacht Britannia, moored at Long Beach, 25 miles south of Los Angeles.


Question of the Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: Does it really matter?
He'll be back again.
And again.
And again.
ROB CARPENTIER  Dumont, N.J.


O'Rourke Sets a Low-Key Agenda
LEAD: IN his State of the County address before a packed legislative chamber, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke looked back at 1987 with a measure of satisfaction last week but warned that there could be hard times ahead for Westchester.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: After spending most of the last two years in detention for distributing cocaine, Tony Robinson, the former Tennessee quarterback, was released from the Knox County Penal Farm in Tennessee yesterday after winning a parole. . . .
A former United States Boxing Association middleweight titleholder, Alex Ramos, was taken into custody late Friday in an investigation of charges of assault with a deadly weapon, kidnapping and false imprisonment after police said he attacked a female roommate in Los Angeles.


'Wasserella' Swings Into Gear
LEAD: THREE weeks ago, two of Wall Street's biggest celebrities, Bruce Wasserstein and Joseph R. Perella, resigned from the First Boston Corporation and said they would set up their own firm.


Enfolding India in A Length Of Cloth
LEAD: THE sari is merely a length of cloth about six yards long, but it enfolds all the exoticism of India.
Without the need for tailoring, buttons or zippers, the sari provides its wearer with the modesty of a veil, a shield from the sun and protection from the cold.
Like the sarong and the serape, the sari combines simplicity with ingenuity to become an elegant solution in the technical sense of the word.


YESTERDAY'S MEDAL WINNERS
LEAD:  Cross-Country: Men's 50 km  Gold: Gunde Svan, Sweden  Silver: Maurilio De Zolt, Italy  Bronze: Andy Gruenenfelder, Switzerland  Alpine Skiing: Men's Slalom  Gold: Alberto Tomba, Italy  Silver: Frank Woerndl, West Germany  Bronze: Paul Frommelt, Liechtenstein  Speed Skating: Women's 1500-meters


Play On!
LEAD: IN THE RATHER DANK basement of Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center, the history of the New York Philharmonic, America's oldest symphony orchestra, is sitting in cardboard boxes.
According to Barbara Haws, the archivist whose task it is to organize it all, the correspondence, photographs, financial records, programs, scores and other memorabilia would fill 1,600 file cabinet drawers.


FROM THE MINES OF CURRY POWDER
LEAD:  THE TROTTER-NAMA  A Chronicle.
By I. Allan Sealy. 575 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Swaggart's Troubles Show Tension of Passion and Power in TV Evangelism
LEAD: One night about 30 years ago, as he hovered somewhere between sleep and consciousness, Jimmy Swaggart says, he found himself in a windowless, bare room suffused with a palpable sense of evil.


THE EARTH WAS HERE FIRST
LEAD:  A SAND COUNTY ALMANAC  And Sketches Here and There.
By Aldo Leopold.
Introduction by Robert Finch.
Illustrated. 228 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $17.95.
COMPANION TO A SAND COUNTY ALMANAC  Interpretive and Critical Essays.
Edited by J. Baird Callicott.
Illustrated. 308 pp.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.


Hostage in Lebanon: The American 9
LEAD:  Terry A. Anderson: Chief Middle East correspondent of The Associated Press; missing since March 16, 1985.
Thomas M. Sutherland: Dean of agriculture at the American University of Beirut; June 9, 1985.
Frank Herbert Reed: Director of the Lebanon International School in Beirut; Sept. 9, 1986.


Former Day-Care Teacher Denies Sexually Abusing Schoolchildren
LEAD: A former day-care center teacher being tried on charges of sexually abusing 20 children in her care testified in her defense this week and denied ever having had sexual contact with the 3- 4- and 5-year-old youngsters.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A photography review on Dec. 27 about Robert G. Ketchum misidentified the source of the silk embroidery in the show.
It was made by members of the Suzhou Embroidery Research Institute in China.
Also, the bridge at Bear Mountain was misidentified.
It is Popolopen Bridge.
The review characterized Mr.


Music: Philharmonic's Wind Players
LEAD: THE oboe d'amore is a small musical reminder of how poor communications 300 years ago promoted an almost limitless variety of invention.
Closeness to one another has bred standardization; thus double-reed instruments are now narrowed to roughly the same bassoon, English horn and oboe one meets in every part of the world.


Beer Is Excellent as, Yes, an Ingredient
LEAD: ALMOST every nation in the world makes beer of some sort.
And these days it seems that they are all being sold here.


Henry Broido, Retail Executive, Dies at 87
LEAD: Henry W. Broido, a retail executive who was president of Hammacher Schlemmer in the 1950's, died of pneumonia on Tuesday at the Jewish Home and Hospital.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Pop
LEAD: The New York folk performer, Christine Lavin and the Seattle-based trio, Uncle Bonsai, who are sharing the bill at the Bottom Line (15 West Fourth St.) this Friday and Saturday, use acoustic music as a springbord for very different styles of sophisticated humor.


A Talk With Aharon Appelfeld
LEAD: Aharon Appelfeld lives a few miles west of Jerusalem in a mazelike conglomeration of attractive stone dwellings directly next to an ''absorption center,'' where immigrants are temporarily housed, schooled and prepared for life in their new society.
The arduous journey that landed Appelfeld on the beaches of Tel Aviv in 1946, at the age of 14, seems to have fostered an unappeasable fascination with all uprooted souls, and at the local grocery where he and the absorption center residents do their shopping, he will often initiate an impromptu conversation with an Ethiopian, or a


Poverty and Bureaucracy Hurt the Young
LEAD: I AM a pediatrician at a federally funded, nonprofit community health center that sees all patients regardless of their ability to pay.
I serve children who live in one of the poorest neighborhoods in Connecticut, the lower east side of Bridgeport.
Recently, a mother came to see me; she asked me to cure her 6-month-old son's cough.


Deirdre Hanofee to Marry Eric T. Friedland in August
LEAD: Judge and Mrs.
Eugene M. Hanofee of Liberty, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deirdre Constance Hanofee to Eric Todd Friedland, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Friedland of Liberty.
An August wedding is planned.


City Auctions
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE CAREFUL SHOPPER
LEAD:  In Rye, Clothing At Up to 75% Off  The Bay Window in Rye has reductions of up to 75 percent on winter clearance merchandise in its upstairs sale room.
Separates, turtlenecks, gloves, sweaters, dressy dresses, evening gowns, belts and pantyhose are available.
In addition, through March it offers 20 percent reductions on sterling silver and other jewelry from downstairs and on Regina


In Manila, Man of the Pen Ponders the Sword
LEAD: The sword, says F. Sionil Jose, in despair over his country's troubles, is obviously mightier than the pen.


CHILD STYLE
LEAD: MANY DESIGNERS include children's versions of adult fashions in the presentation of their major collections.
In this season of whimsy and fantasy, however, children's clothes often seem to be the inspiration for a designer's entire line.
Among the Europeans, Sonia Rykiel, Kenzo and Elisabeth de Senneville created a striking variety of Lilliputian looks.


October Wedding For Miss Murphy
LEAD: Rachel Elizabeth Murphy and John A. Cannizzaro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Cannizzaro of South Plainfield, N.J., plan to marry in October, the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Bradford Murphy of Little Silver, N.J., and Harwich Port, Mass., have announced.


Anne Cameron To Wed in Fall
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mrs.
Richard R. Dailey of New York and Lyme, Conn., and William A. Cameron of New York and East Hampton, L.I., of the engagement of their daughter Anne Hamilton Cameron to Terrence Patrick Cunningham, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Cunningham of Lancaster, Pa., and Rock Hall, Md.


DELAYING A DEAL
LEAD: In his article ''Leveraged Buyouts: On the Level?'' (Jan. 17), Benjamin J. Stein presumes, but never offers any proof, that management's offer for Narragansett Capital was below fair market value.
No higher bids emerged from outsiders and 97 percent of the shareholders voted in favor of the deal, so only a small minority of those involved appear to agree with the author.


Kempton Is Winner Of George Polk Prize For 45-Year Career
LEAD: Murray Kempton, the columnist for Newsday, has won the George Polk Career Award in Journalism, one of 14 awards announced yesterday by Long Island University.


A Cherished Royal Retreat
LEAD: BY permission of her great-great-granddaughter, the public has access each spring to Queen Victoria's most treasured and private memorial to Prince Albert, the Royal Mausoleum at Frogmore.
Hidden in the shadow of Windsor Castle, the mausoleum and gardens of Frogmore House are opened to the public in aid of charity for a few days each year - this year on May 4 and 5, May 18 (gardens only) and


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Tree Adoptions: Make Mine Maple


An 18th-Century Journey and New Shapes
LEAD: IN a 1762 portrait painted by Pompeo Batoni, James Bruce of Kinnaird stands corpulent, wearing a richly frogged coat and a periwig and looking the embodiment of kindliness.
So much for appearances: the rest of the evidence suggests that the naturalist and explorer was something of a scoundrel, and mean-spirited to boot.


Battle for the Black Vote Is Over Before It Started
LEAD: In 1984 Walter F. Mondale came to this proud citadel of the civil rights movement, wrapped himself in the approbation of its black establishment, and began a head-to-head, vote-to-vote struggle with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson for the support of Southern blacks.


Linda Eglin Is Engaged
LEAD: Linda Hilliard Eglin's engagement to Cole Edmund Harrop, a son of Yolanda W. McPhee of Princeton, N.J., and David C. Harrop of New York, has been announced by her mother, Mrs.
Thomas Wilson Eglin of Lawrenceville, N.J., and Watch Hill, R.I.
A May wedding is planned.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Turning Off Ivan; Why the Russians Scorn Their Schools
LEAD: FOUR teen-agers are laden with presents and good cheer when they go to their mathematics teacher's apartment for a surprise birthday party.
But the surprise turns vicious.
They lock the teacher in her apartment, cut off the phone and begin a nightmarish siege to force her to give them access to their examination papers so that they can change their grades.


A Rivalry at Airports: Skycaps vs. Baggage Carts
LEAD: Kenute Robinson, a baggage porter at Kennedy International Airport, approached Mary Bradner's car as it pulled up to the British Airways terminal and repeated the question he has asked for eight years: ''You need some help?''


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Fairfield's Auto Dealers Feel the Squeeze
LEAD: THE high cost of real estate coupled with restrictive zoning in lower Fairfield County has put an essential suburban industry, the local automobile dealer, at risk.
Land on which to store new cars, cars under repair and even employees' cars has become unaffordable or unavailable.


Dance: Nancy Zendora Presents Three Creations
LEAD: DANCERS often stood with their backs to the audience.
There was some muted reaching out when they faced each other.
Grain or birdseed was poured over a reclining woman who soon crawled out.
It was a night of artfully tenuous connections on Thursday when Nancy Zendora presented three dances at the Nikolais-Louis


Shultz Tries To Move the Immovable in The Mideast
LEAD: THE United States has often served as a catalyst in the peculiar chemistry of Arab-Israeli accord.
After the 1973 war, Henry A. Kissinger was able to get Egypt and Syria to enter troop disengagement agreements with Israel.
In 1978, President Carter brokered the Camp David deal between President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel - the agreement that led to the first peace treaty between Israel and an


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  TREVI FOUNTAIN TO BE RESTORED


STREETSCAPES: West 83d Street 'Tenements'; Is the Perspective Changing On Old Middle-Class Housing?
LEAD: ''THEY'RE just some old tenements,'' said Harold Pine, the owner of 167 West 83d Street, referring to his building and its neighbors at 169, 171 and 173. ''There's nothing special about them.''


PAINTERS WHO USED CAMERAS AS MEANS AND END
LEAD: THAT ARTISTS WHO ARE KNOWN primarily as painters also take photographs is not news.
Photography, after all, is no longer considered a natural enemy of the brush, as it was in the dark ages 100 years ago.
As a result, what matters today is not whether an artist uses photographs, but the part that camera images play in his or her work.


Theater Sound in the Home
LEAD: Back in the early 1950'S, when the rise of television began to deplete the movie houses, Hollywood fought back by offering what television couldn't: color, a wide screen and multidirectional sound.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  POLITICAL SATIRIST  Mark Russell, the political satirist whose line is ''I have 535 writers -435 in the House and 100 in the Senate,'' will appear in Sparta Saturday evening.


Hiring Women To Haul Garbage
LEAD: ANOTHER male stronghold in New York City crumbled in August 1986 when the Sanitation Department hired two women for its garbage collection force.


Teaching Explored in 2 Plays
LEAD: ''I DON'T believe in the educational process,'' Professor Hiller blithely informs his students, while he sips a martini.


Kozol and Welfare Hotels
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE NICE OLYMPICS
LEAD: Jim McKay, who's been around, says he always assumed Canadians and Americans were pretty much the same people - until he came to Calgary to work the Winter Games for ABC.


The Editorial Notebook; A Safety Valve for Violent Schools
LEAD: The dispute, between class sessions at Bryant High School in Long Island City, was like one of thousands in urban high schools every day.
Four white students had gathered on a stairway when Michael, a black, tried to push past.
Tempers flared.
Charles, one of the whites, threatened Michael with a knife.


Crack Houses Searched By Police In Effort to Find Officer's Killers
LEAD: Teams of police officers swept through suspected crack houses and other drug-trafficking areas in southeastern Queens yesterday, searching for information in the slaying of a rookie police officer as he protected a man who had complained to the police about drug dealing.


Lyle Nelson Worth Mention
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Trump's Vision: Pro and Con
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fight to Save Polo Field Inspires Greenbelt Effort
LEAD: A ONE-MAN fight to save an Old Brookville polo field has inspired a neighborhood campaign to preserve open space in the village.


Texaco Is Facing Another Big Payout
LEAD: Texaco agreed to pay $1.25 billion to the Energy Department to settle a complaint that it overcharged customers when oil-price controls were in effect in the 1970's.
Texaco, trying to emerge from bankruptcy protection, has also agreed to pay $3 billion to Pennzoil in a dispute over Texaco's acquisition of Getty Oil.


STORIES MAKE THE FAMILY
LEAD: The stories of Elizabeth Stone's family remind me of how my childhood was also enriched by a myriad of true and semitrue stories of immigrant forebears.


Question of the Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: Until he isn't waiting in his room for a call from George.


THE SINS OF THE MOTHERS
LEAD:  COMPLICITY  By Elizabeth Cooke. 262 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $16.95.


Miss Kahn Is Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Kahn of Boca Raton, Fla., and New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Melanie Sue Kahn, to Dr.
Barry M. Zingler, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Zingler of Fair Lawn, N.J.
Miss Kahn, a registered respiratory therapist at University Hospital in New York, and her fiance, a resident in internal medicine at the New York University Medical Center, plan to marry in May.


LITTLE GAIN SEEN AS SHULTZ VISITS JORDAN AND SYRIA
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz flew to Jordan and Syria today to discuss a package of American proposals for a Middle East negotiating formula but made little apparent headway in his quest.


Light Infantry Is Given Taste Of Real Thing
LEAD: It was cold and still in the dark of an early morning on the side of the hill amid the scrub pine of western Arkansas.
Moonlight seeped through wispy clouds, and the only sound was the chop of a helicopter circling in the distance.


Consumer Binge
LEAD: To the Editor:


ESCAPE THROUGH BRILLIANCE
LEAD: JUDAH P. BENJAMIN  The Jewish Confederate.
By Eli N. Evans.
Illustrated. 469 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $24.95.


'BESIDE HER JOYCE SEEMS INNOCENT AS GRASS'
LEAD:  JANE AUSTEN  Her Life.
By Park Honan.
Illustrated. 452 pp.
New York: A Thomas Dunne Book/St.
Martin's Press. $24.95.


WATER MILL GROWTH: FACTS ARE NEEDED
LEAD: An article on Jan. 10 about Water Mill contained errors  [ ''Fears on Growth Divide Residents of Water Mill'' ] .
I believe the following to be more accurate.


Samuel L. Duboc And Marina Kalb To Marry in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Kalb of Rockville, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Margot Marina Kalb to Samuel Livingston Duboc, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Duboc of Fox Chapel, Pa.
The couple plan to marry in June.


A Telling Finish Indoors
LEAD: To listen to the competitors at the USA/Mobil Indoor Track and Field Championships at Madison Square Garden on Friday night, the completion of the indoor season in an Olympic year, the most intense race may have been the one to the door.


Question of the Week; How Long Will Billy Martin Last?
LEAD: If Martin can keep his head about him and his flame out from under George Steinbrenner, he'll last the season.
SADIE MCKEOWN  New York


After Many a Spring, Fade the Ills of Prague
LEAD: The latest Czechoslovak television hit is called ''Sondy,'' or ''Probes,'' and it dissects, ''60-Minutes'' style, society's ills.


Two Top Executives Named By New York Urban League
LEAD: The New York Urban League has announced the appointments of William J. Brown as interim president and John J. Barrett as chairman.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Strains in TV Evangelism


Castro Defends Noriega on Drugs
LEAD: Calling portions of a former Panamanian official's Senate testimony ''lies and slanders,'' President Fidel Castro of Cuba said he would be willing to travel to Washington to rebut testimony against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega of Panama.
But Mr.
Castro said a visit to Washington would have to include discussion of other issues, which he did not specify.


MAPPING SOUTH AFRICA'S POP MUSIC FROM AFAR
LEAD: Little by little, American lis-teners are growing familiar with the music of black South Africa.


BEARING WITNESS
LEAD: It is unlikely that AIDS would have spread in this country if there had been vigilant guard against unhygienic and promiscuous sexual practices and a serious effort to eradicate or at least control drug addiction.
The current campaigns for ''safe'' sex and ''sterile'' drug use will do little to reduce the spread of disease.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  THE REAL WAR: The Classic Reporting on the Vietnam War, by Jonathan Schell. (Pantheon, $7.95.) Who were we fighting in Vietnam, Jonathan Schell wonders in a new essay introducing his war reports for The New Yorker - Hanoi, the National Liberation Front, the Soviet Union, China, world communism or ourselves?


Contest: Big City, Big Canvas
LEAD: Many drab New York City blocks have been brightened by murals painted boldly onto the bare sidewalls of buildings.
Among them is the picture Heung Sun Cho drew while he was a student at Abraham Lincoln High School in Brooklyn.
His 60- by 30-foot mural depicting all races benefiting from the Constitution adorns the sidewall of 291-293 Seventh Avenue, at 29th Street.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Some of the floorboards in our house have raised slightly at the edges, and they often break when stepped upon.
As a result, we now have spaces between the boards.
This condition seems to have developed after the floors were stained.
Can you help us solve this problem?


Robertson Makes Gesture of Support for Swaggart
LEAD: Pat Robertson made a stop at an airport here today to offer a message of support to the Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart, the evangelist who stepped down from his television ministry last week after admitting to unspecified sins.


The Art of Matching Cooks and Clients
LEAD: EACH year more and more companies decide to farm out their food programs to independent contractors.
Battling for this market are the small regional contractors and the Goliaths with a national reach - notably the Marriott Corporation, ARA Services, Inc. and the Canteen Company.


Capitals Shut Out Islanders and Close In
LEAD: For the Islanders, the zero on the scoreboard, technically an accounting of goals scored, could have applied to a host of other things a team measures itself by.


PLOT AGAINST U.S. DESCRIBED IN COURT
LEAD: Two former leaders of a racist religious sect and paramilitary training camp have told a jury here of a 1983 plan to set in motion murders and robberies intended to bring down the Federal Government and replace it with an ''Aryan nation.''


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bayport  $158,000  443 Renee Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; den with fireplace, eat-in kitchen, 0.25 acre; taxes $3,500.
Lawrence  $625,000  10 Wedgewood Lane  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; maid's room, fireplace, den, breakfast room; taxes $8,500.


Palestinian Toll Exceeds 70
LEAD: The statistics show three more Palestinians killed in fighting Israeli troops on the West Bank.
But behind the figures are a skirmish in Hebron and two villages, a grim hospital scene and a battle for a body.
Page 18.


Architect of Perestroika Sells It in The West
LEAD: THE changes under way in the Soviet Union are invariably identified with their leading apostle, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
But the real architect of perestroika, as the restructuring is called in Russian, is Abel G. Aganbegyan, an Armenian economist Mr.
Gorbachev summoned from Siberia to impart new dynamism to a sagging economy.


Halfway Houses: What Goes On Inside
LEAD: WHEN Westchester neighbors learn that our organization, Search for Change, is looking into a site for a halfway house for the recovering mentally ill, we start to hear all the elaborated versions of Nimby -Not in My Backyard.
We heard it when we were opening our Scarsdale house, and now we hear it again at meetings about our plans in Larchmont.


A Kibbutz Is Confronted With a Hard New Truth
LEAD: Duby Bar is the secretary of this kibbutz 600 yards from the border with Jordan, and last Friday, he said, a faith that survived wars and four decades seemed suddenly to whither.


Harvey Kuenn, 57, Ex-Manager Of Milwaukee Brewers, Is Dead
LEAD: Harvey Kuenn, a former American League batting champion who managed the Milwaukee Brewers to their only pennant, died today at his home in Peoria, Ariz., the club announced.
He was 57 years old.


Recital: Ax and Ma Perform
LEAD: A DECADE ago, at the height of the vaunted chamber-music boom, much was made of soloists banding together for recitals.
Since then, comparatively few teams of stellar soloists have decided to cultivate chamber playing as an art, and to make it part of their artistic agendas.
The cellist Yo-Yo Ma and the pianist Emanuel


PORTA SYSTEMS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PORTA SYSTEMS CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
12,833,000
11,043,000
Net loss
b5,664,000
c547,000
Share earns
-
.10
Yr sales
50,357,000
40,709,000
Net loss
b3,092,000
c2,500,000
Share earns
-
.46


Music: At the Triplex, Costinescu's 'Seminar'
LEAD: GHEORGHE COSTINESCU'S ''Musical Seminar'' is less interesting for its stated purpose - a United Nations-like reconciliation of styles - than for its confrontations between music and language.


Fire Destroys Westchester Church
LEAD: The charred remains, foreground, of the St.
John and St.
Paul Episcopal Church in Mount Vernon, N.Y., after it was destroyed in a four-alarm fire yesterday.
The blaze heavily damaged a two-family house adjacent to the 70-year-old wood-frame church.
Officials said the cause of the blaze had not been determined.


Koch Ad Asks Help of Reagan in Drug Battle
LEAD: Once again Mayor Koch is taking on the White House and the hearts and minds of anyone who will listen.
This time it is in a full-page ad in The New York Times.


Soviet Jew Lands in Tel Aviv And Ends a 13-Year Struggle
LEAD: A 77-year-old Soviet Jew who battled for 13 years to leave the Soviet Union embraced his daughter when he arrived today in Israel.


Israeli Officers Ordered to Watch Tape of 4 Soldiers Beating Arabs
LEAD: The Israeli Army commander in the West Bank summoned all his officers above the rank of captain today and made them watch American television footage taken of four of his soldiers beating two captured Palestinian youths for nearly 40 minutes.


MAXWELL LABORATORIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MAXWELL LABORATORIES INC (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,912,000
15,160,000
Net inc
661,000
651,000
Share earns
.25
.24
6mo sales
31,117,000
29,798,000
Net inc
1,513,000
1,283,000
Share earns
.57
.48


French Trial Hears Report of Experiment on Patient
LEAD: France's medical world is an uproar over an accusation that a comatose patient was made the object of an experiment to shed light on the trial of two doctors charged with killing another patient.


The Sweat Merchants
LEAD: Two million times a year, American citizens - people who have done nothing more criminal than to apply for a job - are subjected to the humiliation of being hooked up to a polygraph machine.


PHH GROUP INC reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PHH GROUP INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Revenue
389,939,000
336,687,000
Net inc
11,451,000
10,290,000
Share earns
.68
.61
9mo rev
1,174,611,000
992,070,000
Net inc
31,661,000
27,464,000
Share earns
1.88
1.64


Soviet Team Stunned By Finns
LEAD: Vyacheslav Fetisov, the captain of the Soviet Union's hockey team, stood atop the victory stand and gazed thoughtfully at his gold medal.
The shaggy-haired player who is rumored to be joining the Devils next season studied first one side of his medal, and then the other, as if it were the relic of an achievement he might not experience again.


Contrasting Views of Winter
LEAD: Chris Teng looked more like he was taking a wave in California than sledding in Scarsdale, N.Y., as he took advantage of the remnants of Saturday's snowfall.
Andrew Sereysky and his 3-year-old son, Jedd, had the beach at Coney Island to themselves as they fed sea gulls. (NYT/Suzanne Dechillo) (NYT/Angel


HOME UNITY SAVINGS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HOME UNITY SAVINGS (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net loss
b3,817,000
c1,422,000
Yr net loss
b5,276,000
c6,405,000
b-Includes a loss of $191,000 for the quarter and net of $994,000 for the year, both from discontinued operations.


Gore Redirects Message at Workers
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore Jr., acknowledging that his Presidential campaign has lacked a clear focus, has begun a major effort to redefine his quest for the Presidency as a battle for ''average working men and women.''


WISER OIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*WISER OIL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,588,000
7,890,000
Net loss
1,267,000
b741,000
Share earns
-
.08
Yr rev
31,805,000
32,906,000
Net inc
2,952,000
1,598,000
Share earns
.33
.18
b-Net income


Washington Talk: Briefing; Passport Denied
LEAD: Once again, the State Department has refused to issue a passport to Philip Agee, the former C.I.A. agent turned Government critic, whose writings have disclosed the names of fellow intelligence agents and exposed covert operations.


Liverpool Journal; There's No Preaching, Just the Clean Needles
LEAD: Peter McDermott, a 32-year-old Liverpool drug addict, is a regular at the Hope Street clinic here, Britain's largest program for giving out clean needles to drug addicts in an effort to curb the spread of AIDS.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I think we can say we both feel we have a package that is promising - at least that we think is promising.
Whether anybody else thinks it's promising is a question.
But we will be working together to make that so.''  - Secretary of State George P. Shultz after seeing  President Hosni Mubarak.


Carbon Monoxide Kills Five
LEAD: Four children and their baby sitter were killed by carbon monoxide fumes from a gas heater, officials in this northern Florida community said.
Pronounced dead Saturday at the home of Ola Weerts were two of her three children, 10-year-old James and 6-year-old Sherri.
Julie Meador, 10, granddaughter of a friend of Mrs.


School Board Is Ready For a Custodian Strike
LEAD: The New York City Board of Education is prepared ''to take a strike if necessary'' by school custodians to win contract concessions from their union, the board's president, Robert F. Wagner Jr., said in a television interview broadcast yesterday.


Advertising; Ruder Finn &amp; Rotman's President Resigns
LEAD: Morris B. Rotman, who will be 70 years old June 6, has resigned his post as president of Ruder Finn &amp; Rotman, the public relations firm, and will take on the newly created title of senior consultant.
David Finn, 66, continues as chairman.


House Vote on Contras To Defer Real Decision
LEAD: The vote that House members are scheduled to take Thursday on rival Democratic and Republican plans to aid the contras will once again postpone rather than establish a real decision on United States policy toward Nicaragua, members of Congress said this weekend.


Iranian Missiles Hit Iraqi Capital; Renewal of 'War of Cities' Feared
LEAD: Iran fired three surface-to-surface missiles at the Iraqi capital early today, the Iranian press agency said.  [ Reports from Baghdad said that two Iranian missiles slammed into the Iraqi capital, killing or wounding a large number of residents and destroying houses, shops and cars in two residential areas.


Abortion Group Opposes Cuomo's Medicaid Plan
LEAD: A proposal by Governor Cuomo to expand Medicaid coverage for prenatal care, but not for abortion, has abortion rights groups gearing up for their first major fight in the state in almost a decade.


Armenian Protests Reportedly Subside
LEAD: The streets of Yerevan were quiet today for the first time in more than a week as organizers of huge nationalist demonstrations that had paralyzed the Armenian capital met to discuss a planned monthlong suspension of the protests, Armenian nationalists said.


Concert: The Takacs
LEAD: SHORT, precisely imaged pieces by two 20th-century masters brought the best playing from the Takacs String Quartet Friday evening in Weill Recital Hall.
Webern's Six Bagatelles (Op. 9) and Stravinsky's Three Pieces for String Quartet were composed at nearly the same time, at and just before the beginning of World War I.


The Hostage Scourge: How Europe Is Faring
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl recently referred to hostage-taking as ''the pest of modern times,'' and it is one few West European countries have escaped.


Koch and LeFrak Agree on Plan For 1,200 Middle-Income Units
LEAD: The Koch administration and Samuel J. LeFrak have reached an agreement for the developer to build 1,200 apartments for limited profit on the Lower East Side.
The plan would involve a creative financing arrangement and would be among the largest middle-income projects built in New York City in a decade.


Winners Satisfied With Losing
LEAD: This has been a winning season for basketball at Hunter College, but at first glance it doesn't appear to be for its winning basketball coaches.
The women's varsity team and the men's junior varsity won their divisions at the annual City University of New York tournament.


Early Music Finale
LEAD: An all-Beethoven program is to be presented on March 7 at 8 P.M. as the last of the ''On Original Instruments'' series at the Merkin Concert Hall, Abraham Goodman House, 129 West 67th Street.
The performers are to be Malcolm Bilson, fortepiano; Daniel Pincus, tenor; Stephen Hammer, oboe; Lawrence McDonald, clarinet; William Purvis, horn and Dennis Godburn, bassoon.


Singapore's Economy Up
LEAD: Singapore, one of Asia's richest nations, made an impressive economic recovery in 1987, but growth will slow this year with consumers having less money to spend, the Government's annual economic survey said.


Unexpected Strong Traffic Allows Airlines to Lift Fares
LEAD: Americans are seeking lower-priced package tours to offset the higher prices in Europe.
Many travelers have shrugged off the stock market crash and are not crimping on their vacation and business travel.
And Europeans by the thousands are flocking to the United States to take advantage of the greater buying power of their currencies.


Topics of The Times; No-Fault Fat
LEAD: Two studies published in The New England Journal of Medicine last week won't help the obese drop any pounds but the research should lift another enormous weight: guilt.


Tool Orders Jumped 23.7% In January
LEAD: Bolstered by increased exports and Federal policies requiring some Government agencies to buy more domestic products, orders in January for American-made machine tools rose 23.7 percent from December's level, the industry's trade association said.


Reed Will Become Nets Coach Today
LEAD: Willis Reed, who as a player led the Knicks to the only two National Baskeball Association championships the franchise ever won, will be officially named today as the head coach of the New Jersey Nets, a struggling franchise that needs wholesale rebuilding.


Arts Troupes Caught In East-West Squeeze
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Refugees: Open Arms, or Stiff-Arm?
LEAD: In Moscow, the Secretary of State won a Soviet promise to let more emigres out.
In Washington meanwhile, the Reagan Administration proposed a budget that would cut by a quarter the funds for resettling refugees in the United States.
This beckoning with one hand and shooing with the other constitutes a two-faced policy, unacceptable even given dire budget difficulties.


Jansen Has Victory, of Sorts
LEAD: Dan Jansen, the speed skater from West Allis, Wis., was named today as the winner of the Olympic Spirit Award for these Winter Olympics.


Knicks Defeated by Nuggets
LEAD: Michael Adams scored 15 of his 18 points in the first quarter, helping Denver get off to a fast start today as the Nuggets went on to defeat New York by 109-100 and snap the Knicks' three-game winning streak.


Privatization Faces Test in Britain
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's plan to end Government ownership of Britain's electrical power system is emerging as a major test of public satisfaction with her policy of privatization.


China Hasn't Done Much for Ordinary Tibetans
LEAD: To the Editor:


SHAER SHOE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SHAER SHOE CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,071,369
4,006,377
Net inc
233,950
217,999
Share earns
.23
.21


Yesterday's Medal Winners
LEAD:  Speed Skating: Women's 5,000 meters  Gold: Yvonne van Gennip, the Netherland  Silver: Andrea Ehrig, East Germany  Bronz: Gabi Zange, East Germany  Nordic Combined Individual  Gold: Hippolyt Kempf, Switzerland  Silver: Klaus Sulzenbacher, Austria  Bronz: Allar Levandi, Soviet Union


AMERICAN MANAGEMENT SYSEMS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN MANAGEMENT SYSEMS INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
50,545,000
37,117,000
Net inc
3,349,000
1,719,000
Share earns
.32
.17
Yr rev
174,308,000
135,521,000
Net inc
7,582,000
5,231,000
Share earns
.73
.51


Los Angeles Journal; Traffic Guru Gives Rush-Hour Relief
LEAD: Through the morning fog, smog and freeway jams comes the blast of Bill Keene over the radio:


RANGAIRE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RANGAIRE CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
18,085,000
18,580,000
Net loss
104,000
b242,000
6mo sales
38,086,000
40,539,000
Net inc
1,105,000
b646,000
Share earns
.29
.12
b-Includes an extraordinary charge of $273,000 from prepayment of long- term debt.


Results and Standings
LEAD:  HOCKEY  YESTERDAY'S GAMES  Finland 2, Soviet Union 1.
Sweden 3, West Germany 2.
SATURDAY'S GAME  Canada 6, Czechoslovakia 3.
Medal Round
W
L
T
Pts
GF
GA
*Soviet Union
2
1
0
8
13
3
!Finland
2
1
0
7
10
1
!!Sweden
2
1
0
6
10
9
Canada
2
1
0
5
14
9
Czechoslovakia
1
2
0
2
10
14
West Germany
0
3
0
2
3
19


As Salvadoran Vote Nears, Political Killings Increase
LEAD: The worst wave of political killings in the last two years has swept El Salvador in recent weeks as campaigning picks up for legislative and municipal elections next month.


Creating a Bernstein Tribute
LEAD: When Julia Migenes steps onto the stage of Alice Tully Hall this evening to sing Leonard Bernstein's ''I Hate Music,'' the song, which opens an evening celebrating the composer's 70th birthday year, will set the freewheeling musical mood of a concert devoted entirely to Mr.
Bernstein's songs.


DUKAKIS AND BUSH TRIUMPH IN MAINE
LEAD: Governor Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts scored another victory in his backyard today, easily winning Maine's Democratic caucuses, while the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's solid second-place finish again demonstrated his ability to build support in a state with an overwhelmingly white population.


Sledders' Medal Slips Away
LEAD: For all the unpleasantness surrounding their Olympic experience, the United States bobsled team probably should have named its sleds Fussing, Fighting and Feuding.
Today, however, the Americans were on the verge of making all the controversy of the past three weeks ancient history.
Its top four-man sled, driven by Brent


Panamanian's Wife Recounts Crisis
LEAD: With the deposed President, Eric Arturo Delvalle, still in hiding today, his wife has said he intends to remain in Panama as long as possible to assert that he is still the constitutional President.


Brockway Bid Cleared
LEAD: Owens-Illinois Inc. has won another victory in its attempt to purchase Brockway Inc., another glass maker.
The company said that the Court of Appeals in Washington on Friday unanimously denied the Federal Trade Commission's motion to block the merger.


SPENDTHRIFT FARM INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPENDTHRIFT FARM INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,858,324
15,073,698
Net loss
1,416,615
5,960,938
6mo rev
4,085,316
21,037,325
Net loss
3,454,278
12,207,561


VW Increases Prices
LEAD: Volkswagen of America Inc. said Friday that it would increase the average price of its vehicles by 2.2 percent, or $248, effective Monday.
Prices of the least expensive models, the two-door Golf hatchback and the Fox line, are to remain the same.


Attention Is Focused on Florida Derby
LEAD: The last two Kentucky Derby winners, Alysheba and Ferdinand, emerged from obscurity and California late in the spring.
This year, though, it appears that the East may rise again.


Very High Levels of Alcohol Are Found in Drunken Drivers
LEAD: Half of the jail inmates convicted of drunken driving had consumed the equivalent of at least 12 bottles of beer or eight mixed drinks before their arrest, the Federal Government said today.


GOULD INVESTORS LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GOULD INVESTORS LP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,489,000
5,841,000
Net inc
375,000
297,000
Share earns
.30
.22
Shares outst
1,248,146
1,338,894
The company said the latest quarter includes a gain on properties, mortgages and invetments of $1,094,000, or 88 cents a share, compared to $106,000, or 8 cents a share, a year ago.


Soviet Gains Seen in Air-Launched Cruise Missiles
LEAD: The Soviet Union has rapidly expanded its ability to fire air-launched cruise missiles armed with nuclear warheads at the United States, according to Maj.
Gen.
Jimmie V. Adams, the Air Force officer responsible for the air defense of the continental United States.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Has a major leaguer ever failed to bat at least .300 in a season in which he had 200 or more hits?


TV Review; Superman At 50, A Special
LEAD: BETWEEN 8 and 9 this evening, you can choose between two specials.
At 8, CBS is mounting a pop-culture party in ''Superman's 50th Anniversary: A Celebration of the Man of Steel.'' At 8:30, NBC has a preview (another is scheduled Thursday), of a new sitcom called ''Day by Day,'' which will have an official premiere in its regular time period next Sunday night at 8:30.


Advertising; Rodale Press Prepares A Magazine for Lipton
LEAD: Rodale Press plans to publish Kidsmarts, a magazine for children, that will be used by Thomas J. Lipton Inc. as a premium offer.
Consumers of its Lipton Cup-A-Soup, Lipton Side Dishes, Wyler drinks and Sunkist Fun Fruits can get copies through on-pack coupons.


World Trade Increased 4% in 1987
LEAD: International trade, led by a sharp rise in shipments of manufactured goods, grew by 4 percent last year and is likely to match that rate again in 1988, economists of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade said in a report scheduled for release Monday.


DI INDUSTRIES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DI INDUSTRIES (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
2,060,718
501,000
Net loss
561,434
2,052,000
9mo net loss
1,230,318
4,207,000
The company said results for the year-ago periods include accruals of $358,000 and $1,074,000, respectively for the quarter and 9 months, for future dividends of preferred stock.


Washington Talk: Briefing; That Political Game
LEAD: ''We're not very big, but we're slow,'' said Representative Michael G. Oxley of Ohio, the captain of the Republican basketball team in the House.


Jewish Groups Examine Farm Crisis
LEAD: Representatives of Jewish groups from around the country met with state and Federal Government officials and agricultural leaders in New York City yesterday to discuss the farm crisis and formulate a national Jewish response to the plight of small farmers.


Advertising; Account
LEAD: * Esquire magazine to Kirschenbaum &amp; Bond.


Dutch Skater Wins Third Gold Medal
LEAD: Yvonne van Gennip of the Netherlands won her third speed-skating gold medal of the XV Olympic Winter Games today, cutting more than six seconds off her world record in the women's 5,000-meters.


DRESHER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DRESHER INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
14,139,000
10,935,000
Net inc
674,000
662,000
Share earns
.15
.15
6mo sales
26,927,000
23,640,000
Net inc
1,392,000
1,344,000
Share earns
.31
.30


IDENTIX INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IDENTIX INC
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
191,000
465,000
Net loss
770,000
490,000
6mo sales
900,000
717,000
Net loss
1,015,000
1,122,000


UNICARE FINANCIAL reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*UNICARE FINANCIAL (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b1,229,000
c840,000
Per share
.31
.23
Shares outst
3,986,395
3,666,667
Yr net inc
b4,859,000
c3,209,000
Per share
1.22
1.01
Shares outst
3,996,571
3,116,667


One Barrier to Banks Due to Fall This Week
LEAD: Unless a Federal Appeals Court decides otherwise, subsidiaries of 13 commercial banks will be able tomorrow to enter, once again, the hurly-burly world of investment banking.


NATO Summit Meeting: Emphasis On a Show of Solidarity, Not Results
LEAD: President Reagan and the other NATO leaders gather in Brussels on Wednesday, determined to demonstrate solidarity in the face of differences and disputes that have afflicted the alliance.


A 27-1 Shot Wins The Pan American
LEAD: Canada finally won a gold medal of sorts today when a 5-year-old Canadian mare named Carotene scored a major upset victory at 27-to-1 odds in the $300,000 Pan American Handicap at Gulfstream Park.


OAK INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*OAK INDUSTRIES INC (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
46,498,000
42,587,000
Net loss
b4,226,000
c2,862,000
Yr sales
182,210,000
151,745,000
Net inc
b8,226,000
c60,243,000
Share earns
.11
1.01
b-After gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change of $277,000 for the quarter and $1,559,000 for the year; the year also included income from discontinued operations of $1,436,000 and an extraordinary loss of $466,000.


Verbeek and Muller Help Devils Win
LEAD: After scoring only a single goal in each of their previous three games, the Devils exploded for eight this afternoon at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and beat the Minnesota North Stars, 8-6.


MICRO DISPLAY SYSTEMS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MICRO DISPLAY SYSTEMS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
1,509,417
1,125,036
Net loss
737,898
b39,710
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
4,117,843
2,197,303
Net loss
765,027
b190,580
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Women Key to Fighter Wing, Albeit Earthbound
LEAD: In the First Tactical Fighter Wing, a large Air Force combat unit whose fighter pilots have long had a macho image, Maj.
Gail R. Duke says, ''We've earned our place.''


Swaggart, After 'Darkest Week,' Thanks Faithful of All Religions
LEAD: The Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart, who stepped down from his electronic pulpit after confessing to moral lapses, thanked members of all religions today for their support during ''the darkest week'' he has experienced.


DREXLER TECHNOLOGY CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DREXLER TECHNOLOGY CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,796,000
3,540,000
Net loss
1,489,000
1,655,000
9mo rev
9,715,000
12,416,000
Net loss
6,483,000
3,415,000


Jet Sets a Mark Circling Earth
LEAD: A crew of four flew a corporate jet to a new round-the-world speed record on Saturday, breaking a mark set last month.


Brawley Case: Stubborn Puzzle, Silent Victim
LEAD: She vanished on a cold, moonless autumn night in Wappingers Falls, N.Y., from a strip of gas stations and fast-food outlets that stand as a kind of neon-lit mockery of Washington Irving's quaint old haunts up the Hudson.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Navratilova Defeats Shriver: Martina Navratilova defeated Pam Shriver for the 23d straight time yesterday, 6-0, 6-2, to win the $300,000 Virginia Slims of Washington.
It was her third tournament championship in three weeks.
She won the first six games and the final six games.
Navratilova, the world's No.


Business and the Law; More Obstacles For the Raiders
LEAD: FOR corporate raiders, these are not happy times.
State and Federal regulators have made it harder for hostile bidders to conceal their intentions.
They have given the prey of raiders more time to defend themselves.
And they have made several forms of takeovers more costly.


PLACER DOME reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PLACER DOME (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
230,800,000
169,200,000
Net loss
26,400,000
36,200,000
Yr sales
833,900,000
719,000,000
Net inc
158,200,000
93,900,000
Share earns
.73
.46
Figures are in Canadian funds.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, FEBRUARY 29, 1988
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL REPORT  Brazil has reached a preliminary agreement with its commercial creditors on a financial package that should help end its yearlong moratorium on debt payments to foreign banks. [ Page D1. ] The new owner of La Coupole is starting to be called the king of Paris's brasseries.


Tribute to Senator Thurmond Goes Awry in South Carolina
LEAD: It has been compared with the colonies' fight to overthrow King George III, the underdog fighting for a principle.


SPI PHARMACEUTICALS reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SPI PHARMACEUTICALS (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1987
1986
Sales
26,100,000
22,200,000
Net inc
500,000
2,844,000
Share earns
.05
.27
Yr sales
78,600,000
61,400,000
Net inc
b8,500,000
b8,100,000
Share earns
.83
.80


AMERICAN FRUCTOSE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERICAN FRUCTOSE CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
31,623,000
27,888,000
Net inc
b3,192,000
2,554,000
Share earns
.31
.24
Yr sales
132,022,000
151,497,000
Net inc
b11,175,000
13,048,000
Share earns
1.06
1.23


BOGERT OIL CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BOGERT OIL CO (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,554,000
4,293,000
Net inc
551,000
304,000
Share earns
.25
.14


Final Chapter in Chemical Scare Story Is Starting
LEAD: Do you remember EDB?
Four years after the grain fumigant was banned as a possible cancer risk after widespread concern over its discovery in popcorn, breakfast cereal and muffin mixes, most of the the public seems to have forgotten it.


U.S. Will Sell $12.8 Billion of Bills Today
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market.
The Government will auction $12.8 billion of three-month and six-month securities today.


G.M.'s Specialist in Job Shake-Ups
LEAD: When Roy S. Roberts was manager of the General Motors Corporation's aging assembly plant in North Tarrytown, N.Y., he was instrumental in forging a coalition of management, labor and government that secured a future for the once-endangered plant and its 4,500 workers.


Weight Lifting A Complement To Aerobics
LEAD: THE advertisements buried in comic books have always promised that in just a few weeks we could be transformed from 90-pound weaklings, scorned by all, into muscular specimens so imposing that no one would dare kick sand in our faces at the beach.
All we had to do was lift weights.


PS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*PS GROUP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
108,304,000
60,312,000
Net inc
b3,752,000
c6,576,000
Share earns
.50
-
Yr rev
372,110,000
259,477,000
Net inc
b55,616,000
c13,930,000
Share earns
7.25
-


Baby With Brain Defect Is Taken Off Life Support
LEAD: A Texas infant born with almost no brain was taken off life-support equipment that was intended to help preserve her heart and other organs for transplant, a doctor said Saturday.


SOUTHERN STARR reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SOUTHERN STARR
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,058,240
1,914,128
Net loss
250,932
b84,243
Share earns
-
.07
9mo sales
6,287,983
5,912,769
Net loss
292,474
b232,807
Share earns
-
.21
b-Net income


TV on the Open Market: An Industry Convention
LEAD: As the executive in charge of CBS News for five years, Van Gordon Sauter lived in a maelstrom stirred by his determined drive to make news programs more popular.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Feb. 28, 1988:
MONDAY
Watkins-Johnson
TUESDAY
Alaska Air Group
Pillsbury Co
MCA Inc
WEDNESDAY
Fieldcrest Cannon
Stanley Works
Louisville Gas &amp; Elec
Starret (LS) Co
Pennwalt Corp
USF&amp;G Corp
Stanhome Inc
THURSDAY
Allegheny Pwr System
Humana Inc
Atlantic Energy
Munford Inc
Bear Stearns Cos
Washington Natl Corp
Brown Group
Witco Corp
Chrysler Corp
FRIDAY
Chubb Corp
Green Mountain Power
SATURDAY
Collins Foods Intl
Home Depot
SUNDAY
RLI Corp


Time to Move On
LEAD: Tommy Kane, a wide receiver from Montreal who was on the undefeated Syracuse team, has decided to pass up a fourth season with the Orange and seek a career in the National Football League.


A Giddy Witt Is All Smiles After Figure-Skating Final
LEAD: Long after the strains of ''Carmen'' had ended Saturday night with Katarina Witt's version on ice impressing the judges far more than Debi Thomas's, the would-be Spanish gypsies from East Germany and the United States reflected upon the tragedies of their performances.


Republicans Focus on Regional Issue
LEAD: The Republican Presidential candidates disagreed today on trade and budget policy but broke little new ground in their last debate before the Southern primaries and caucuses begin next weekend.


Seoul Opposition Leaders Agree to Merge Parties
LEAD: Hoping to avert another disaster at the polls, South Korea's rival opposition parties are about to merge so that they can present a united front in National Assembly elections this spring.


GREENERY REHABILITATION GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GREENERY REHABILITATION GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
16,436,000
11,395,000
Net inc
1,236,000
988,000
Share earns
.14
.11
The company said year-ago first quarter results are adjusted for a change in tax rates.


Showdown on Selling Newspaper in France
LEAD: France's Finance Minister, Edouard Balladur, may not have realized what a spat he was creating when he provisionally blocked the sale of Les Echos, France's largest financial daily, to Pearson P.L.C.
Last week the publisher of Les Echos turned up the heat even more.


China Hasn't Done Much for Ordinary Tibetans; A Submerged Culture
LEAD: To the Editor:


Topics of The Times; Toy Gun Terror
LEAD: Brandishing a pistol, a crazed man disrupted a Burbank, Calif., news broadcast last August and demanded that his statement be read by the commentator.
The weapon turned out to be a fake.
But the real terror it caused underscores the need for Federal legislation barring the manufacture of realistic-looking toy guns.


ANGELES CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ANGELES CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
9,408,000
10,524,000
Net inc
165,000
b97,000
6mo rev
18,112,000
20,855,000
Net inc
284,000
b611,000
Share earns
-
.07
b-Includes tax credits of $47,000 for the quarter and $296,000 for the 6 months.


DATAVISION INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*DATAVISION INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,186,650
2,178,372
Net loss
478,583
b64,329
b-Net income  Preferred dividend requirements in the year-ago first quarter exceeded net income.


Woman, 69, Dies in Queens After Being Folded Into Bed
LEAD: A Queens woman died of either suffocation or a heart attack when her companion folded her into a convertible bed in a fit of anger, the authorities said yesterday.


It's America's Debt Crisis, Too
LEAD: Item: With help from Morgan Guaranty, Mexico promotes a plan to exchange some of its foreign bank debt for securities backed by U.S. bonds.


A Restaurant Empire, Parisian Style
LEAD: Jean-Paul Bucher, a former chef at world-famous Maxim's, just might have the most successful recipe in Paris: Take a half-dozen preferably large and ornate brasseries, spice up the traditional fare of cabbage and sausage with some nouvelle cuisine fish dishes, blend in some Beaujolais and beer and throw in a little business sense.


A Drive for Basketball
LEAD: Wayne and Carol Lis of Killingly, Conn., suspected they had a burgeoning hoop prospect in the family, when their 8-year-old daughter, Tracy, started spending hours shooting baskets in the driveway of their home.
She seldom missed.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Going Easy on Panama  President Reagan will not order the maximum sanctions against Panama when he rules that Panama has failed to take adequate steps to control drug trafficking, officials said.
Page A3.
Fighting AIDS With Needles  A program in Liverpool, England, that gives out clean needles to addicts is being watched as one approach to curbing the spread of AIDS.


Dance Award Winners
LEAD: The winners of the 1988 Dance Magazine Awards are Kyra Nichols, a principal dancer with the New York City Ballet; P. W. Manchester, a critic and dance historian, and Moscelyne Larkin and Roman Jasinski, the artistic directors of the Tulsa Ballet Theater.
A special award will also be given this year to the presenters of ''Dancing for Life,'' a benefit last fall that raised $1.4 million for AIDS programs.


AIFS INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AIFS INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
11,567,000
9,623,000
Net loss
994,000
b168,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


Bridge: Pro-Am Tourney Is Success After Early Lack of Interest
LEAD: An event that seemed headed for cancellation because of lack of interest turned into a success Friday night at the Roosevelt Hotel, at Madison Avenue and 46th Street.


Israelis Sink a Dinghy, Thwarting P.L.O. Raid
LEAD: An attempt by Palestinian guerrillas to infiltrate Israel from Lebanon by sea was foiled today when an Israeli naval vessel intercepted their rubber dinghy and sank it.


Developer Sues To Force Couple To Alter House
LEAD: If imitation is the most sincere form of flattery, Chris Demetriades, a builder known for his stately $2 million-plus homes, should be glowing.


Curtain Falls on a Hit Show in Calgary
LEAD: The flame lighted 15 days ago by a 12-year-old Calgary girl was to be extinguished tonight by a 32-year-old city engineer who wasato ournro f the gas and thus end the longest Olympic Winter Games ever staged.


Cyprus Leader Pledges Talks in Taking Office
LEAD: President George Vassiliou ushered in his administration today by promising to seek direct talks with Turkey to unify this island, divided between Greek and Turkish Cypriots for 14 years.


AMERIBANC INVESTORS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*AMERIBANC INVESTORS GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,572,000
2,058,000
Share earns
.25
.34
Yr net inc
8,170,000
7,689,000
Share earns
1.30
1.40
Shares outst
6,274,164
5,484,222
The company said net income in the latest year was adversely affected by an increase in the effective tax rate to 43 percent.


Elephants Kill Kenyan
LEAD: Elephants trampled a 60-year-old Kenyan man to death in southeastern Kenya Friday, and a hippopotamus emerged from a sewage pond and attacked a bicyclist on the outskirts of Nairobi, a newspaper said today.
The Daily Nation said the 35-year-old man bitten by the hippopatmus on Thursday was hospitalized in serious condition.


10 or More Groups Vie For Queens Drug Trade
LEAD: The violence-ridden drug trade that is said to be the backdrop for the execution-style killing of a rookie police officer in Queens on Friday includes 10 or more groups plying their drugs and vying for turf in southeast Queens, law-enforcement authorities say.


SAGE SOFTWARE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SAGE SOFTWARE (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,101,000
3,825,000
Net inc
575,000
581,000
Share earns
.11
.14
9mo rev
10,266,000
10,191,000
Net inc
1,081,000
1,044,000
Share earns
.21
.27


Yankees Are Nurturing Leiter With Confidence, but Quietly
LEAD: The arm is discussed in reverential tones around the Yankee camp, where such notable former pitchers as Whitey Ford and Eddie Lopat have cautiously nurtured it over the last two springs.
They speak glowingly about the young pitcher attached to the arm, and they say without hesitation that it could happen this year.


RESIDENTIAL MORTGAGE reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RESIDENTIAL MORTGAGE (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
1,120,000
1,060,000
Per share
.27
.25
Yr net inc
5,093,100
2,187,912
Per share
1.21
.52


CLINICAL DATA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CLINICAL DATA (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
4,110,129
3,961,514
Net loss
b181,962
cd326,961
Share earns
-
.11
9mo rev
13,079,289
10,424,385
Net inc
b571,573
d513,140
Share earns
.19
.17
b-After tax credits of $3,000 and $179,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


EMCON ASSOCIATES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMCON ASSOCIATES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
5,053,000
4,360,000
Net inc
561,000
306,000
Share earns
.21
.19
Shares outst
2,576,000
1,600,000
Yr rev
19,612,000
15,520,000
Net inc
1,722,000
1,074,000
Share earns
.93
.68
Shares outst
1,861,000
1,575,000


Cameras' Scrutiny May Add to Stress
LEAD: DID Peggy Fleming and ABC's coverage unwittingly contribute to Debi Thomas's failure to land the gold medal on Saturday night?


Studies Support Benefits of Circumcision
LEAD: To the Editor:


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON CHARTER - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


SHULTZ SAID TO GET MUBARAK SUPPORT IN TALKS IN CAIRO
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt today became the first Middle East leader to support the peace proposals being offered by Secretary of State George P. Shultz, American officials said.


Topics of The Times; Injudicious, to a Degree
LEAD: According to The Wall Street Journal, Solomon Casseb Jr., the Texas judge in the Pennzoil-Texaco trial, never graduated from law school.
That's no great offense.
He apparently did pass the Texas bar exam, and otherwise met the minimum requirements for service in the state's courts.
But there is reason to ask why he lists a degree from the University of Texas Law School on state bar association and military service records.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Closing Up Shop
LEAD: The Congressional Iran-contra commmitees are scheduled to go out of business Tuesday.
But they will be leaving behind something for journalists and aficionados of the affair to chew on.
The committees are scheduled to make public upward of 40,000 pages of deposition testimony and documents that will be published by the Government Printing


Corrections
LEAD: An article from Baton Rouge, La., on Thursday about the Rev.
Jimmy Swaggart misidentified the television station that interviewed a woman who said she had several sexual encounters with him.
It was WVUE-TV in New Orleans.


L.I. Group Presses Fight Over Shoreham
LEAD: Citizens to Replace Lilco, a powerful organization credited with starting the public power movement on Long Island, is opening an advertising and letter-writing campaign this week against a negotiated settlement to end the long stalemate over the Shoreham nuclear power plant.


Hyundai's Success Is Challenged in Canada
LEAD: When the Hyundai Motor Corporation began exporting cars to Canada in 1984, there were few signs that its competitors were concerned.
The Canadian industry was recovering from its worst recession since the 1930's and its executives had little time to worry about a South Korean manufacturer with less than 20 years in the business and no experience in selling cars in the competitive North American market.


China's Coastal Plans
LEAD: The Chinese leader Zhao Ziyang said his country is planning to concentrate on developing the economies of its coastal areas, strengthening their links with international markets, according to a Japanese newspaper.
He said economic reform and open-door policies have led to considerable progress and that the economy of the areas would gradually be transformed to look outward.


Studies Support Benefits of Circumcision; High Rate in U.S.
LEAD: To the Editor:


BOOKS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: A FOOL AND HIS MONEY.
The Odyssey of an Average Investor.
By John Rothchild. 251 pages.
Viking. $17.95.


The 15-Second Career
LEAD: IT took Debi Thomas 15 years to get there and 15 seconds to lose it.
The moment she felt her body and her skates slip out of synchronization her active mind went a third direction - south.


Smoke in Cockpit Prompts Unscheduled Landing by Jet
LEAD: A Midway Airlines 737 flying from Tampa to Chicago made an unscheduled landing here today after its pilot reported an electrical problem that produced smoke in the cockpit, the authorities said.


GRANGES EXPLORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*GRANGES EXPLORATION (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
8,114,868
2,937,705
Net inc
106,121
458,491
Share earns
.01
.03
Shares outst
19,529,628
13,529,801
Yr sales
21,590,297
9,761,449
Net inc
1,463,199
930,073
(
Share earns
.09
.07
Shares outst
16,618,051
13,168,473


ATLANTIS GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ATLANTIS GROUP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
23,176,000
19,515,000
Net inc
b20,000
c1,334,000
Share earns
-
.24
Shares outst
6,685,750
5,435,750
Yr rev
84,386,000
45,274,000
Net inc
b3,114,000
c3,522,000
Share earns
.51
.64
Shares outst
5,843,284
5,435,750


LEVITT CORPORATION reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*LEVITT CORPORATION (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
35,105,000
38,628,000
Net inc
822,000
1,433,000
Share earns
.25
.42
Yr rev
104,915,000
90,218,000
Net inc
2,027,000
2,033,000
Share earns
.60
.60


Advertising; Several Large Accounts Move to New Agencies
LEAD: A good number of agencies ended last week with new business assignments.


Metro Matters; Residency Laws: Costly Realities Complicate Issue
LEAD: More New York City police officers commute from Suffolk County than come from Staten Island.
As many live in Nassau as in Brooklyn.
Almost as many come from Rockland as from Manhattan.


Continental Grain Getting New Leader After 44 Years
LEAD: In what is the end of a virtual corporate dynasty, Donald L. Staheli, president of the Continental Grain Company since 1984, has been named chief executive, a post held at the international agribusiness company since 1944 by Michel Fribourg.


Corrections
LEAD: The Briefing column of the Washington Talk page on Friday misstated the number of rapes that occurred in buildings operated by the General Services Administration in the fiscal year ending last October.
Two rapes took place in the 7,000 buildings for which the Federal agency is responsible.


Getty Petroleum Chief Sees Gains for Texaco
LEAD: Leo Liebowitz has been besieged with questions about his company's moves, announced last week, to purchase a stake of more than $15 million in Texaco Inc.
But Mr.
Liebowitz, who is president and chief executive officer of the Getty Petroleum Corporation, insists that he is interested is the stock ''for investment purposes only.


Censures in Hutton Case Reported
LEAD: George L. Ball, the chairman of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., has agreed to be censured by the New York Stock Exchange for a supervisory failure during an illegal check overdrafting scheme when he was president of E F. Hutton &amp; Company, according to Wall Street professionals with knowledge of the settlement.


TV Review; 'Perfect People,' With Perry King
LEAD: KENNETH and Barbara -think of them as Ken and Barbie dolls - are married, middle-aged and morose.
Their daughter is heading for college.
They have let themselves disintegrate into acute frumpiness.
Visiting the local disco on an uncharacteristic lark, they find that they have become invisible while the merry singles and cheerfully divorced seem to be having all the fun.


The 'Two Societies' Today
LEAD: It has been 20 years since the Kerner commission's report on urban riots predicted that America was heading toward ''two societies, one black, one white - separate but unequal.''


Prescribing Methadone
LEAD: To the Editor:


TRIANGLE CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TRIANGLE CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
17,912,000
14,595,000
Net inc
379,000
294,000
Share earns
.15
.12
Yr sales
62,357,000
56,530,000
Net inc
b1,966,000
1,352,000
Share earns
.77
.54


CYBEROPTICS CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CYBEROPTICS CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
396,450
235,801
Net inc
48,568
b68,056
Share earns
.02
-
Yr rev
1,380,254
697,894
Net inc
26,310
b191,820
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Instruction Is Essential to Improve in Cross-Country
LEAD: WHEN cross-country skiing was gaining popularity in the 1970's, its advocates often said that anyone who could walk could ski.The ease of learning the sport got a lot of people out on skis.
It also caused a lot of people to miss the joy of skiing with expertise.


JOHN HANCOCK INCOME SECURIIES TRUST reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*JOHN HANCOCK INCOME SECURIIES TRUST (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
3,366,276
3,501,533
Share earns
.36
.38
Yr net inc
13,513,846
14,257,147
Share earns
1.46
1.56
Net income represents net investment income.


5 Years Changes Much In Child-Molesting Case
LEAD: It has been 10 months since the trial began, seven months since the first witness appeared and five years since the child-molesting charges against the McMartin Pre-School hit the courts.
And there is no end in sight.
Prosecutors say they will conclude their presentation by July.
The defense is not saying how long it may take.


Carter Hopes New Strength Can Restore the Kid in Him
LEAD: Gary Carter knows what people were thinking.
He remembers the headline last season that said: ''Kid on Skids.''


MID-AMERICA INDUSTRIES INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MID-AMERICA INDUSTRIES INC (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
21,823,000
21,784,000
Net loss
1,820,000
1,121,000
Yr sales
84,904,000
89,417,000
Net loss
2,785,000
1,492,000


Irving Foresees Bitter Fight
LEAD: Last week's decision by the Federal Reserve Board to allow the Bank of New York Company to proceed with its hostile takeover bid for the Irving Bank Corporation has set the stage for a bitter April 21 proxy fight, Irving said yesterday.


NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, FEBRUARY 29, 1988
LEAD:  International A2-15


E.P.A. Proposes Giving States Say on Pesticides
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency has issued the draft of a policy that would let states decide when, where and how to use pesticides that could contaminate underground water.


NEWHALL RESOURCES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*NEWHALL RESOURCES (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 27
1987
1986
Revenue
1,256,000
1,756,000
Net loss
129,000
b278,000
Share earns
-
.06
Yr rev
5,262,000
9,737,000
Net inc
1,315,000
1,923,000
Share earns
.30
.44
b-Net income


Payout Delay At Santa Fe
LEAD: The Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corporation said Friday that it would suspend for 10 days the payment of a special $5 dividend to be paid in debentures, to allow a Delaware Chancery Court judge time to study the legality of the payment.


Capturing New York's History on a Carousel
LEAD: In a cramped workshop here, Gerry Holzman is building a merry-go-round for the more than 17 million people of New York State.


Stage: 'A Walk in the Woods'
LEAD: IN one of several funny passages that threaten to quicken ''A Walk in the Woods'' into nearly a trot, a Soviet disarmament negotiator tells his American counterpart that the real blame for their nations' nuclear deadlock belongs to Switzerland.
With its bucolic mountains and centuries of peace, Switzerland is so soothing that it drains the urgency from diplomatic talks about Armageddon.


BUDGET RENT A CAR reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*BUDGET RENT A CAR (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
100,400,000
79,700,000
Net inc
1,100,000
1,500,000
Share earns
.10
.14
Yr rev
409,000,000
328,700,000
Net inc
11,800,000
7,800,000
Share earns
1.20
.79


EMC INSURANCE GROUP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*EMC INSURANCE GROUP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b2,150,847
c2,318,441
Share earns
.25
.27
Yr net inc
b10,653,875
c7,348,217
Share earns
1.26
.87
b-After investment losses of $72,978 for the quarter and investment gains of $63,379 for the year.


FISHER TRANSPORTATION reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FISHER TRANSPORTATION
Qtr to Aug 31
1987
1986
Revenue
3,615,622
2,089,964
Net loss
2,255,506
b312,805
Share earns
-
.20
9mo rev
9,876,914
8,472,931
Net loss
2,896,535
b568,002
Share earns
-
.36
b


Older Than The Post
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dance: Tom Evert Company, From Cleveland
LEAD: THE Tom Evert Dance Company made its New York debut Friday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater, and it was no surprise to see members of the Paul Taylor Dance Company in the audience.


Washington Talk: Intelligence Agencies; Secret Life of a Roosevelt Is Now an Open Book
LEAD: Banker, intelligence officer, amateur scholar, grandson of a President, Archibald B. Roosevelt has long been a low-key presence in Washington.
He has been perhaps best known in recent years as the smiling fellow frequently captured by photographers at the side of his wife, Selwa, at the many social occasions she attends as the State Department's Chief of


Iran Hangs 2 for Bombing
LEAD: Two Iranian men were hanged today in a Teheran square where they had planted a bomb on orders from Iraq, Iran's national news agency reported.
The agency, monitored here, gave few details, but several people were killed and dozens wounded when a car bomb exploded in Tajrish Square in December 1985.


FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (EAST HARTFORD) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS &amp; LOAN (EAST HARTFORD)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Net inc
b522,000
c834,000
Per share
.22
-
Yr net inc
b1,989,000
c3,038,000
b-Includes securities gains of $23,000 and $427,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and the year also includes a writeoff of FSLIC secondary reserve, net of tax, of $264,000.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; An 18-Year Court Fight Still Awaiting an Ending
LEAD: Gather round and listen to the tale of Saul S. Weitzman.
It is the oldest one in the book - the docket book, that is, of the Federal Court for the Southern District of New York.
For that matter, it ranks among the 100 oldest civil cases still active in the Federal judicial system.


Inquiry in Officer's Slaying Is Said to Be Stalled
LEAD: A high-ranking New York City police official said yesterday that the investigation into the slaying of a rookie officer had stalled.


Departure Pays Off
LEAD: Anthony Mason remembers playing at Brandeis High School on the Upper West Side with Mark Jackson, Walter Berry and Eddie Pinckney in pick-up games made for new dribbles, new dunks, and razzle-dazzle basketball moves that coaches detest.
Even though Mason was a senior in high school in 1984, and they were in college, he was on their level.


For Women in India Prisons, a 'Grim Picture'
LEAD: An official study of women in Indian prisons says many of them are beaten, sexually molested or otherwise harassed in jail.


Britain Names New Regulator
LEAD: Britain has replaced the chairman of its financial regulatory agency, the Securities and Investment Board.


Louis Zhang Jiashu, Bishop, 96
LEAD: Louis Zhang Jiashu, bishop of Shanghai under China's independent Catholic Church, has died at the age of 96, the official New China News Agency reported today.


Topics of The Times; A Tasteless Meal
LEAD: The Friends of Harvey Mudd College may have already nailed down the prize for unappetizing meal of the year.
The Southern California school recently staged a fund-raising dinner featuring Robert Ballard, leader of the expedition that found the remains of the ''unsinkable'' Titanic three years ago.


Washington Talk: The State Department; Delicate Task Puts Drug Agency in Limelight
LEAD: Each year about this time, a little known agency within the State Department, the Bureau of International Narcotics Matters, emerges from the shadows to issue a report on worldwide drug problems.


Dead or Alive, Who Is Safe From Scavengers?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Opera: Cimarosa's 'Matrimonio Segreto,' Set in 1936
LEAD: WITH the wisdom of hindsight, we now regard Domenico Cimarosa as a footnote among 18th-century composers, scarcely to be mentioned in the same breath as his contemporary, Mozart.
Yet, in their day, Cimarosa's operas found greater favor with the Viennese public, and while they lack the consistent depth and ingenuity of Mozart's scores, the most durable of Cimarosa's works, ''Il Matrimonio Segreto,'' proves to be not only a charming example of the period's style, but also a precursor of


RELIABILITY INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*RELIABILITY INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
8,006,000
5,724,000
Net inc
151,000
b267,000
Share earns
.04
-
Yr rev
28,535,000
21,475,000
Net inc
842,000
b1,101,000
Share earns
.20
-
b-Net loss


Anne D. Nayer Is Bride of James McMenamin 3d
LEAD: The marriage of Anne Dennison Nayer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herman R. Nayer of Oakland, Calif., to James Leo McMenamin 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McMenamin Jr. of New Hyde Park, L.I., took place yesterday in Charlotte Amalie, V.I.
The Rev.
Tyrone Woods of the Universalist Church of Christ in Charlotte Amalie performed the ceremony in the chapel at Louisenhoj


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  Farm Prices Feb.
Tuesday  Leading Indicators Jan.
Construction Spending Jan.
Wednesday  Factory Orders Jan.
New-Home Sales


Trade Move by Rumania
LEAD: Rumania, one of three Communist countries to which the United States has granted favorable tariffs on exports, has said it will not seek renewal of those special trading rights when they expire in July, the State Department said Friday.


SANDERSON FARMS reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*SANDERSON FARMS
Qtr to Jan 31
1988
1987
Sales
33,682,000
36,553,000
Net inc
b1,399,000
3,614,000
Share earns
.15
.43
b-Includes a gain of $1,250,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


LYNN VILLENCY MARRIES STEPHEN COHEN
LEAD: Lynn Marie Villency, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Villency of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Stephen Abraham Cohen, the son of Mrs.
Stanley Novack of Stamford, Conn., and the late Robert M. Cohen.
Rabbi Harold Spivack performed the ceremony at Westbury Manor in Westbury, L.I.


Appeals Court Finds Mother Guilty of Abuse in Son's Death
LEAD: A Manhattan appeals court has overturned a Family Court ruling and found a Bronx mother guilty of abuse in the death of her 19-month-old son, who was found scalded and drowned in a bathtub.
The appeals court also ruled that her 5-year-old son should be removed from her custody.


Stowaways Set Fire in Ship
LEAD: Four Dominican stowaways who were locked in the cargo hold of a container ship set a fire early today to get the crew's attention, but the blaze burned out of control, the Coast Guard said.
A spokesman said no one was injured in the fire.


Champion Sets Layoffs
LEAD: The Champion Spark Plug Company announced that it would lay off more than a quarter of its work force here.
The layoffs, which will begin March 22, will be phased in over four months, said William Walker, Champion's director of industrial relations.
A total of 243 workers - 119 people from the aviation products group and 124 from automotive operations -will lose their jobs in Toledo, where Champion employs 834 production workers.


Raiders Name Shanahan
LEAD: The Los Angeles Raiders will name Mike Shanahan, an assistant with the Denver Broncos, as their new head coach Monday.


Advocacy Group Seeks Park For Westway's Replacement
LEAD: Saying that government is not paying enough attention to the Hudson River waterfront, the Parks Council yesterday proposed its own accompaniment to the Westway replacement - a 65-acre park along the West Side of Manhattan.


MOSCOM CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*MOSCOM CORP
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
2,318,334
1,868,771
Net inc
381,838
41,613
Share earns
.06
.01
Yr sales
8,530,163
6,206,181
Net inc
955,607
b912,312
Share earns
.15
-
b-Net loss


CUBIC CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*CUBIC CORP (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
87,392,000
88,146,000
Net inc
b2,333,000
2,539,000
Share earns
.31
.33
b-Includes $608,000, or 8 cents a share, from an accounting change.


Kentucky Outlasts Syracuse
LEAD: To mark a rare game against Kentucky and a trip to the Adolph Rupp Arena, the Syracuse Orangemen traded in the orange uniforms they have worn on the road for the last 13 seasons for sharp new blue ones.


20 Years After the Kerner Report: Three Societies, All Separate
LEAD: Like a line on a graph, Euclid Avenue traces 20 years of race relations in this old industrial town, an east-west passage from American dream to American nightmare.


Venture Capitalist Back, But She Is Nearer to Top
LEAD: In her long career as a venture capitalist, Patricia M. Cloherty has often managed to squeeze something extra from a deal.
When her company, Alan Patricof Associates, tried to buy the Childcraft Education Corporation, a maker of educational toys, in 1972, one shareholder balked. ''He thought the price was too low,'' she recalled.


Metrodome's Din Echoes Through Viola's Winter
LEAD: THERE had never been much reason for Frank Viola and his young family to remain in Minnesota for Halloween.
The Minnesota Twins did not have any obligations once the baseball season ended at the beginning of the month.
That is, until last year, when Halloween week began with their deafening victory in the seventh game of the World Series under the fiberglass roof of the


IMRE CORP reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*IMRE CORP (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
95,840
16,526
Net loss
4,746,000
1,595,436
Results for 1987 included payments of $520,000 to settle all litigation pending against the company and $320,000 paid in connection with the termination of a contingent lease.


Market Place; Interpreting Standard's Plan
LEAD: WHAT'S a shareholder to do when assessing the rival offers for American Standard Inc., the big producer of plumbing fixtures and air-conditioning units.
The Black &amp; Decker Corporation has offered $68 in cash, while American Standard is proposing a recapitalization plan whose value is less certain but has been estimated by some analysts to be worth as much as $71 a share.


Brazil Debt Agreement Is Reached
LEAD: Brazil and its principal commercial creditors announced tonight that they had reached preliminary agreement on a financial package that should help end this country's yearlong moratorium on its debt payments to foreign banks.


Land Rover Pay Pact
LEAD: About 2,000 white-collar workers at Land Rover U.K.
Ltd. have accepted a two-year pay increase that was previously rejected by 6,000 striking production workers, the vehicle company said on Friday.
The state-owned company said the pay package represented a 14 percent raise, but the strikers contend that it amounts to 8 percent.


Tension for Asset Agency's Chief
LEAD: Gerald P. Carmen has never been one to shrink from political heat.
As a lobbyist and consultant for conservative causes, he has faced occasional controversy before, but in his new job he seems certain to face plenty of it.


The 'Siegfried' Dragon: 6 Men in the Belly of the Beast
LEAD: O.K.
Nobody has moved on stage for five minutes.
Siegfried is going strong and hasn't even got his second wind.
He'll sing for another 15 minutes at least.
Time for a quick nap.


New Helmets Add Speed
LEAD: Jim Gentes, a bicycle racer and industrial designer from Santa Cruz, Calif., has designed a helmet that he claims will make a cyclist go 20 percent faster than he would without the helmet.
Yet speed isn't as big a factor with the new helmet as weight.
The Giro Prolight weighs 7 1/2 ounces, 50 percent less than conventional bike helmets.


Advertising; Faberge Builds Up McGregor
LEAD: WHEN Mark R. Goldston, the president of Faberge USA, asked the Smith/Greenland agency to create something new to introduce the McGregor line of men's cologne and after shave, he certainly could not have expected an ad with the headline: ''Introducing Scotch before breakfast.''


Stage: Moliere's 'Miser,' at Yale Rep
LEAD: For a septuagenarian with a cane, Harpagon, the funniest skinflint in literature (''so mean he won't even give you a good day, he'll lend it to you'') is covering a lot of stage in ''The Miser'' at the Yale Repertory Theater.
He comes on with a bound and goes off with a dive.
In a burst of despair, he jumps and jumps and jumps, higher and higher till he threatens to fly from the premises; in an excess of agitation, he climbs a pole that occupies the center of his living room for no particular purpose other than to provide something for people to climb when emotions require it.


Environmental Records Rated
LEAD: Senator Paul Simon received the highest rating among the Presidential candidates graded by an environmental coalition but no candidate in either party rated better than fair.


Dignity Sues St. Patrick's Over Taping
LEAD: A group of Roman Catholic homosexuals has asserted that on at least four occasions since October, officials of St.
Patrick's Cathedral and the New York City Police Department ''conspired'' to conduct illegal surveillances of the group's protests inside the church.


Faster Drop in Interest Rates Seen
LEAD: Further large declines in interest rates, until recently considered possible only in a medium-term context, may in fact be on the verge of occurring, according to credit market analysts.


At Leetch's First Workout, Advice for On and Off the Ice
LEAD: Money, the old adage goes, attracts money.
It was therefore not all that startling to find Lou Eisenberg and Curtis Sharp, two of New York's more cheerfully ubiquitous millionaires, at today's practice session for the Rangers.


ADELPHIA COMMUNICATIONS reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*ADELPHIA COMMUNICATIONS
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
28,881,000
18,796,000
Net loss
15,921,000
7,782,000
9mo rev
75,948,000
35,986,000
Net loss
37,055,000
11,337,000


65 Bolshoi Dancers Coming to Boston
LEAD: Maya Plisetskaya is to lead 65 dancers from the Bolshoi Ballet of Moscow in the dance component of the Festival of Russian Music and Dance in Boston, in March and April.
The festival has been organized by Sarah Caldwell, the artistic director of the Opera Company of Boston; Miss Plisetskaya, a prima ballerina with the Bolshoi, and her husband, Rodion Shchedrin, a Soviet composer.


Federated-Campeau Terms Shaped
LEAD: Negotiators for Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Campeau Corporation mainly discussed contract terms, including financing, as they worked through the weekend on proposals for a $6.3 billion merger of the two companies, according to people close to the talks.


M-I SCHOTTENSTEIN HOMES reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*M-I SCHOTTENSTEIN HOMES (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
44,152,000
32,861,000
Net inc
880,000
955,000
Share earns
.14
.16
Yr rev
148,195,000
102,141,000
Net inc
4,625,000
3,438,000
Share earns
.77
.69
Shares outst
6,038,425
4,984,493


HEI CORP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*HEI CORP (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
17,674,000
16,703,000
Net loss
b3,031,000
c56,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
58,371,000
52,188,000
Net loss
b3,778,000
c264,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $2,280,000 for the quarter and $751,000 for the 9 months.


TIMBERLAND CO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*TIMBERLAND CO (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Sales
31,190,000
25,226,000
Net inc
2,517,000
2,338,000
Share earns
.24
.22
Yr sales
106,977,000
84,651,000
Net inc
9,371,000
5,240,000
Share earns
.88
.49


U.S. Plans No Stiff Sanctions on Panama
LEAD: President Reagan will not impose the maximum economic sanctions against Panama when he declares Tuesday that it and several other countries have failed to take adequate steps to control drug trafficking, senior Administration officials said today.


Tottenville, Clinton Win
LEAD: Nnennah Lynch and Ramon Espinosa turned in outstanding performances yesterday in the Public Schools Athletic League indoor track and field championships at Manhattan College in the Bronx.


Advertising; People
LEAD: *
William R. Kelly and William G. Weigold were named presidents of the BBDO Detroit and Minneapolis offices, respectively, and Bruce A. Macdonald was named executive vice president of BBDO Worldwide.


KINDER-CARE LEARNING CENTER INC reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*KINDER-CARE LEARNING CENTER INC (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1987
1986
Revenue
126,682,000
92,032,000
Net loss
7,857,000
1,100,000
Yr net inc
26,303,000
b26,936,000
Share earns
.57
.60
Shares outst
46,536,000
44,721,000


Outdoors: No Medals, but One Rewarding Trout
LEAD: THE quad in the Olympic Village is nestled between the athletes' dorms and the dining area.
It is protected from the wind, but at least part of it receives full sunlight all day, and the athletes, like college-age kids everywhere, like to hang out and catch rays during the warm and breezy afternoons that have bedeviled the skiers, sliders, ski jumpers and bobsledders for the last two weeks.


The Calgary Champions
LEAD:  Alpine Skiing  MEN  Downhill  Pirmin Zurbriggen, Switz.
Peter Mueller, Switzerland  Franck Piccard, France  Combined  Hubert Strolz, Austria  Bernhard Gstrein, Austria  Paul Accola, Switzerland  Super G  Franck Piccard, France  Helmut Mayer, Austria  Lars-Boerje Eriksson, Sweden


