Drexel Files an Appeal To Oust Judge in Case
LEAD: Going over the head of a Federal judge, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. yesterday filed an appeal seeking to remove the judge from a broad securities fraud action brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Miles Smeeton, Conservationist, 83
LEAD: Miles Smeeton, a yachtsman and conservationist, died of a stroke Wednesday in Calgary, Alberta.
He was 83 years old and lived in the Calgary area.


Parking Rules
LEAD: The annual Pulaski Day Parade will begin at noon tomorrow at 26th Street and Fifth Avenue, marching north to 52d Street, then east to Third Avenue.
Because of the Jewish holidays of Shemini Atzereth and Simhath Torah, which conclude the harvest festival of Succoth, alternate-side parking will be suspended in New York City on Monday and Tuesday.


Indicted Haitian Colonel Is Ousted
LEAD: An army colonel indicted in the United States on drug charges was retired late tonight, the state-run television reported.
The unexpected removal of the officer, Col.
Jean-Claude Paul, came after several days of speculation that he might become the armed forces chief in Haiti's new military regime.


Koch Plan Would Tax Illegal Drugs
LEAD: In an unusual move against drug-traffickers, the Koch administration said yesterday that it would seek a law requiring people possessing illegal drugs to buy city-issued tax stamps.


Cone Tops Cards For 20th Victory
LEAD: David Cone, who began the season looking for work in the Mets' bullpen, ended it last night by pitching himself into the baseball record books.





Graf Adds Gold to Her Grand '88 Record
LEAD: When she arrived in Seoul more than two weeks ago, an Olympic gold medal appeared out of reach for Steffi Graf.
The pursuit of the Grand Slam had taken its toll, the mental and physical exhaustion having drained her of her customary resolve, eliminating the bounce in her step as she moves at that familiar, no-nonsense pace around a court.


Judge Rebuffs U.S. for Blocking Convoy of Aid to Nicaragua
LEAD: A Federal district judge ruled today that the United States Customs Service should not have stopped a convoy of veterans trying to take food, medication and motor vehicles to Nicaragua last June.


3.6% Inflation in Europe
LEAD: Inflation in the European Community stood at 3.6 percent in August, unchanged from a year ago but up slightly from July, a report released today said.
The community's statistical agency, Eurostat, said the consumer price index rose 3.4 percent in July.
It said the average inflation rate for the first six months of the year was 2.6 percent.


U.S. Appeals Court Backs Eastern on Layoffs of 4,000
LEAD: Eastern Airlines won another victory yesterday in its fight to cut its work force and operations when a Federal appeals court upheld its right to lay off 4,000 employees.


Review/Jazz; A Quintet That Crosses Category Lines
LEAD: Ever unpredictable, Muhal Richard Abrams turned to synthesizer from his usual instrument, the piano, for half of his concert Thursday night at Greenwich House.
As the prime mover in the Association for the Advancement of Creative Music, formed in Chicago in the 1960's, Mr.
Abrams spurred a generation of jazz musicians to forge eclectic styles that drew on history but weren't captives of the past.


Japan's Surplus for August
LEAD: Japan's current-account surplus, the main measure of its trade in goods and services, continued to drop in August on heavy spending by Japanese tourists abroad, the Government announced today.


Kitty Dukakis Urging All-Out War on AIDS
LEAD: Kitty Dukakis said today that AIDS was ''one of the greatest struggles of our century,'' but she also said the deadly affliction presented an opportunity to ''demonstrate to the world the compassion and resourcefulness that is the true American character.''


'Well Paid' Hardly Describes Airline Employees
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sports of The Times; The Many Faces of America
LEAD: ''All right, gang, let's get it together for the closing ceremony tomorrow.
First you put your left foot out, then your right.
It's called marching.
Please don't carry ''Hi, Mom'' banners and NBC signs.
You can't begin to know how childish that looked in the opening ceremony.''


August Home Sales Up 0.1%; Three-Month Pace Strong
LEAD: Sales of new single-family homes, bolstered by a surge in the Middle West, rose slightly in August to continue the strongest sales pace since early 1987.


What to Do With Old Items
LEAD: If you have a worn-out appliance that may contain PCB's, you should take these precautions:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: COMPANIES


Quayle Gives Up Chance to Study For Bentsen Debate to Discuss It
LEAD: Dan Quayle did not want to do his homework.


Beijing Strengthens Centralized Control Of Fitful Economy
LEAD: After moving steadily away from traditional socialism for the last decade, China will strengthen centralized control of the country's economy, Prime Minister Li Peng declared today.


Turning On the Heat
LEAD: The key to a trouble-free start-up of heating equipment is maintenance.
This is work for the experts, and homeowners who schedule annual checkups of their oil furnaces have the right idea.
The service should include a check of burner, nozzles, contact points, filters and automatic controls.
Gas burners are easier to maintain; a homeowner can change filters annually, though professional cleaning of the furnace and venting will eventually be needed.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Sluman Takes Charge: Jeff Sluman shot a 3-under-par 67 yesterday to hold off Leonard Thompson for a 2-shot lead after the second round of the $400,000 Southern Open in Columbus, Ga.
Sluman, who captured the PGA championship six weeks ago, shot an opening-round 63 and was at 130.
Thompson matched the 63 yesterday with a string of eight birdies for a 132 after a first-round 69.


Answers to Quiz
LEAD:  Questions appear on page 10.


U.S. Vows to Take Contras Off Honduras's Hands
LEAD: President Reagan has assured Honduras that the United States ''accepts responsibility'' for thousands of Nicaraguan guerrillas living in Honduran camps, and American officials are considering admitting some of them to the United States as refugees, Administration officials said today.


Miss Martineau Wed To John Landreth Jr.
LEAD: At St.
Mary Star of the Sea Roman Catholic Church in Beverly, Mass., Jeanne Lisa Martineau, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roland William Martineau of Beverly, was married yesterday to John Thompson Landreth Jr., a son of Mr.
Landreth of Fallbrook, Calif., and Betty Wright Landreth of New York.
The Rev.


North and 2 Others Lose Bid to Overturn Iran-Contra Charges
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today refused to dismiss the conspiracy indictments against Oliver L. North, John M. Poindexter and Albert Hakim, three of the defendants in the Iran-contra case.


AFGHAN SAYS PACT ON WAR IS IGNORED
LEAD: The Afghan Foreign Minister today accused Pakistan and the United States of violating or failing to carry out the Geneva accords on the Afghan war.


No Tomorrows for Yankees
LEAD: The race finally ended for the Yankees tonight.
They could have kept themselves alive for another day, but instead they bowed quietly from contention in the American League East on a night when the Boston Red Sox lost again but won the division title.


Olympic Circle


Soviet Player Sought
LEAD: Stan Kasten, the president of the Atlanta Hawks, is in Seoul, South Korea, attempting to sign one of the stars of the gold medal men's basketball team from the Soviet Union.


Bengals Undecided
LEAD: The Cincinnati Bengals had not decided yesterday on the roster status of Daryl Smith and Emanuel King, who have just returned from a 30-day suspension by the National Football League for substance abuse.
Smith, a cornerback, and King, a linebacker, practiced with the team Thursday, but King hurt his lower back, suffering a muscle pull or a spasm.


Mary Hall Oxholm, Lobbyist, 86
LEAD: Mary Hall Oxholm, a former trustee of the Maternity Center Association in Manhattan, died of heart failure Wednesday at the Valley Care Nursing Home in Sewickley, Pa.
She was 86 years old and lived in Gibsonia, Pa.


2d Round for Iran and Iraq; Peace Talks Resume at U.N.
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar opened a second round of peace negotiations between Iran and Iraq today, presenting a new package of proposals to the two countries' Foreign Ministers, United Nations officials said.


Joachim Prinz, Leader in Protests For Civil-Rights Causes, Dies at 86
LEAD: Dr.
Joachim Prinz, a former president of the American Jewish Congress and a leader in civil-rights causes, died of a heart attack yesterday at St.
Barnabas Hospital in Livingston, N.J.
He was 86 years old and lived in Brookside, N.J.


Red Sox Lose, 4-2, But Win Division
LEAD: The Boston Red Sox backed into the American League East championship tonight when the Milwaukee Brewers were eliminated by the Oakland Athletics, 7-1.


'84 Winner In Marathon
LEAD: Carlos Lopes of Portugal, who won the 1984 gold medal in an Olympic-record time of 2 hours 9 minutes 21 seconds, will defend his title in the men's marathon on Sunday afternoon. (The marathon will begin at midnight Saturday Eastern daylight time.) Students, upset that police have refused to release one of their leaders, have threatened to disrupt the race.


In Wisconsin's North Woods Towns, The '88 Campaign Is Hardly Remote
LEAD: The candidates spend almost all of their time in the cities, but Presidential elections are won and lost in the villages and hamlets of America as well as its metropolises.


PAKISTAN GUNMEN KILL AT LEAST 60
LEAD: At least 60 people were killed and 150 were wounded today when gunmen opened fire on crowds in Hyderabad, a city in southern Pakistan, doctors and witnesses said.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
8.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.75
8.39
7.42
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.26
7.30
6.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.46
7.50
6.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.76
8.86
9.45
30-YR.


Sanofi's U.S. Unit To Add Kallestad
LEAD: Sanofi Inc. said it was acquiring Kallestad Diagnostics, based in Austin, Tex., for $72 million from Erbamont N.V., a Netherland Antilles company with headquarters in Stamford, Conn.
Sanofi, the New York-based subsidiary of the French drug company Sanofi S.A., said it expects Kallestad to work closely with Diagnostics Pasteur, Sanofi's joint venture with Pasteur Institute, the


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article in Weekend yesterday about the Hell's Kitchen Park Art Show in the Clinton area of Manhattan gave an incorrect location.
The show takes place tomorrow on 10th Avenue between 47th and 48th Streets.


Magazine's Stolen Olympic Photos Are Found on a Street Corner    Two boxes, at right, containing 3,000 slides from events Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday in Seoul, South Korea, were stolen Thursday from a delivery van outside the Time-Life building in Manhattan. The boxes were found at Seventh Avenue and 56th Street by a messenger, Roberto Garcia, who returned them to the magazine yesterday. Mr. Garcia will receive a reward. (The New York Times/G. Paul Burnett)


Busy Racing Weekend
LEAD: New York's most promising 2-year-old colts and fillies will run in separate Grade I races that highlight a busy weekend of stakes action.


Lincoln Hudson, 72, Advertising Executive
LEAD: Lincoln Theodore Hudson, a former advertising executive, died of an undisclosed illness Monday at Jackson Park Hospital and Medical Center in Chicago.
He was 72 years old and lived in Chicago.


A Perestroika Generation
LEAD: Today's sweeping changes in the Kremlin give Mikhail S. Gorbachev's leadership a fresh sense of momentum at a time when his domestic programs have been flagging badly, when public discontent about the anemic economy is rising, and when troops patrol restive Soviet republics.


Doctors Go on Strike at a Financially Troubled Bronx Clinic
LEAD: Doctors at a financially troubled South Bronx clinic rejected a final contract offer yesterday and went on strike, leaving the clinic to be run by temporary replacements.


London Transit Passes Are Worth Imitating
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japanese Purchase Of Inter-Continental Set for $2.27 Billion
LEAD: In one of Japan's largest purchases of an American company, the Seibu Saison Group, a retailing giant that is one of the country's most aggressive conglomerates, acquired the luxury Inter-Continental Hotel chain today for $2.27 billion.


Famous Hotels in Inter-Continental Chain
LEAD: While President Francois Mitterrand of France chatted over coffee with Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis at the Inter-Continental Hotel in Manhattan on Thursday, an elusive Japanese billionaire took a quick look around the lobby, proclaimed it ''very nice,'' slipped out the hotel door - and left town.


Shortening Links In the Retail Chain
LEAD: It started as a concept about four years ago, an attempt to stem the flow of apparel imports.
It exists today in its infancy, with a handful of retailers, clothing manufacturers and fabric and fiber producers participating.
And in five more years, consumers across the nation may reap the benefits of this revolution in the way apparel and general merchandise are made available for sale.


Nets Guard Banned for Drugs
LEAD: Duane Eddy Washington, who was hoping to win a spot in the backcourt with the Nets, was banned by the National Basketball Association yesterday after having tested positive for cocaine use.


JUDGE FINDS F.B.I. IS DISCRIMINATORY
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Texas found today that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had discriminated against Hispanic agents in promotions and working conditions and that the bureau's internal procedure for dealing with discrimination complaints was ''bankrupt.''


An Inner Circle of 100 or So Carried Out A-Bombing of Japan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Don't Privatize Social Security
LEAD: To the Editor:


Changes Big and Small Aid Flight, Experts Say
LEAD: As is suggested by the impressive flight of the space shuttle Discovery so far, America's winged spaceship and its vast complex of supporting facilities have undergone improvements that have left them stronger and better tested than ever before, space experts said today.


Fishing for the Ones That Got Away
LEAD: Amid the tumultuous growth sweeping across this island, Bobo Wang is the kind of entrepreneur that the Government is hoping will become a symbol of the new Taiwan.


Ted Tiller Dies at 75; Actor and Playwright
LEAD: Ted Tiller, an actor, director, playwright and producer, died of complications resulting from brain surgery Sept. 24 at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 75 years old.


Seoul Youths Hurl Firebombs Into U.S. Army Headquarters
LEAD: Protesters hurled firebombs into an American Army station today in a mounting anti-American campaign, the American and South Korean authorities said.
No damage was reported.
The attack followed an outburst of anti-United States sentiment spurred by incidents involving American athletes and the news media during the Summer Olympics.


Ford Heirs Fight, and Entertain, in Seeking Estate
LEAD: So determined was Henry Ford 2d to exert influence from the grave that he left instructions on what emotions his friends and family should feel at his funeral.


Youth Testifies Emotionally On Role in Fatal Stabbing
LEAD: A 17-year-old youth, testifying in his own defense at his murder trial in Queens yesterday, broke down in tears as he described events leading to the fatal stabbing of another youth in a confrontation between two groups of teen-agers.


French Watercolors In Lenox Hill Benefit
LEAD: ''Velins du Roi,'' an exhibition of watercolors from the collections of Louis XIV, Napoleon and others, will open with a benefit for a community organization from 6 to 9 P.M.
Tuesday at the W. Graham Arader 3d Gallery, 29 East 72d Street.


Congress Meets Spending Bill Deadline
LEAD: With precisely one minute to spare before a midnight deadline, Congress accomplished late Friday what it has been unable to do for more than a decade, complete all 13 annual spending bills before the start of the new fiscal year.


Leiter Left Unprotected
LEAD: Ken Leiter, the 27-year-old defenseman who appeared in 51 games for the Islanders last season, was the most prominent player left unprotected by the three metropolitan area National Hockey League teams for the waiver draft Monday.


Ex-Rutgers Player Enters Guilty Plea
LEAD: A former star football player for Rutgers University has pleaded guilty to charges of death by automobile and admitted that he was intoxicated behind the wheel before a crash that caused the death of a teammate and injured another passenger.


How Ordinary Details Can Suddenly Derail a Life
LEAD:  These Things Happen  By Marian Thurm  173 pages. Poseidon Press. $15.95.


Unrealistic Hopes In Ratings Game
LEAD: HERE was the scene across the United States yesterday: It's Friday morning, and people are rubbing their eyes, steeling themselves for the final workday of the week.
Perhaps a brisk wake-up from a little early-morning television?
Turn it on and . . . yes, it's . . . water polo.
Not only that, there's also, hold on now, rhythmic gymnastics.


Leo Schloss, Educator And Accountant, 74
LEAD: Leo Schloss, an educator and accountant, died Wednesday at University Hospital in Stony Brook, L.I., after a long illness.
He was 74 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Korean Arts Seek to Share Olympic Spotlight
LEAD: Kim Myong Hwan, master of the Korean narrative opera known as pansori, strives to preserve an ancient art.
Suh Se Ok, one of South Korea's foremost contemporary painters, seeks to make the old new, reinterpreting the traditional discipline of calligraphy in modern abstract paintings.


Corrections
LEAD: A cast listing on Sept. 23 with a theater review of the Young Playwrights Festival misidentified the group presenting the festival.
It is the Foundation of the Dramatists Guild; Nancy Quinn is the producing director.


California Sues to Force Tobacco Warnings
LEAD: The State Attorney General today sued 25 manufacturers and eight retailers of noncigarette tobacco products in an effort to force compliance with a state law requiring warnings to consumers whenever they are exposed to cancer-causing chemicals.


An Aging Gromyko Takes Last Bow
LEAD: Public life ends for Andrei Andreyevich Gromyko this weekend, 49 years after it began.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''In the name of liberation from male 'domination,' women must not appropriate to themselves male characteristics contrary to their own feminine originality.'' - Pope John Paul II.  [ 6:2. ]


Christie Can Keep Medal
LEAD: Linford Christie, a sprinter from Britain who tested positive for a banned substance after he finished fourth in the 200 meters, will be allowed to stay in the Olympics and keep a silver medal won in an earlier race, Olympic officials said today.


Your Money; How Charities Can Help Donors
LEAD: CHARITY can begin at home - in fact, with the home.
An individual can realize both economic and tax benefits by donating a home or other assets while continuing to enjoy their use.
Neal Myerberg, chief executive officer for endowments and bequests of the U.J.A.-Federation, calls this strategy ''donor-centered giving.


Dukakis Tailors Speech To Fit Texans' Interests
LEAD: On a crisp fall day when the pungent air on the Isom farm rang with Texas oratory, the Governor of Massachusetts rolled up the sleeves of his blue button-down shirt for the kind of campaigning his supporters say he must use to catch up with Vice President Bush in this pivotal state.


Note to Readers
LEAD: The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the growing volume of submissions, however, we regret that we can no longer return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.


Formica Told Of Bid Proposal
LEAD: The Formica Corporation, a leading manufacturer and distributor of decorative surfacing products, said yesterday that it had received a letter from Malcolm I. Glazer, a Rochester investor, that he was prepared to make a $20-a-share bid to acquire the shares of Formica that he does not already own.


College Football; Duke (4-0) Offering Plenty to Celebrate
LEAD: This is a year to celebrate football at Duke: the 100th anniversary of the first intercollegiate game in North Carolina, in which Trinity College beat North Carolina, 16-0.
And it is the 50th anniversary of the Iron Dukes, a team that was undefeated, untied and unscored upon in the 1938 regular season but lost to Southern California, 7-3, in the Rose


Excerpts From John Paul II's Apostolic Letter 'On the Dignity of Women'
LEAD: Following are excerpts from ''Mulieris Dignitatem'' (''On the Dignity of Women''), an apostolic letter issued yesterday by Pope John Paul II, as issued in English by the Vatican:


Oil Price Off On Fears of More Supply
LEAD: Oil prices dropped sharply yesterday as traders reacted to the prospect of continuing overproduction by members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, especially Saudi Arabia.


Falcons to Stay
LEAD: Rankin Smith, owner of the Atlanta Falcons, said today that he would keep the team in Atlanta and try to build a new open-air stadium by 1991.
Smith told a news conference he was uncertain whether a proposed domed stadium could be built before the team's lease with Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium expires after the 1990 season.


Martha E. Combs Wed To Steven E. Wheeler
LEAD: Martha E. Combs, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore H. Combs of Marblehead, Mass., and North Conway, N.H., was married yesterday to Steven E. Wheeler, a son of June B. Wheeler of Richmond and Floyd E. Wheeler of Remlik, Va.
Henry M. Kidder Jr., a justice of the peace of Oyster Bay, L.I., performed the ceremony at the Creek Club in Locust Valley, L


Patents; A Method to Detect Some Forms of Cancer
LEAD: A. Arthur Gottlieb, founder of Imreg Inc. in New Orleans, won patent approval for a method of detecting leukemia, Hodgkin's disease and other cancers affecting lymph cells.


Despite Some Trouble, Shuttle Is Doing 'Great'
LEAD: Flight controllers said today that the space shuttle Discovery was performing well, despite two pesky equipment malfunctions, as the astronauts spent their first full day in orbit operating scientific experiments, checking out all systems and enjoying the views of the Earth below.


U.S. Denies Violating Panama Canal Treaty
LEAD: The Reagan Administration today disputed a Panamanian charge that a shipment of weapons to American military forces in Latin America constituted a violation of the Panama Canal Treaties.


A Plea: Say It Ain't So, Ben
LEAD: A crowd gathered outside Ben Johnson's house today as it has every day since the athlete returned from Seoul, South Korea, on Tuesday.
Many of those gathered here are sustained by the hope that Canada's fallen athletic idol will somehow explain his drug-testing disaster in Seoul in a way that will make it possible for the nation to believe in him again.


Joaquin Roces Is Dead; Aquino Backer Was 75
LEAD: Joaquin Roces, a prominent newspaper publisher who persuaded Corazon C. Aquino to run for President, died today of complications from cancer, his doctor announced.
He was 75 years old.


POPE, DEFENDING WOMEN'S DIGNITY, SETS NARROW ROLE
LEAD: Pope John Paul II today issued a major document on the status of women that forcefully defends their dignity but narrowly defines their role in the Roman Catholic Church and in secular society.


Israeli Troops and Settler Fire on Arabs, Killing 2
LEAD: Two Palestinians were killed today as Israeli troops and a Jewish settler opened fire on stone-throwing youths in Hebron, in the West Bank, Palestinians said.


Review/Music; Yo-Yo Ma In Dvorak Cello Piece
LEAD: Those who heard Yo-Yo Ma play the Dvorak Cello Concerto with the Boston Symphony at Tanglewood a few months ago would have found an interesting comparison in Thursday's New York Philharmonic performance at Avery Fisher Hall.
The performance at Tanglewood had the same deeply moving impulses but without the hurtling, breakneck enthusiasm that on Thursday almost extinguished the music with its passion.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASKETBALL  NATIONAL BASKETBALL ASSOCIATION - Suspended Duane Washington, guard, of the Nets for two years for violating the substance-abuse agreement.
GOLDEN STATE (NBA) - Signed Joseph Hutt, Biola College, and John Starks, guards.
KNICKS (NBA) - Signed Rod Strickland, guard, to a multiyear contract.


Daisy Systems Seeks Cadnetix
LEAD: The Daisy Systems Corporation began a tender offer at $8 a share in cash to acquire control of the Cadnetix Corporation.
Daisy, a maker of computer-aided engineering systems, based in Mountain View, Calif., already holds 7.6 percent of Cadnetix, a Boulder.
Colo., company that makes similar systems.


Doubling-Up by Tenants Costing New York Millions
LEAD: The New York City Housing Authority has run up $62 million in operating deficits in the last three years, and housing officials say that one of the prime causes of the shortfalls - overcrowding - is also one of the key reasons why they have not sought additional Federal aid to cover the debts.


Patents; Two Proteins Stimulate Production of Cartilage
LEAD: The Collagen Corporation, a biotechnology company in Palo Alto, Calif., received patents this week on two proteins that stimulate the body to produce cartilage.


Jury, Citing Mother's Condition, Absolves Her in 2 Babies' Deaths
LEAD: A former pediatric nurse who admitted suffocating two of her newborn babies and trying to kill the third was absolved yesterday by a jury, which said that her actions were a result of a mental disease or defect.


Film Festival; An Avant-Garde Clash Of Two Kinds of Laws
LEAD: In Warren Sonbert's ''Honor and Obey,'' soldiers march in formation, a tiger stalks through the snow, religious processions wind through streets, and palm trees wave in a tropical breeze.
As brightly colored images of authority figures blend into scenes of cocktail parties, this 22-minute silent film flows along with the grace of a musical score built on complex tensions hidden among the notes.


Homeless Families Create a Community
LEAD: When Albert Dempsky learned his family was to be moved from a welfare motel in Willingboro where it had lived for two years to the grounds of a state psychiatric hospital here, he said he would sleep in the woods before he would go.


Patents; Snake Venom Is Said To Curb Some Cancers
LEAD: Venom from the Western diamondback rattlesnake may prove useful in the war on cancer.


Storm Victims Fault Mexico's Aid Effort
LEAD: When a luxury apartment building collapsed here earlier this week, killing five people, the residents of this industrial center of three million shuddered.
Just as Hurricane Gilbert was receding into memory, it had once again struck a blow at a city struggling to recuperate from the storm's disastrous passage across northeastern


Rose Re-signs
LEAD: Pete Rose, who was criticized by the team's owner, Marge Schott, as Cincinnati headed toward its fourth consecutive second-place finish, signed a two-year contract yesterday to continue as manager of the Reds.


Ex-Firefighter Is Sentenced In Shooting Death of Doctor
LEAD: A retired firefighter was sentenced yesterday to 6 to 18 years in prison for fatally shooting a physician last year in a dispute over a pension claim.


Glassblowing Display
LEAD: A Greek glassblower, Thomas Halvatzis, will discuss and demonstrate his craft at the Hellenic Cultural Center of the Greek Archdiocese, 27-09 Crescent Street, in Astoria, Queens, on at 5 P.M. tomorrow.
Admission is free.
The program is in Greek and English.
Information: (718) 626-7896 or (718) 204-0108.


3 Networks Agree to Run Condom Ads in AIDS Fight
LEAD: The three major television networks have agreed to broadcast a public-service advertising campaign that promotes the use of condoms to prevent the spread of acquired immune deficiency syndrome.


From Cassavetes, a Theater Tempest
''Opening Night'' could be described as John Cassavetes' version of ''All About Eve'' if Mr.
Cassavetes were the sort to be strongly influenced by the work of other film makers, which he most certainly is not.
Like the characters who ramble amiably through this sprawling, funny, emotionally raw 1978 film -which has a style that's of a piece with the director's other long films of the 1970's, among them ''Minnie and Moskowitz'' (1971), ''A Woman Under the Influence'' (1974) and ''The Killing of a Chinese Bookie'' (1976) - Mr.
Cassavetes displays a remarkably free-spirited point of view.
''Opening Night,'' previously unreleased in the United States, is a reminder of what has made Mr.
Cassavetes' films so appealing, and of what can make them so maddening, too.
For all its length - nearly two and three-quarter hours - it's a relatively thin example of the director's work, but a mischievous and inviting one, too.


Last Jump Goes Ritter's Way
LEAD: Red Oak is a small town in Texas, 30 miles south of Dallas.
When Louise Ritter grew up there, it had only 1,000 residents, and she says she knew all of them.


Motion in Noriega Case Does Not Refer to Bush
LEAD: Court papers seeking to dismiss a drug indictment against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the Panamanian leader, do not include references to Vice President Bush or his Presidential campaign, as prosecutors had feared they would.


Ex-Developer Convicted of Fraud
LEAD: A former millionaire and developer has been found guilty of defrauding banks in an attempt to get loans to keep his failing company afloat.


The Breath of the Black Dragon in Russia and China
LEAD: Just a year ago, I inspected the scene of the great Black Dragon forest fire, which broke out in May 1987 along the Amur River, the boundary between eastern Siberia and Chinese Manchuria.
As I walked in the world left by the fire -every tree, every bush, tuft of grass turned to black - I felt I was walking in a prehistoric forest of a long dead planet.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Education page on Sept. 21 about the teaching of liberal arts studies misstated curriculum changes at Duke University.
The faculty voted to increase the overall number of credits needed for graduation.
It did not add more books and courses on non-Western European thought to the core liberal arts curriculum.


Highs and Lows For U.S. Squad
LEAD: The United States team won an Olympic gold medal Friday in a track and field event it did not expect to win.
It lost a chance for a gold medal in an event it was sure it would win.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
All Nippon Airways Co., Tokyo, bought the San Francisco Meridien Hotel for about $100 million from Tag-Arcon-Pioneer Ltd.


From Dacron To Men's Pants
LEAD: The Du Pont Company is a leader in the Quick Response approach.
The company's director of business development for fibers, Peter N. Buttenhoff, offers this example:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Resettling the Contras


N.A.A.C.P. Official Convicted
LEAD: A State Representative who is president of the Alabama National Association for the Advancement of Colored People was convicted of extortion today for taking $10,000 in exchange for trying to obtain the early release of a convicted murderer from prison.


Spring Bulbs: Time Is Now
LEAD: Although there were reminders to send in mail orders for bulbs, many gardeners dallied.
Now, it may be too late to order by mail, since most brokers forward their orders to the Netherlands, and the bulbs are then shipped directly to the gardener.
Other brokers fill bulb orders from their own warehouses, and they report that supplies are getting low.


USG to Get $400 Million For Masonite
LEAD: As part of a sweeping restructuring, the USG Corporation today agreed to sell the Masonite Corporation to the International Paper Company for about $400 million in cash.


Poaching in Kenya Destabilizes Africa
LEAD: To the Editor:


Coping With Selling Your Car
LEAD: Fall is new-car time, and a shopper faces many decisions, not the least of which is whether to trade the old one in or sell it privately.
It's less trouble to let the dealer take your car and apply its worth to the price of a new one.
But it's important to know when to trade and how to get a fair price if you sell it yourself.


GORBACHEV GAINS, EXPERTS IN U.S. SAY
LEAD: American experts on the Soviet Union said today's shake-up in the Kremlin dramatically strengthened the hand of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, without giving him a complete triumph over his opponents.


Delchamps Rejects Latest A.&amp;P. Bid
LEAD: Delchamps Inc., a regional supermarket chain in the South, rejected the latest unsolicited overture from the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company because the takeover would not be good for it.
A.&amp;P. offered to bid as much as $30 a share, Delchamps said, but the $210 million deal was ''not in the company's best interest.


American Wrestlers Lose Two Matches and One Protest
LEAD: Mark Schultz of the United States, the world champion and 1984 Olympic gold medal winner, lost two matches and his chance of winning a freestyle wrestling medal today.


Who Would Try to Teach in New York City?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Russian-English High School Is Closed Because of Back Taxes
LEAD: St.
Sergius High School, a small Manhattan secondary school that trained its students in the values and culture of pre-revolutionary Russia, was closed by Federal agents Thursday for failure to pay almost $90,000 in back taxes.


Dollar Takes a Sharp Fall Amid Fears of Lower Rates
LEAD: The dollar fell sharply yesterday as declining oil prices increased the fears among currency traders that interest rates would fall in the United States.


Gibraltar Killings of 3 in I.R.A. Ruled Lawful
LEAD: A jury decided today that British commandos acted within the law when they shot and killed three unarmed Irish Republican Army guerrillas in this British colony last March.


Third World Debt Won't Wait
LEAD: The third world debt crisis is six years old.
The debt has grown by 50 percent.
Many of the debtor nations are in desperate shape; none are out of the woods.
And contrary to everyone's best interests, more capital flows from debtors to the industrial world than the other way around.
Increasingly, this distress threatens struggling democracies.


New Members of Politburo
LEAD:  Vadim A. Medvedev


Review/Cabaret; Campy Female Impersonations by Charles Pierce
LEAD: Ranging from the high drama of B. D. Wong's performance in ''M.
Butterfly'' to the goofy comic antics of Monty Python, from Jim Bailey's eerily accurate re-creations of legendary stars to the Ridiculous Theatrical Company's stylized gender-bending, female impersonation has almost as many genres as the theater itself.


Review/Theater; Flesh vs. Spirit in a Play by Claudel
LEAD: Paul Claudel entered the French diplomatic service in 1890 and almost immediately began to write poetry and plays, the entire body of which dwelt on religious or, more specifically, Roman Catholic themes, and the central thread of which was the emptiness of a life that is devoid of spirituality.
By the time of his death in 1955, Claudel was an Immortal in the Academie Francaise and was regarded as one of the leading


Olympic Highlights
LEAD:  TENNIS: Steffi Graf of West Germany, who won the Grand Slam, took the gold medal in the women's singles, beating Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina, 6-3, 6-3.
TRACK AND FIELD: The United States won the men's 1,600 and the women's 400 relays.
The men equaled the world record of 2:56.16.
Evelyn Ashford overtook Marlies Gohr of East Germany in the final 100 meters to give the United States the gold medal in the 400.


Real Welfare Reform, at Last
LEAD: Barbara Harris, a high school dropout and divorced mother, has been on welfare since 1982.
She fits perfectly the profile of the long-term welfare recipient.
But as a participant in an education program for welfare mothers, she also embodies the hopes of welfare's reformers. ''I have two girls,'' she says.


Coffee Pact Is Seen as Near
LEAD: The two-week conference of the 74-nation International Coffee Organization is approaching an agreement here on 1989 export quotas, the chief Brazilian negotiator, Jorio Dauster, said today.


Letter: On Human Rights; In Turkey, Democracy Is a Fact
LEAD: To the Editor:


Board Delays Vote On S.I. Navy Port
LEAD: The New York City Board of Estimate agreed to a Koch administration request early yesterday and postponed indefinitely a vote on the city's plan for handling a possible nuclear accident at the Navy port being built on Staten Island.


Close-Up: Wrestling
LEAD:  An Olympic Original  Wrestling was a major part of the ancient Olympic Games, with competitors oiling their bodies and wrestling on sand.
It has evolved into two disciplines: Greco-Roman and freestyle.
In Greco-Roman, wrestlers cannot use holds below the waist or use their legs for holds; freestyle allows most standard techniques.


About New York; Pull the Cord If You've Heard This One, Now...
LEAD: The doors were closing on the IRT Broadway express when the short, frayed man in the stained blue T-shirt rushed in and began shouting at the passengers.
For a tense instant it seemed that yet another crazy person was claiming the attention of strangers, so some on the uptown train buried themselves in newpapers or stared fixedly at ads for hemorrhoid relief.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 54.


Suspicious Fire Destroys a Building in the Bronx


Wynton Marsalis
LEAD: Wynton Marsalis, the trumpeter, is leading a quintet tonight and tomorrow at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, below 11th Street (255-4037).
Sets begin at 10 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is a $12 cover and a $6 minimum.


Leading Indicators Improve
LEAD: The Government's chief economic predictor climbed four-tenths of 1 percent in August and also did slightly better in June and July than previously thought, the Commerce Department reported today.


Chip Maker Cuts Back: 'The Boom Is Over'
LEAD: In another signal that demand may be softening for computers and semiconductors, Advanced Micro Devices Inc. said today that it anticipated flat sales for its semiconductors in the coming quarters and would lay off 1,400 workers.


Corrections
LEAD: The TV Notes column on Thursday referred incorrectly to the scheduling of the next debate between the Presidential candidates.
The date has not been determined; it is expected to be Oct. 13 or 14.


Stieb Loses Gem Again
LEAD: Dave Stieb lost a no-hit bid with two out in the ninth inning for the second consecutive start, finishing with another one-hitter tonight as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Baltimore Orioles, 4-0.


Review/Dance; A Roland Petit Ballet to Satie's Music
LEAD: Roland Petit played a major role in the rebirth of French ballet after World War II, and it was natural that he be represented in the three-week dance festival here devoted to four centuries of dance in France.


SHAKE-UP VIEWED AS GIVING GORBACHEV STRONGER HAND
LEAD: In a major Kremlin shake-up that appears to strengthen the position of Mikhail S. Gorbachev as party leader, the Communist Party Central Committee dismissed three veteran members of the Politburo today.


Patents; Translating Words With Multiple Meanings
LEAD: Sharp Kabushiki Kaisha, the Japanese parent company of the Sharp Electronics Corporation, has designed a language-translation machine that helps sort out the nuances of words with multiple meanings.


Patents; An Implant To Correct Child's Bite
LEAD: AN orthodontist in Livingston, N.J., has developed a removable dental implant that can correct a child's overbite or underbite without the need for wire braces and plastic bands.


Health Officials Order Shutdown Of Gay Cinema
LEAD: New York City yesterday closed an East Side cinema that caters to homosexuals, accusing the establishment of flagrantly violating state and city regulations against unsafe sexual activities and of operating an AIDS-virus breeding ground for profit.


Stocks Mixed as Dow Falls by 6.40
LEAD: Stock prices ended mixed yesterday after a late wave of selling reversed a broad advance.


A New Party Structure In the Soviet Union
LEAD: The personnel shake-up in the Soviet Communist Party yesterday was accompanied by a revamping of the party structure.
Six Central Committee commissions were created, all headed by secretaries of the Central Committee, to supplant 22 departments as the party's main administrative apparatus.
Political power continues to be centered in the Central Committee and the Politburo, where all important decisions are made.


Balance Is the Eastern Look
LEAD: The East has several strong teams this season in Division I-A, and Boston College and Pitt are among them.
They meet at noon today in the Boston College's Alumni Stadium.


7 Companies Settle Toxic Dumping Lawsuit
LEAD: Seven companies have agreed to pay a total of $12.5 million to New York City to settle a lawsuit involving the dumping of hazardous industrial and chemical wastes at five city landfills.


U.S. Suspends 2 Loral Units
LEAD: The Loral Corporation, a military electronics concern, said yesterday that it had received notice that its Loral Defense Systems-Akron and Loral Engineered Fabrics divisions had been suspended from receiving Government contracts.


Some Treasury Bond Yields Dip Below 9%
LEAD: Some Treasury bond yields fell below 9 percent yesterday as oil prices fell to their lowest level in more than two years.


Two Gold Medals and One Silver for U.S. Relays
LEAD: American sprinters and Kenyan distance runners turned the last full day of Olympic track and field into a celebration.


Judge Permits DNA Evidence
LEAD: A Queens judge ruled yesterday that prosecutors may present DNA-matching evidence to the jury in a sexual-assault case, the first time such evidence linking a defendant with a crime is to be used in New York State.


THE GAMES AT A GLANCE
LEAD:  Track and Field  Evelyn Ashford, in what could well have been her farewell appearance, said took the baton with 100 meters left and said goodbye to her competition.
Ashford, after an awkward handoff from Florence Griffth Joyner, brought home the gold for the U.S. with an inspired anchor leg in the women's 400-meter dash.


The War on Dirty Water
LEAD: House committees have wisely adopted the proposal by the Governors of New York and New Jersey that fines for ocean sludge dumping after 1993 go into an environmental project trust fund.
The measure warrants approval by the House and by Senate conferees.


Severe Accidents at Nuclear Plant Were Kept Secret Up to 31 Years
LEAD: The Savannah River Plant in South Carolina, an enormous Government complex that produces fuel for the nation's nuclear weapons, has experienced a number of serious reactor accidents that have been kept secret from the public for as long as 31 years, two Congressional committees disclosed today.


The Politburo: Another Shake-Up
LEAD: The Soviet Communist Party shake-up yesterday removed some familiar names from the ruling Politburo and added new ones.
Here is the current Politburo line-up, including full, voting members and candidate (nonvoting) members, as well as the members who were removed yesterday.
The Government functions of some members may change today after a session of the Supreme Soviet, the legislative body.


New Texas Savings Rescue
LEAD: Six more deeply troubled savings institutions in Texas were rescued late today in two transactions that the Federal Home Loan Bank Board estimated would require $2.5 billion in Federal assistance in the next decade.





Walker Status Uncertain
LEAD: The playing status of Wesley Walker of the Jets, who caught four touchdown passes in the last two games, was termed questionable yesterday for the game tomorrow against the Kansas City Chiefs at Giants Stadium.


Shielded From Demonstrations, Bush Assails Dukakis on Crime
LEAD: Vice President Bush blitzed the Northeast corridor today, hammering Michael S. Dukakis on crime while his campaign aides played an intense game of keep away with anti-Bush demonstrators.


Mercer Stops South Korean
LEAD: It is one of boxing's oldest lines.
Asked how he will avert a possible hometown decision, a boxer will hold up his fists and say, ''These are my judges.'' And today Ray Mercer's fists were the judges in a first-round knockout of Hyun Man Baik of South Korea, thereby defusing any chance of a home-nation influence on the


Trauma of Miscarriage
LEAD: To the Editor:


Italy's Proposed Budget
LEAD: The Italian Cabinet has approved a proposed 1989 budget that would put the deficit at 117.25 trillion lire, or $83.7 billion.
The plan, which Parliament must approve, was adopted late Thursday.


Pilots Accused Of Lying to U.S. In Applications
LEAD: Twenty-seven pilots, including at least two who fly large airliners, were indicted by a Federal grand jury in Florida yesterday on charges of denying past drug- or alcohol-related convictions in applying for pilot medical certificates.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 3-6, 28


Appliances No One Wants
LEAD: When Mary G. Smith moved into her home in Darby Township near Philadelphia in May, she discovered that the previous owner had left an air-conditioner in the garage.


Teacher Rejects Calls to Testify In Attack Case
LEAD: A New York City teacher refused to testify yesterday at a disciplinary hearing against a student accused of beating him, and officials at the Board of Education and the teachers union are worried that efforts to control school violence may have suffered a setback.


BRIDGE
LEAD: Many American tournaments now prohibit smoking.
But at some tournaments in Europe, it is compulsory - in the evenings.
This is a traditional demand for the use of ''le smoking,'' the dinner jacket, and the call for decorum was heard at the Staten Bank Pairs Tournament, an all-expert event, played in the Hague in late


Bentsen, Before Teachers, Seeks Support 'for Future of Schools'
LEAD: Senator Lloyd Bentsen urged teachers and parents today to support the Democratic national candidates because ''the future of our schools is on the line on Nov. 8.''


Inflation Rises in Brazil
LEAD: Brazil's monthly inflation rate increased again in September, according to official figures released Thursday.
The Brazilian Geography and Statistics Institute said the consumer price index rose by 24 percent in September, on a base month of March 1986.


Disdain and Praise For Vatican Letter
LEAD: Prominent American Catholic women were divided today in their initial reaction to the Vatican document on their role.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our home is covered with aluminum siding in a blue-gray color.
Last Halloween, children threw eggs against one corner, leaving a stain.
There are also some white stains from bird droppings.
The rains have lightened these stains considerably, but I have been reluctant to scrub the siding, as I have heard this might strip it down to the bare metal.


Mustache Mania; Or, Many a Slip Between Nose and Lip
LEAD: A FRIEND of long standing looked at me one day recently and suggested I grow a mustache. ''A mustache?'' I said. ''What in the world for?'' ''It'll make your nose smaller,'' he said.
The subject of noses is a sensitive one for me, so I quickly and wittily retorted, ''Oh yeah?''


Jonathan Winthrop, an Architect, Wed To Sydney Cheston, a Student, in Maine
LEAD: Sydney Cheston, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Morris Cheston of Philadelphia and Somesville, Me., and Jonathan Winthrop, a son of Angela F. Winthrop of Hamilton, Mass., and the late Frederic Winthrop, were married yesterday in Northeast Harbor, Me.
The Rev.
F.
Goldthwaite Sherrill performed the ceremony at St.


Vacancy Report
LEAD: To the Editor:


Johnson Breaks His Silence
LEAD: Ben Johnson has broken his silence on the events that led to his being stripped of his Olympic 100-meter victory, telling The Toronto Sun in an article published today that ''I have never knowingly taken illegal drugs, nor have had illegal drugs administered to me.''


THE FLOATING ADULTERERS
LEAD:  THE CHINESE WESTERN  Short Fiction From Today's China.
Translated by Zhu Hong.  224 pp.
New York:
Available Press/  Ballantine Books. Paper, $5.95.


This Year's Top Female Athlete Is . . .
LEAD: For 1987 and most of 1988, Jackie Joyner-Kersee has been honored by sports groups round the world as the world's greatest female athlete.
Then, last month, a West German teen-ager captured the elusive tennis achievement won only by four previous legends.
When Steffi Graf won the Grand Slam, many thought it only logical to wait until the conclusion of the Olympics to crown this year's female athlete of the year.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/PEOPLES OF THE WORLD
LEAD:  THE MOST BEAUTIFUL PLACE IN THE WORLD  By Ann Cameron.
Illustrated by Thomas B. Allen.  57 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $10.95.  (Ages 5 to 9)


Miles to Go
LEAD: To the Editor:


'It's Been A Cycle of Abuse and Neglect'
LEAD: IN autumn, the eyes of most people turn to the woods, where the blazing scarlet of red maple leaves mixes with the golden yellows of beech and the purples of oak.
At this time of year, people see only beauty, but professional foresters, like Stephen H. Broderick of the University of Connecticut's Cooperative Extension


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Appointment With Death  Starring Peter Ustinov, Lauren Bacall, Carrie Fisher, John Gielgud, Piper Laurie, Hayley Mills, Jenny Seagrove, David Soul, Nicholas Guest, Valerie Richards.
Directed by Michael Winner. 1988.
Warner Home Video. 102 minutes. $89.95.
Closed captioned.
Rated PG, though it contains little to disturb children.


Nancy Ware Marries D. C. Shepard in Iowa
LEAD: At the First Presbyterian Church in Sioux City, Iowa, Nancy Melissa Ware, an associate with the Philadelphia law firm of Schnader, Harrison, Segal &amp; Lewis, was married yesterday to David Chauncey Shepard, a management consultant for Touche Ross in San Francisco.
The Rev.
William F. Skinner performed the ceremony.


TALKING: Relocation; Handling Disparities In Housing
LEAD: ONCE upon a time, Americans could move from one part of the country to another and find only marginal differences in rental costs or house prices.


NEW MAN AT K.G.B.
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev consolidated his leadership of the Soviet Union today by taking over the presidency of the country to match his role as head of the Communist Party.


Three Homeless Seized In Helms Office Protest
LEAD: Three homeless protesters served a homemade ''eviction notice'' on the office of Senator Jesse Helms Friday, removed the furniture from his outer office and then were led off in handcuffs.


DAVID SILVER WED TO AMELIA WOOD
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York, Amelia Sheridan Wood, a daughter of Donald J. Wood of Wayland, Mass., and Mrs.
Brian R. Fernandez of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to David Richard Silver, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Silver of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Johnson of the Cathedral Church of St.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''This bill represents protectionism at its worst.'' - President Reagan, after he vetoed the textile measure.


Parks as Paupers
LEAD: The summer was a banner season for news concerning the national parks, particularly with the fire in Yellowstone ravaging one-half of that massive and glorious natural preserve.
There was, however, a park story that didn't make headlines even though it is probably more significant than the ones that did.


FOCUS: Broward County, Fla.; A 10,000-Acre City Is Growing in the Everglades
LEAD: AROUND Broward County they call it Muck Mountain - 40 feet of oozing black dirt scraped off the surface of the Everglades so that neat new houses could be built.
It is a manmade mountain and from its peak, one of the highest points in this low-lying plain, it is possible in a few seconds to understand the forces that brought it into being.


Clapboard Controversy: Paint or Siding for a 1770 Church
LEAD: A PLAN to cover one of the oldest meetinghouses in the state with vinyl siding rather than to repaint it has touched off a furor in eastern Connecticut.


Highlighting 3 American Composers
LEAD: SUMMER at the Charles Ives Center for the Arts in Danbury officially ended seven weeks ago, but the site comes alive again for a three-part coda that includes some of the most imaginative programming of late.


ARMY CRUSHES BUCKNELL
LEAD: Army, which failed to complete a pass in beating Northwestern a week ago, completed 4 of 5 passes today against another team without a victory, Bucknell.
But, as was the case against Northwestern, the Cadets needn't have bothered going to the air in view of their awesome running game.


Government in the Soviet Union: Gorbachev's Proposal for Change
LEAD:  THE CURRENT STRUCTURE  Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our home is covered with aluminum siding in a blue-gray color.
Last Halloween, children threw eggs against one corner, leaving a stain.
There are also some white stains from bird droppings.
The rains have lightened these stains considerably, but I have been reluctant to scrub the siding, as I have heard this might strip it down to the bare metal.


Melissa Fogelman Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Fogelman of North Woodmere, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Melissa Beth Fogelman, to Eric Steven Redleaf, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Redleaf of Dellwood, Minn.
Miss Fogelman is a second-year medical student at Washington University in St.
Louis, where her fiance, an engineer with Emerson Electric in St.


Boxing Ends in Controversy
LEAD: After two weeks of controversy, turmoil and hostility in a cauldron called the Chamshil Students' Gymnasium, it probably would have been too much to expect the boxing competition to end with the Olympic spirit prevailing.
So what might otherwise have been considered a good showing by an inexperienced team from the United


THE WORLD: A Voice From Warsaw; 'So Now in Recent Days, We Have an Opposition'
LEAD: WE'RE sitting with my wife in our kitchen at the round table.
Round tables are very fashionable in Poland these days.
At such tables, our press, television and politicians tell us, it's easier to reach compromises.


Arson Blamed in Dallas Fire That Was Fatal to 5 Children
LEAD: The fire that killed five children in a house whose back doors and windows were blocked by burglar bars was deliberately set, fire officials say.


ELAINE POCHTAR IS MARRIED TO JAMES CRANE SWEENEY
LEAD: Elaine Nancy Pochtar, a vice president of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, and James Crane Sweeney, a vice president of Shearson Lehman Hutton, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York by the Rev.
Harry Boyle.


PERSPECTIVES: New Condos in Flatbush; Tapping the Market in Central Brooklyn
LEAD: THE heart of the old town of Flatbush is the intersection of Church and Flatbush Avenues, says Irving Choban with the authority of his office, the presidency of the Flatbush Historical Society.
The town had spread out three miles from that center by 1892, when it merged into the city of Brooklyn.
Its 1798 Dutch Reformed Church still stands - on the site of the original church, built in 1654 - as does its 1876 town hall, now a school.


Beyond Materialism, Toward Diversity
LEAD: I am not a friend of nor do I know Mrs.
Gass.
However, I felt it was expedient that Mr.
Marcus take off his Porsche-labeled sunglasses and look at life as it really is on Long Island.
As a woman living in a similar environment, I felt I had to defend Mrs.
Gass and the rather unrealistic, angry tone in which Mr.


Drug-Proof U.S. Borders May Be An Impossible Dream
LEAD: IN the words of Senator Phil Gramm, a conservative Republican from Texas, ''We could assign the armed forces full-time to nothing but drug interdiction and probably not double the street price.''


Correction
LEAD: A diagram last Sunday with an article about retinal cell transplants in rats labeled layers of the retina incorrectly.
The layer next to the outer layer, or sclera, is the choroid.
Next to that is a layer of retinal pigment epithelial cells, then a layer of photoreceptor cells.


DISSIDENT ATTACKS SOVIET SPORTS SYSTEM
LEAD: Twenty-eight years after he bent his thick weight lifter's neck to receive the Olympic gold medal, Yuri Vlasov watches the Summer Olympic Games with rage and longing, longing for what he thinks sports might be, and rage at what he thinks they are in the Soviet Union.


Time Warp on the Gulf
LEAD: THE OLD GALVESTON CLUB EXISTS IN AN amiable time warp in the rear of a downtown building that houses a dreary newsstand and video game arcade.
The generally uncategorizable decor ranges from nautical flags to a golden Buddha rescued from a gambling joint.


Flannery O'Connor's Works
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reviews/Music; The Accent Is on Youth At Samuel Zyman Concert
LEAD: As young composers go, Samuel Zyman seems to have luck, and a good deal more, on his side.
He was born in Mexico City and began his studies there, but came to New York in 1981 to work with Stanley Wolfe, Roger Sessions and David Diamond at the Juilliard School.
Now he is on the Juilliard faculty and has amassed an impressive number of awards and commissions, as well as a recording of his works on the new Antilles/New


Truong Chinh Dies in Hanoi at 80; Was in Ho Chi Minh's Inner Circle
LEAD: Truong Chinh, one of the last of the original group of militant Communist revolutionaries who governed Vietnam over the last 35 years, died at his home in Hanoi on Friday, according to the Vietnam News Agency.
He was 80 years old.


MISHEARD WORDS
LEAD: Jack Rosenthal's column on misheard words (On Language, ''Misheard, Misread, Misspoken,'' Aug. 28) reminded me of a peculiar theological notion from my own childhood.
I thought God's first name was Howard.
I got that from the Lord's Prayer: . . .
Howard be Thy name.
DAVID MCCRAW  West Park, N.Y.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bellport  $157,000  80 Circuit Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, deck; taxes $2,300.
Bay Shore  $485,000  32 Maple Avenue  8-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 86-year-old Victorian; 1 waterfront acre with bulkheading, 3-car garage; taxes $5,700.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, a front-page art review in the Arts and Leisure section today about Degas renders a word incorrectly.
The affected sentence, on page 16, should read, ''I for one do not believe that the celebrated 'Interior,' now in the Philadelphia Museum, has anything to do with any of the French novels of the day.


THE PROMISE THAT FAILED
LEAD: The artificial-heart project is one example of what is wrong with our health-care system.
An effective health-care system requires macro-thinking about all the environmental, emotional and social factors involved.
However, the medical world, with our compliance, is run by the micro-minded, looking in the wrong direction for the wrong answers.


CHILDREN'S BOOKSBookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: 'Clones' Sell Poorly; Detroit's New Goal: Models That Differ Not Only in Name
LEAD: DETROIT automakers have introduced little that is truly new in recent new-car seasons, but this year the story is slightly different.
Although they are introducing no brand-new car models, they have succeeded in differentiating between the ones they are showing.


Ritual Pallor Amid Change In the Kremlin
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev said it best today as he stood at the huge mahogany lectern emblazoned with a laurel wreath and a hammer and sickle: ''There is no need for a long-winded policy speech.'' The session of the Supreme Soviet that confirmed the Communist Party General Secretary as President was about power, not policy.


Judge Censured for Rudeness To Woman in Massachusetts
LEAD: The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court has censured a judge for rudeness to a woman who sought court protection from her husband, but the high court allowed the judge to remain on the bench.
The decision was criticized by the woman's family.


SUSAN KOESTER WEDS
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady of Peace in New York, Susan Deirdre Koester, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Koester of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to James Lawrence Kennedy, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Kennedy of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
The Rev.
William J. Sweeney performed the ceremony.


Concord Jews Celebrate a Renovation
LEAD: On a recent Friday Jay Rosenfield, president of the temple here, found himself in a tense situation.
The electricians and carpenters were getting ready to leave, the rug man was on his way out, but the man installing the front door wasn't quite finished when the bar mitzvah party arrived.


WHO OWNS THE LAND?
LEAD: As two of the attorneys litigating the constitutionality of the White Earth Land Settlement Act on behalf of the Indians of White Earth, we were pleased that you chose to cover the efforts of the Chippewas to regain their land (''Who Owns the Land?'' by Louise Erdrich and Michael Dorris, Sept. 4).


When Shuttle Is Visible
LEAD: The space shuttle Discovery will be visible in some parts of the United States as it moves across the sky in the rest of its four-day flight.
Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said the craft would appear as a fast-moving point of bright light.
Because the shuttle's path is south of the United States, the shuttle will not be visible from northern cities.


WHAT HAPPENED AT THE MALL
LEAD:  IN THE HEART OF THE WHOLE WORLD  By John Rolfe Gardiner.  239 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.


Multi-Theaters: Popularity Breeds Problems
LEAD: THE first evening shows at the Commack Multiplex Theater start shortly after 7 on Friday nights but by 6:30, the cars are beginning to filter into the large parking lot, their passengers trying to beat the rush to buy tickets for one of the multiplex's 13 movies.


Dr. Henry Ilian Wed To Linda Joan Freitag
LEAD: Linda Joan Freitag, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Freitag of Larchmont, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
Henry Robert Ilian, the son of Sara Ilian of New York and the late Simon Ilian.
Rabbi Gary Bretton-Granatoor performed the ceremony at the Columbia University Faculty House.


Life Among Motown's Machiavellis
LEAD: TEN years ago last summer, I resigned as an editor at Fortune magazine and moved to Detroit to join the public affairs staff of the Ford Motor Company.
My job: to help communicate company positions on regulatory issues.


A Retarded Son Accepts Himself
LEAD: MY second son, Christopher, was born with a handicap - he learns things very slowly.
Today, more than 35 years later, he would be called ''learning disabled'' and there would be many programs to help him.
But at that time we had to find our own answers and help.


Sharon Chu Wed To N. M. Kreutter
LEAD: Sharon Fong Chu, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sherwood C. Chu of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to Norman Michael Kreutter, a son of Maj.
Dale T. Kreutter, U.S.A., retired, and Mrs.
Kreutter of Fayetteville, Ga.
The Rev.
Horst Gutsche performed the ceremony at the Zion Evangelical Lutheran Church in Brooklyn Heights.


A Look at the Lessons Learned
LEAD: When the stock market collapsed on Oct. 19, dire predictions were made about the ability of the nation's economy to rebound from such a cataclysmic event.
Yet, 12 months later, according to many experts, the economy and the financial markets are sound.
The Business Forum editor, Joel Kurtzman, talked to 11 experts about what they have learned since the stock market fell.


Driven wild in Sicily
LEAD: AFTER MORE THAN 20 YEARS OF marriage, I still have an urge to get away with my wife to a beautiful subtropical island.
But as we sat stranded on the Autostrada del Sole, I wondered whether Sicily was a wise choice.
We could already see the island's thorny spine on the far side of the Straits of Messina, but a phalanx of cars seven miles long stood between us and the ferry port.


NEW COURT TERM MAY SHOW EXTENT OF REAGAN'S INFLUENCE
LEAD: The Supreme Court returns from a three-month recess on Monday to open a new term that is likely to provide the measure of President Reagan's success in his eight-year attempt to shift the Court in a more conservative direction.


Mother's Work
LEAD: WHAT DO WE call a woman who manages the household finances, bears the babies and educates the preschool children, does the shopping and cooks the meals, organizes family social functions and serves as confidante, lover and constructive critic to her husband?


Mexican Letter: Fighting Words, Poisoned Pens
LEAD: In Latin America, politics and literature not only converge, they often collide, and at the moment, the din from the nastiest clash in recent years is echoing throughout the region.
What began in June with a long polemic in a Mexican literary magazine has grown into a transcontinental argument about the relationship between history and the novel and between revolution and democracy - all of it enlivened by harsh personal insults, accusations of back-stabbing campaigns aimed at winning the Nobel Prize in Literature and even the spectacle of


The Mental Health Sieve
LEAD: Only Jorge Delgado knew what demons drove him to defile St.
Patrick's Cathedral with murderous violence.
But his recent rampage, in which he killed an elderly usher and was himself shot down by police, resulted all too predictably from chronic mental health care mismanagement.


Marcel Ophuls on Barbie: Reopening Wounds of War
LEAD: If things had gone according to plan, the architecture of Marcel Ophuls's film about the Nazi war criminal Klaus Barbie would have been similar to ''The Sorrow and the Pity'' - the French director's classic exploration of the universe of collaboration and resistance in German-occupied Clermont-Ferrand.


Something New At Morristown Fair
LEAD: OCCASIONALLY there is something new, not just under the sun but also under the roof of a craft fair.
Take, for example, a suit of armor for a mouse.
Intricately wrought despite its tongue-in-cheek theme, that ultimate in trappings will be found in a booth full of works by Canadian artists, a special feature at the Morristown CraftMarket opening here Friday night.


Snarling Ex-Sooners
LEAD: Sometimes emotions can outstrip intelligence and that may have been the case last week when Tony Casillas, a defensive lineman for the Atlanta Falcons, said he wished he could be on offense for just one play in today's game against the Seattle Seahawks so he could challenge his former Oklahoma teammate, Brian Bosworth, the


CHOSEN AND GIVEN
LEAD: I do not dispute Ms.
Henig's findings that many adopted children have social and behavioral problems, but it seems clear to me that the psychological burden of abandonment, of which she speaks, will diminish once society stops viewing adoption as a negative experience.
Instead of focusing so heavily on the issues of separation and abandonment, Ms.


Excerpts From Quayle Interview on Arms
LEAD: The following are excerpts from an interview today with Senator Dan Quayle:


Rites of Passage
LEAD: THOUGH rodeos, chicken scratch dances and beauty pageants may be encountered by visitors to any of Arizona's 20 Indian reservations, a few genuine ceremonials and rituals remain.
In these rituals tourists can discover the authentic expression of an indigenous culture.
Many of the ceremonials among Indian tribes have endured despite hostility and suppression throughout the centuries, and these vividly colorful and startling vestiges of once-thriving cultures have, to many Indian elders, become the only way to preserve an embattled culture.


A Word on the Meaning Of the Word 'Chai'
LEAD: I was surprised to learn from Amelia B. Winkler's article  [ ''A Return to the Past on Rosh ha-Shanah,'' Westchester Opinion, Sept. 11 ]  that the Hebrew word chai means ''good luck'' with a numerical value of 18. (The Hebrew letters have numerical equivalents that form the basis for a mystical understanding of the meanings of the various words.) In fact, chai means ''life.


Arbitrator Who Freed Gibson May Be the Dodgers' M.V.P.
LEAD: If Fred Claire is the National League executive of the year, Tommy Lasorda the National League manager of the year and Kirk Gibson the league's most valuable player, another award has to be created.
It would go to Tom Roberts, who is really the most valuable player of the year as far as the Los Angeles


L.B.J.'S HOMESPUN GROUSING
LEAD: I run into the views attributed to Lyndon Johnson all the time - among working-class people and small businessmen, especially in the Midwest, where I grew up.
Mr.
Goodwin is overintellectualizing.
These views can be exceptionally strong when Americans have not undergone a certain level or style of acculturation through education, foreign residence or other countering influences.


Flannery O'Connor's Works
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reviews/Dance; Anita Feldman Designs Tap Abstractions
LEAD: Anita Feldman employs traditional tap steps in untraditional ways by choreographing tap dances that -though they lack specific subject matter - are so varied in mood and rich in dynamic shadings that they could be called abstract paintings in motion.
She displayed some fine tap abstractions Thursday night when her company, Anita Feldman Tap, performed in the auditorium of the Whitney Museum of American Art at Equitable


Honk if You Want a Bumper Sticker
LEAD: Ever feel helplessly nostalgic describing to someone much younger the rhyming Burma Shave signs that once lined the roadways?
A report by William Schmidt of The Times produces much the same feeling.
It said that political buttons and bumper stickers are outre, things of the past.
The Bush and Dukakis campaigns are producing them by the bushel, but nobody seems to be buttoning lapels or stickering bumpers.


Lennon? A Film Joins the Fray
LEAD: ''We were out to create a balanced portrait of John Lennon, not an idealized vision of St.
John of Liverpool,'' says the director Andrew Solt of his documentary, ''Imagine: John Lennon,'' which opens Friday. ''John Lennon had an edge to him, and we show that, along with many other facets of his personality that were captured on film over the years.


'La Cage' In All Its Splendor
LEAD: YES, the Paper Mill Playhouse is doing ''La Cage aux Folles'' justice, totally.
This is a splendiferous production of a splendiferous musical - and that's not all there is to that.


On Sephardic Service In the County
LEAD: I would like to correct some misinformation in the article ''A Sephardic Temple Greets the New Year''  [ Sept. 11 ] .


BASEBALL'S RENAISSANCE MAN
LEAD: In addition to giving us a fine portrait of a very fine man, Charles Siebert's article on Bart Giamatti gave us a wonderful quote from Pete Rose (''Baseball's Renaissance Man,'' Sept. 4).
Pete's compliment for Bart Giamatti: ''He's an intellectual from Yale, but he's very intelligent.''


Correction
LEAD: A review of a poster exhibition, ''Persuasive Images,'' on Sept. 18 gave an incorrect closing date.
The show, at the Lehman College Art Gallery in the Bronx, closes on Oct. 26.


Examining Pop Music in the Greater Sociological Context
LEAD: In a cozy, neo-Gothic seminar room overlooking the Yale College campus, with sunlight streaming through the leaded-glass windows, Robert Walser of the University of Minnesota was delivering a paper to a gathering of colleagues.
Bearded, bespectacled, dressed in tweed jacket and bluejeans, he could almost have been a liberal-arts Everyman as he discussed ''coherent systems of signification'' and ''specific affective experiences.


An Artful Guide To Bali's Crafts
LEAD: FOR CENTURIES, SPICE traders did their best to avoid the small island of Bali, lying just off the easternmost tip of Java.
The warriors were fierce and, besides, there was little to export except coconuts and copra - certainly nothing to fight over.
Even the Dutch colonizers maintained only a small outpost here.


Maplewood Theater Stirs Memories
LEAD: The interesting article on the Maplewood Theater's present state was especially evocative to me (''A Movie Theater's Bit of Drama,'' Sept. 4).
It brought back memories of the time, circa 1940, when the theater was a hotbed of fine plays enacted by famous stars.


REAGAN ON REAGAN: 'SAME MAN I WAS'
LEAD: In a brief departure from partisan activities, President Reagan said today that although world events had changed dramatically, he had not.


HAITIANS FEAR VIOLENCE AFTER COLONEL'S OUSTER
LEAD: Haiti's most powerful unit commander, Col.
Jean-Claude Paul, was dismissed late Friday night, raising fears of new violence in the troubled country.


Family Afflicted by AIDS Finds a Better Life
LEAD: Garfield the Cat, a stuffed toy incarnating the comic strip character, was just about all the Rays were able to retrieve from the ashes after an arsonist burned their home to the ground.


The Subliminal Message of the Bush Campaign; The Point Spread
LEAD: To the Editor:


A.C.L.U. Boasts Wide Portfolio of Cases, but Conservatives See Partisanship
LEAD: The American Civil Liberties Union is known for supporting unpopular causes, but George Bush's recent attacks on the group have touched off heated debate over whether the A.C.L.U. itself is an unpopular cause ''out in deep left field,'' as the Republican Presidential candidate portrays it, or a respected


Giants and Taylor Brace for Redskins
LEAD: There probably never should have been any doubts that Lawrence Taylor would play in today's game against the Redskins in Washington.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: The Sound of a Slogan ''NOTHING in life is simple,'' said George E. Fey, president of the Long Island Tourism and Convention Commission.
The search for a new Long Island slogan started out that way.
Long Island needed a slogan.
The Commission held a contest.
They picked a winner in August from the 7500 entries submitted.


A Case of Deja Vu And Its Aftermath
LEAD: TWO situations arose in quick succession in the final of the Expo team championship in Brisbane, Australia, on Sept. 9.
After three days of Swiss qualifying play, a touring American group spearheaded by the world champions Lew Stansby and Chip Martel were opposed by four Australians plus the globe-trotting Pakistani star Zia


Hungary
LEAD: To the Editor: I am just back from a delightful holiday in Hungary where the American tourists get a real welcome.
As Western Europe is very expensive, beautiful Budapest with its museums, attractive and interesting architecture, exciting excursions and its lovely opera house (best tickets $5) is a revelation.


Father Charged With Murder For Shaking Baby Who Cried
LEAD: A father has been charged with the murder of his 1-month-old daughter after he shook her so violently it killed her, the police said yesterday.


Aikman Connects Again for U.C.L.A.
LEAD: Troy Aikman passed 48 yards to Reggie Moore for a touchdown with 1 minute 28 seconds left in the game today to give U.C.L.A. a 24-17 victory over Washington in both team's Pacific-10 Conference opener.


The English Find a Revolution on Their Own Shores
LEAD: APART from Dover sole and fish and chips, Great Britain has not been famous for its seafood.
One would never think it was an island surrounded by waters teeming with fish to judge by the standard stocked in many of its shops: frozen plaice fillets and codfish sticks (aptly named fish fingers).


Ms. Hatcher Wed To Andrew Roth
LEAD: Julia A. Hatcher, a daughter of Mrs.
Frederick Gipson and Charles Hatcher of Toledo, Ohio, was married last evening to Andrew D. Roth, a son of Rosalind Wells of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi John Rosove performed the ceremony at the Washington Hebrew Congregation.


Judge Says Rockefeller Estate Isn't Liable in Attica Lawsuit
LEAD: Inmates at the Attica Correctional Facility have no claim against the estate of former Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller for the deaths that occurred during a violent prison uprising in 1971, a Federal judge has ruled.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Corpus Christi
LEAD: Most Texans pride themselves on having casual attitudes and life styles (or at least pretending to), and the people of Corpus Christi are no exception: They act surprised - maybe even disappointed - if you imply you're not here to enjoy yourself.


INSPECTIONS FIND AIRLINE PROBLEMS
LEAD: A Federal inspection of 35 commuter airlines has produced nearly a dozen cases of falsified records and problems with maintenance and operations.


Gloria Gaines Has Wedding
LEAD: Gloria Ryan Gaines, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Gaines of Lexington, Ky., was married there yesterday to Craig Robert Callen, a son of Helen M. Callen of Peabody, Mass., and Robert H. Callen of North Providence, R.I.
The Rev.
Daniel J. Noll, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Holy Spirit Parish Newman Center at the University of


One Year After, the Market Lives but Matters Less
LEAD: ON October 19, 1987, the New York stock market crashed, sending markets around the world into a dizzying downward spiral.
Even before anyone could add up all the losses, forecasts of global recession and worse filled the air.


An Apples Revival West of the Cascades
LEAD: MOST of us think of an apple as sharp and crisp, with sweet-tart juice and a gentle perfume.
But that fruit is too often only a memory, since the apples in supermarkets these days require a shift of expectation.
More often than not, they are pulpy and flavorless.


Grants Offered for Plans That Reduce Pollution
LEAD: The Citizen's Committee for New York City is offering $5,000 awards to 10 neighborhood organizations that come up with projects to reduce air, noise or water pollution, curb toxic waste hazards or promote recycling and energy conservation.


'89 Drought Feared as a World Catastrophe
LEAD: Another drought in 1989 would be catastrophic for the world's food supply and cause a scramble by needy countries for dwindling grain supplies, an economist said today.


TAKING THE PULSE ONE YEAR LATER
LEAD: THE crashes of 1987 and 1929 bore an eerie resemblance to each other.
For more than three years before both market plunges, the Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks rose mightily.
And for months after, they followed similar down drafts.


Ellen Zachos Married To a Record Producer
LEAD: Ellen Zachos, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kimon S. Zachos of Manchester, N.H., and A. T. Michael MacDonald, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur T. MacDonald of Portsmouth, N.H., were married yesterday in Manchester.
The Rev.
David G. Phreaner, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the Currier Gallery of


Omaha, Debate Site, to Aid Homeless
LEAD: Shelter has been offered to several hundred homeless people during the Vice-Presidential debate here next week, but city officials denied that the idea was to push homeless people out of sight.


Draft Treaty Seeks to Take the Profit Out of Drugs
LEAD: The United States and more than 100 other countries have negotiated a treaty that would dramatically increase international cooperation in the effort to curb narcotics trafficking.


A Public School Seeks Equality in Uniformity
LEAD: A NEW uniform requirement to take effect in a New Haven public school tomorrow promises to quell arguments and fistfights among students over who has the designer T-shirts or the most expensive brand-name sneakers.


Recommendations On Tax Changes
LEAD: An Opinion page article by State Senator C. Louis Bassano (''Fiscal Blueprint: Burden's Not New,'' Aug. 21) criticized the final report of the New Jersey State and Local Expenditure and Revenue Policy Commission.
Like much of the rhetoric surrounding the report, Senator Bassano's article reflects an inaccurate or incomplete perception of the recommendations.


Hirohito's Bleeding Worsens And Relatives Rush to Side
LEAD: Emperor Hirohito's internal bleeding suddenly worsened today, causing his blood pressure to plummet and his relatives to come rushing to his bedside.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  AND THE BAND PLAYED ON: Politics, People, and the AIDS Epidemic, by Randy Shilts. (Penguin, $12.95.) ''AIDS did not just happen to America,'' Randy Shilts writes in his chronicle of the pandemic. ''It was allowed to happen.'' And, he concludes, the Reagan Administration, public health officials, the communications media and the leadership of the gay community all share the blame.


In Defense Of Carl Lewis
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


60's Revue Staged in Bridgeport
LEAD: BY restoring a misguided Broadway musical to its beginnings as a pop concert, the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport has come up with one of its most appropriately placed and crowd-pleasing entertainments.
It may well be providing a lesson on how to salvage an unsuccessful show.


Irony Is Back, And It's No More Mr. Nice Guy
LEAD: Late 1980's rock is overrun with professional nice guys.
Like politicians on the stump, they're busy demonstrating their idealism, their empathy with the common folk, their good intentions, their sincerity.
While a little responsibility on the part of people with mass-media exposure doesn't hurt, some mainstream rockers - Steve Winwood, George Michael, Def Leppard, Huey Lewis and dozens of others -have grown so protective of their images that they won't touch iffy, ambivalent or dangerous subjects and emotions.


Creating a New Jersey Heirloom (First, Get the Wool)
LEAD: ON trips west and north - to New England, the Ohio Valey, West Virginia - my husband and I saw many examples of local traditional craftwork: baskets, pottery, woven cloth.
All wrought, the creators are quick and proud to point out, from local materials, native clay or stone or vine, trees or grasses.


Joanne Trout Is Bride Of Craig Michael Cutler
LEAD: The marriage of Joanne Elizabeth Trout, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Trout of Old Greenwich, Conn., to Craig Michael Cutler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Cutler of Wilmington, Del., took place yesterday at the First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Avery Manchester performed the nondenominational ceremony.


Another Milestone for Mets
LEAD: Three days before the playoff for the National League pennant, the Mets passed a couple of modest milestones yesterday and even passed 3 million at the gate at Shea Stadium for the second straight year.


Trainng Program for Hospice Nurses
LEAD: THE Connecticut Hospice Inc. has announced it will train nurses in hospice care.


Sound Pollution: The Wrong Villain
LEAD: Your issue of Sept. 4 featured an article about the pollution of Long Island Sound  [ ''An Effort to Ban Discharges From Boats'' ]  and the efforts oflocal leaders to establish a zero pollution factor.


Loved Ones
LEAD:  GATES OF HEAVEN  Produced, directed and edited by Errol Morris.
RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video. 85 minutes. $79.95.


Elizabeth O'Neill Wed To Robert A. Wright
LEAD: Elizabeth Blanck O'Neill and Robert Alan Wright were married yesterday at the New Canaan, Conn., home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Henry O'Neill.
The Rev.
T.
Guthrie Speers Jr., a Presbyterian minister, officiated.


Haunted Hopes for . . . for What Now?
LEAD: It seems to me that most people live baseball lives informed by one spectacular or calamitous season early in their experience, in my case, age 11, 1949.
By that time I was articulate and sure-footed on the subject, having haunted libraries to read about the baseball that had preceded my consciousness of the game.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Too Many Duchesses for Gide  When Proust first submitted ''Remembrance of Things Past'' to the Nouvelle Revue Francaise, it was read and rejected by Andre Gide, who is supposed to have said of the manuscripts ''They're full of duchesses, not at all our style.'' Here we see two of the other editors having second thoughts.


A Moment of Beauty Amid the Chaos
LEAD: ONE morning as I went outside to take a shower there was a soft, warm rain falling.
If I had been patient I could have soaped up and let the gentle rain do the rinsing.
But the workmen were to arrive at 7 A.M. and I didn't want them to catch me dancing through the rain drops in my own backyard.


Anne H. Clothier, Winston Haydon, Exchange Vows
LEAD: The marriage of Anne Hopkins Clothier, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Clothier Jr. of Haverford, Pa., and Burgoyne Island, Nova Scotia, to Richard Winston Haydon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rogers Kenneth Haydon of Itta Bena, Miss., took place yesterday in Wayne, Pa.
The Rev.
Stephen K. Jacobson performed the ceremony in the chapel at St.


What to Do When the Taxman Goofs
LEAD: EVERY tax professional has at least one horror story to tell about Internal Revenue Service foul-ups.
Jo Carole Klepack, a tax manager with the New York accounting firm of Siegal, Rich, Pachtman &amp; Company, recalls the case of a client who diligently paid his estimated taxes each quarter.
But the I.R.S.


Under the Coral Sea
LEAD: THERE IS AN ISLAND IN OUR MINDS.
IT IS made of fairy tales, cartoons, adventure stories, sea chanteys, pirate lore, ''The Tempest,''


Scrambled Eggs And Cross-Purposes
LEAD: TEN YEARS AGO MY mother and father split up.
In the uneasy truce that has followed, my father's Sunday morning visits have become a ritual.
I scramble some eggs.
The kids play in their pajamas.
My wife dresses for Mass.
Retired now, he is youthful-appearing since he gave up the chemotherapy.
But he walks and speaks with a look only those who have had the cancer cut out of them can possess.


An Heir to Land - But Where?
LEAD: OUT of the blue, Woonsocket, R.I., learned that it had fallen heir to a parcel of land that might be worth up to $500,000.
But there was a hitch.


Ms. Weisenstein Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At st.
James Episcopal Church in New York, Kristina Ellen Weisensteinm the daughter of Mrs.
Philip J. Wojak of Webster Groves, Mo., and Hugh L. Weisenstein of St.
Louis, was married yesterday to Waddell Waters Stillman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Gordon B. Stillman of New York and Wrightsville Beach, N


June C. Palumbo Weds J. M. Meyer
LEAD: The marriage of June Carolyn Palumbo, a personnel recruiter at the New York advertising agency of McCann-Erickson, to James Martin Meyer, a management supervisor and a senior vice president at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton, a New York advertising agency, took place yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Damian A.


A Vanished Townsman Leaves Only Questions
LEAD: Peter H. Burr was a popular figure in this seaside community.
He was a teacher, Boy Scout leader and a member of the town's governing board.
In July, he disappeared amid reports that he sexually molested a 16-year-old boy.


20 YEARS AFTER A MASSACRE, MEXICO STILL SEEKS HEALING FOR TIS WOUNDS
LEAD: On Oct. 2, 1968, the Mexican Army and security police fired on students and other unarmed protesters at Tlatelolco plaza here.
When the shooting stopped, dozens of people were dead, more than a thousand had been wounded, and the Mexican political system had suffered a blow from which it still has not recovered.


'Holy Secrets'
LEAD: PHYSICIANS AND PRIESTS have long been the keepers of secrets.
On graduation from medical school, doctors take the oath of Hippocrates, promising: ''Whatsoever I shall see or hear in the course of my profession . . . if it be what should not be published abroad, I will never divulge, holding such things to be holy secrets.


Jack Ruby's Timing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Volunteering? No WayAm I Ever Doing That Again
LEAD: WITH the onset of the school year, a malady will overcome many healthy, intelligent women.
Homebound women, not participants in the outside workforce and with school-age children, are most susceptible to the syndrome.
Among the symptoms of this affliction are the inability to say the word ''no'' and a hand that involuntarily raises itself in response to a call for chairwomen, committee members or other types of volunteer positions.


Suzanne Stroble Weds Douglas Richard Sitter
LEAD: The wedding of Suzanne Louise Stroble, the daughter of Charles R. Stroble of Greenwich, Conn., and Mrs.
Henry L. Coon of Bronxville, N.Y., to Douglas Richard Sitter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles R. Sitter of Bronxville, took place yesterday in Washington.
Msgr.
J.
Joshua Mundell performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the


Miles to Go
LEAD: To the Editor:


MISHEARD WORDS
LEAD: There is indeed a word for a phrase that is misheard.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Basking Ridge  $262,000  43 Decker Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; family room, den, deck, 2 fireplaces; taxes $3,254.
Budd Lake  $189,000  18 Falcon Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old Cape Cod; den, hardwood floors, fireplace, full basement; taxes $2,680.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  DECORATIVE ARTS


THE PROMISE THAT FAILED
LEAD: The failure of the artificial heart was inevitable the moment the first patient developed a post-operative complication that should have been anticipated prior to the operation (''The Promise That Failed,'' by Ralph Brauer, Aug. 28).
The problem was not infection.
The heart is only a portion of the vascular tree and functions by pumping blood to supply oxygen to the cells and to remove carbon dioxide and other metabolic wastes.


SOCIAL CHANGE 101
LEAD:  SAIGON, ILLINOIS  By Paul Hoover.  pp. New York:  Vintage Books. Paper, $6.95.


THE REGION: The Comptroller and His Backers; Regan Raises Funds, an Inquiry Raises Questions
LEAD: LIKE illicit lovers, politicians and their fund-raisers are passionate in private but prudent, indeed prissy, in public.


Tough Choices to Make for Power Without Pollution
LEAD: SENATOR Timothy E. Wirth quotes the old Mark Twain line and takes it seriously: ''Everybody talks about the weather but nobody does anything about it.''


Welfare Bill's Radical Goals Would Take Years
LEAD: If its proponents are right, the welfare bill that passed Congress Friday will create a historic change in the lives of millions of poor people in America and in the way in which the rest of society views them.


East and West Get Down to Basics in Arms Negotiations
LEAD: WHOEVER wins in November, the next Administration will find itself involved in one of the most complex negotiations on arms reduction ever attempted.
Arms control officials say that by the end of this year, the 16 nations in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the 7 members of the Warsaw Pact will be ready to commence talks limiting conventional weapons in all of


Princeton Drives to 2-0 in Ivy
LEAD: Princeton's drive for its first Ivy League football championship since 1969 cleared an important barrier today.
The Tigers beat Brown, 31-27, for the first time in five years and they did it the hard way, by coming from behind in the second half against a sound opponent.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There is no need for a long-winded policy speech.''  - Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  [ 1:5. ]


In Praise of Follies: Britain and Ireland
LEAD: IT IS SAFE TO SAY THAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND contain what must be the known world's greatest assemblage of follies - those eccentric and generally useless temples, grottoes and castles built, often at great cost, to satisfy the whim of the builder.
The sorts of construction, in other words, that provoke the beholder to utter the good old Anglo-Saxon cries of ''Coo!


Lillian Hellman's Temperament
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pavarotti Tickets on Sale
LEAD: Tickets for Pavarotti Plus, a concert by Luciano Pavarotti and guests on Jan. 9 at Lincoln Center, go on sale today at the Avery Fisher Hall box office.
Guest artists will include June Anderson, Shirley Verrett, Sherrill Milnes, Ruggero Raimondi, Kallen Esperian, Eduardo Ayas and Thomas Hampson.
Anton Guadagno will conduct.


New Chairman of the K.G.B.: Vladimir Aleksandrovich Kryuchkov
LEAD: Has been a deputy director of the K.G.B., or Committee on State Security since 1978 . . .
Vaulted over the head of two more senior deputies in appointment today to replace Viktor M. Chebrikov . . .
Is also an army general . . .
Joined the K.G.B. in 1967 when Yuri V. Andropov, who later served as Soviet leader, was head of the secret police and intelligence agency .


Store Ceiling Yields 3 Boys
LEAD: Three boys lived for nine days inside the suspended ceiling of a department store until the manager checked to see why the burglar alarm had been ringing off and on for days.
Two of the boys, both 13 years old, left home Sept. 19 and set up camp in the Zayre store.


Miss Vogel, an Accountant, Marries Joseph W. Mullins
LEAD: Kathleen L. Vogel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
O.
Martin Vogel of New Rochelle, N.Y., and Joseph W. Mullins, the son of Marie J. Mullins of New Rochelle, and Christopher J. Mullins of Palm Beach Shores, Fla., were married yesterday.
Justice William R. Crosbie of the Village of Tarrytown, N.Y., performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill Restaurant in


THE SEOUL OLYMPICS: Equestrian; Frenchman Captures Gold in Show Jumping
LEAD: With smart riding and a little luck, Pierre Durand of France and his flashy black jumper Jappeloup won the individual show jumping gold medal in the Olympic Stadium here today.


New Role for OPEC: Small Fish in a Big Pond
LEAD: THE energy crisis of the 1970's, with its long gasoline lines and the frantic race to buy crude oil at any price, is dead.
A new world of energy has emerged, one in which oil is more easily supplanted by other sources of energy, including natural gas, coal and, despite the accidents at Chernobyl and Three Mile


Banned Nepal Opposition Hopes for Revival
LEAD: In a bare, brick building off a bustling thoroughfare in the Nepalese capital, Krishna Prasad Hattarai, president of the major opposition party banned nearly 30 years ago, spoke of the hopes of groups seeking multi-party democracy.


B. J. KILCOYNE WED TO MS. LIVINGSTON
LEAD: The marriage of Martha Evarts Tracy Livingston, the daughter of Mrs.
W.
Putnam Livingston of Keene, N.H., and the late Mr.
Livingston, to Brian Joseph Kilcoyne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Kilcoyne of North Andover, Mass., took place yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Jaffrey Center, N.H.


The Full Life Can be Full of Values Too
LEAD: ''Full Life, Empty Values'' by Linda Gass  [ Opinion, Aug. 21 ]  correctly points out that a successful economic system must also be compatible with a value system.
Her desire to have our value system ''teach our children to be the best, not just have the best'' is commendable.
However, her outrage at ''what it is our generation is teaching its children'' is myopic.


POSTINGS: Hotel in Transition; Nurses' Station
LEAD: Irving Schatz scored a real estate coup three years ago when WNET/Channel 13 paid him $15 million to buy its offices and studios on the lower nine floors of the Henry Hudson Hotel.
Mr.
Schatz scored again in August when St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center agreed to lease the remaining portion of the 26-story building.


Accord on 3-Year Pact Is Announced at Deere
LEAD: Negotiators for Deere &amp; Company and the United Automobile Workers reached a tentative agreement today on a three-year contract affecting more than 13,400 workers, company and union spokesmen said.


RANDI M. BUZIN IS WED TO MITCHELL J. SOLOMON
LEAD: Randi Meryl Buzin, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herman H. Buzin of Massapequa, L.I., was married there last night to Mitchell Jay Solomon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max M. Solomon of Huntingdon Valley, Pa.
Rabbi Sanford Jarashow performed the ceremony at Temple Judea.


POSTINGS: Rockland Conversion; Market Upswing
LEAD: When Unity Capital purchased Hillcrest Point for $10 million in 1984, the Long Island developer considered the decision as only a corporate milestone - its first foray into Rockland County.
It had no big plans; the 16-acre garden apartment complex on Route 45 in Spring Valley, company officials thought, should remain a rental.


To Play in Asia, Moscow Has to Pay
LEAD: General Secretary Mikhail S. Gorbachev has updated his 1986 speech on Asia with new proposals to make Moscow a full-fledged participant in the region's political and economic affairs.
And his impending meeting with the Chinese foreign minister, widely interpreted as a precursor to a summit meting, only underscores his determination.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  AMERICAN PLAYWRIGHT  A centennial celebration of the birth of Maxwell Anderson, the noted American playwright, will open today in Stamford with an exhibition at the Ferguson Library and a buffet dinner and performance at the Landmark Club.


Hospitals Uniting to Attract Nurses
LEAD: THE advertisements - offering a ''fantastic salary,'' a ''challenging position'' and the chance to ''work hours you want'' - are constant and sound an increasingly desperate note.
But hospital administrators say the nursing shortage in Westchester is getting worse.


Red Sox Happy; Stieb Heartbroken
LEAD: Rich Gedman, the catcher for the Red Sox, sat in the empty, but still cramped clubhouse in Cleveland Friday night, soaking his aching right shoulder and listening for the update from Oakland.
A couple of hundred miles away, Dave Stieb, the pitcher for the Blue Jays, lay awake in his bed in Toronto, his mind throbbing with painful memory.


Two Sides of Tyson: Fighter Battles Himself
LEAD: In June 1987, Mike Tyson encountered an acquaintance he had not seen for some time.
When she asked how he was, he said simply, ''I'm in love,'' referring to his relationship with the actress Robin Givens.
And he blushed.


THE ALPHA ZULU
LEAD:  AN APPETITE FOR POWER  Buthelezi's Inkatha and  South Africa.
By Gerhard Mare and  Georgina Hamilton.
Illustrated. 261 pp.
Bloomington:  Indiana University Press. $35.


Throngs March to Anti-Pinochet Rally
LEAD: Opponents of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet concluded their campaign to defeat him in Wednesday's presidential plebiscite with a huge rally today that brought people from the farthest corners of the country.


The English Find a Revolution on Their Own Shores
LEAD: APART from Dover sole and fish and chips, Great Britain has not been famous for its seafood.
One would never think it was an island surrounded by waters teeming with fish to judge by the standard stocked in many of its shops: frozen plaice fillets and codfish sticks (aptly named fish fingers).


More Towns Name Historians
LEAD: NEARLY half of Connecticut's cities and towns have appointed municipal historians, and many others are considering it, one year after a law went into effect authorizing the position.


Miss Vogelpohl Marries in Texas
LEAD: Elisabeth Anne Vogelpohl, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Elmer B. Vogelpohl Jr. of Galveston, Tex., was married there yesterday to Arthur Lindeman Jacobson Jr., a son of Mr.
Jacobson of La Quinta, Calif., and Mrs.
Edward Strauss of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Donovan performed the ceremony at Trinity


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ending Sept. 16  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill  $541,737  1140 Fifth Avenue (95th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, windowed kitchen, maid's room; maintenance $890, 30% tax-deductible (Broker: Edward Lee Cave)


THE GAMES AT A GLANCE
LEAD:  Track and Field  For the American men's 1,600-meter relay team, there wasn't anyone to run against after barely 400 meters.
So they ran against time and history and raced them both to a draw.
The team of Danny Everett, Steve Lewis, Kevin Robinzine and Butch Reynolds sprinted all but alone to the gold medal, equaling the 1968 world record of 2 minutes 56.16 seconds.


The English Find a Revolution on Their Own Shores
LEAD: APART from Dover sole and fish and chips, Great Britain has not been famous for its seafood.
One would never think it was an island surrounded by waters teeming with fish to judge by the standard stocked in many of its shops: frozen plaice fillets and codfish sticks (aptly named fish fingers).


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our home is covered with aluminum siding in a blue-gray color.
Last Halloween, children threw eggs against one corner, leaving a stain.
There are also some white stains from bird droppings.
The rains have lightened these stains considerably, but I have been reluctant to scrub the siding, as I have heard this might strip it down to the bare metal.


Kerri L. Martin To Wed Nov. 6
LEAD: The engagement of Kerri Lucille Martin to Richard Allan Bartlett has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Martin of Chattanooga, Tenn.
Mr.
Bartlett is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas Bartlett of Tuscaloosa, Ala.


A CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Sept. 25 misstated Alfred Faiella's job title.
He is executive director of the Newark Economic Development Corporation.


For Sale, Bits of Broadway    Equity Association and Broadway Cares, included items hand-made by the casts of several plays, autographed photographs, posters, show records and baked goods. (NYT/Dith Pran)


WALL STREET STOLE MY HUSBAND
LEAD:  CRAZY IN LOVE  By Luanne Rice.  307 pp. New York:  Viking. $18.95.


SPACE SHUTTLE CREW, HALFWAY IN ITS FLIGHT, DOES SCIENTIFIC TESTS
LEAD: The astronauts of the space shuttle Discovery cruised around and around the world today, conducting scientific experiments, reading a youth's letter in a telecast and rehearsing procedures for their return to the Earth on Monday.


Bills Turning On the Juice Again
LEAD: Remember when O. J. Simpson dashed through the Rich Stadium snow and when Jack Kemp and Joe Ferguson tossed those winning bombs for the Buffalo Bills?
Remember when rumpled Lou Saban and hard-nosed Chuck Knox would clutch their caps on the sidelines and when Bills fans - with football the only pro game in town - had so much to cheer?


Court Backs Fanelli on Oath of Office
LEAD: SHORTLY after County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke suspended his Probation Director, Marino J. Fanelli, last May - the first department head to be removed in his administration - Mr.
O'Rourke announced that a legal technicality made the filing of charges unnecessary.


In Search of a Star Amid Glitter and Kitsch
LEAD: A portent perhaps.
The new television season, in disarray because of the recent writers strike, is getting under way with a Liberace race.
Both ABC and CBS have been struggling to finish movie biographies of the flamboyant entertainer who died of AIDS in February 1987.
Each network claims initial ignorance of the other's plans.


A Diverse Selection of New Englanders
LEAD: THERE is something humorous about a collection of curators titling a group show, ''New England Now,'' only to admit in the catalogue that they could not find anything specifically ''New English'' about the artists they had chosen.
Undismayed by this, the curators fall back on diversity as the common factor - as if anyone would knowingly assemble a group of look alikes.


Miss Gray Wed to L. J. Buck
LEAD: Elizabeth Christian Gray, a daughter of Mrs.
Thomas Owen Moore Jr. of Winston-Salem, N.C., and the late Bowman Gray 3d, was married yesterday to Leonard Jerome Buck, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Austin Buck of Bernardsville, N.J.
The Rev.
Dudley Colhoun and the Rev.
Harold Barrett, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.


Amputee Is Discharged As an Air Force Cadet
LEAD: A cadet who lost part of a leg in a traffic accident has lost his effort to stay in the Air Force Academy in spite of his contesting a Pentagon rule calling for discharge in the event of such an injury.


THE SMACK OF FIRM GOVERNMENT
LEAD:  MRS.
THATCHER'S REVOLUTION  The Ending of the Socialist Era  By Peter Jenkins.
Illustrated. 417 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press. $25.
THATCHER  By Kenneth Harris.
Illustrated. 248 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95


The Sophisticated Traveler/Magazine/Part 2
LEAD: Treasured islands, from Hawaii to Venice to the Nile and the Coral Sea.


DABBLING IN LOVE - NOT THE NICE KIND
LEAD:  THE ASSIGNATION  By Joyce Carol Oates.  192 pp.
New York:  The Ecco Press. $16.95.


Warm Feelings as Olympics End
LEAD: The Games of the XXIV Olympiad approached their end today amid feelings of warmth, satisfaction, appreciation and relief on the part of the organizers, hosts and participants.


Pinelands Debate, Then and Now
LEAD: HIS law office rises 36 stories above the sophisticated spaces of Rockefeller Center, but when Franklin E. Parker checks his wristwatch he is reminded of New Jersey's wildest spot.
The timepiece's face carries a drawing of a pine cone and a cluster of pine needles, symbols of the vast New Jersey Pine Barrens, which Mr.


Teaching as a Therapeutic Activity
LEAD: THERE was nothing subtle about the pain.
It started in the middle of my chest and made its unsettling way up into my neck, momentarily forming a knot before moving into my face.
There, the pain just below my eyes reminded me of the pain I got as a kid when I ate lemon ice too fast.


Two New Museums Offer a Contrast: British Brashness vs. American Reserve
LEAD: New York and London have just acquired a pair of major new cultural institutions, covering much the same fields of interest.
Early last month Mayor Koch cut the inaugural ribbon at the American Museum of the Moving Image.
A few days later, some 3,000 miles away, the Museum of the Moving Image was formally opened by Prince


Ms. Munson Has Wedding on L.I.
LEAD: The marriage of Elizabeth Palmer Munson, an associate at the New York law firm of White &amp; Case, to Robert Louis von Stade, a residential real-estate broker with William B. May &amp; Company in New York, took place yesterday at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles G.


U.S. Ties AIDS to Soaring Pneumonia Deaths
LEAD: AIDS is believed responsible for an increase in pneumonia deaths among young adults in New York and, possibly, other cities.


Exploring Argentina's Deepest South
LEAD: USHUAIA, Argentina, on the south coast of Tierra del Fuego, is about as far south as a tourist can comfortably go in the Americas.
It faces the Beagle Channel, named for the ship that brought Charles Darwin on his 1832 exploration of local wildlife.
Penguins, sea lions and rare sea birds still abound.


Melissa Moreno Wed to J. L. Seiler 3d
LEAD: Melissa Wilcox Moreno, a daughter of Judith Wilson Moreno of Philadelphia and Cape May, N.J., and Vito Nicholas Moreno of King of Prussia, Pa., was married yesterday to Joseph Leidich Seiler 3d, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Seiler Jr. of Millington and Ocean City, N.J.


On the Mesas of the Hopis
LEAD: IN the dusty plaza of a Hopi Indian village, the flat pueblo rooftops begin to fill with people.
Others gather below, leaning against the wall or sitting on benches and straight-backed chairs brought outside for the occasion.
The Hopi patiently wait.
Dark-eyed children, dressed in their Sunday best, chase each other like puppies at play.


Fordham's New Theologian: a Flair for Diplomacy
LEAD: When Avery Dulles took up his duties last month as the first occupant of the Prof.
Laurence J. McGinley Chair in Religion and Society at Fordham University, he came bearing a reputation as one of the nation's most eminent theologians.


A Late Blooming Shrub for Ornamental Use
LEAD: DON'T be lured by mild, sunny weather; move house plants indoors; exceptions are Christmas cactuses, which remain outdoors until light frosts to set flower buds.
Continue transplanting evergreens, conifers and perennials.
Bulb planting also goes on this month and continues to the early days of next month.


Credit Cards
LEAD: To the Editor: Betsy Wade's article on credit card problems (Practical Traveler, Aug. 7) was very informative.
I would like to add a piece of advice that my husband and I have found helpful.
He applied for a MasterCard in his name and I applied for a Visa card in my name.
He carries the MasterCard and I carry the Visa.


Autumn Diversions on Ile de Re
LEAD: Although it's barely a speck on the map of France, I think of the Ile de Re as France's kind and gentle, quiet island.
A flat, irregular stretch of land bathed in an ever-bright haze, this tiny, tidy Atlantic island off the coast of La Rochelle is the epitome of ''douce France,'' all that is calm, quiet, welcoming about this eternally attractive nation.


12-Hospital Study Cites Preventable Deaths
LEAD: As many as one-quarter of the deaths of patients being treated for heart ailments, stroke and pneumonia in 12 hospitals could have been prevented, but doctors committed a variety of errors, a new study indicates, Doctors improperly treated patients complaining of chest pain, prescribed the wrong kind of antibiotics for pneumonia and misdiagnosed stroke, according to the study published today in The Annals of Internal Medicine.


Film Festival; 2 Views Of Sexual Fantasies
LEAD: When do businessmen do the tango?
More often than you might think, according to ''Ray's Male Heterosexual Dance Hall,'' a wickedly deadpan short film by Bryan Gordon.
Mr.
Gordon has the novel idea of letting a bevy of dark-suited executives meet at lunchtime in a dance club (with ticker tape over the bar) to run through their paces, which are choreographed to songs like ''Begin the Beguine.


Administration Faulted on Homeless Aid Program
LEAD: A Federal district judge has ruled that the Reagan Administration is defying a Congressional mandate to release underused Federal property as housing for the nation's homeless.


DETERMINED TO BE HEARD
LEAD: THEY ARE THE POWERFUL and the powerless, the popular and the scorned.
A guild of stubborn optimists who test the limits of the system for the rest of us, they take their grievances, as they were taught they could in America, as far as you can go: to the United States Supreme Court.


Sergeant Is Shot During Kidnapping Investigation
LEAD: A police sergeant was shot and wounded yesterday when he stopped a car in Queens during a kidnapping investigation, the authorities said.


Washington Gains and Houston Loses Population
LEAD: Florida and Texas have a total of 9 of the nation's fastest-growing metropolitan areas, but the only change in the top 10 was that the Washington, D.C., region edged ahead of economically distressed Houston.


Weighing Imagery In a Campaign Made for Television
LEAD: FOR better and for worse, television has come of age in this Presidential election.
No longer is the tube some dark, new force distorting the process through which voters select their Presidents.
In the new electronic democracy, television is the force that shapes the process through which voters select their Presidents.


Oman Official Says Iran Wants Hostages Released
LEAD: A consensus is emerging among Iran's political leadership that Western hostages held by Iranian-backed groups in Lebanon should be released, according to Oman's Foreign Minister, Youssef bin al-Alawi.


All Aboard for Upper Egypt
LEAD: IN THE MID-1800'S, WHEN JOURNEYING UP THE Nile had just become the rage, a French traveler, M. Ampere, described the typical tour of Egypt as ''a donkey ride and a boat trip interspersed with ruins.'' The itinerary hasn't changed much in a century, but the means and speed of travel have.
Buses have replaced donkeys and flights have replaced boat trips, except, perhaps, for the scenic cruise from Luxor to Aswan.


Reviews/Music; Sheryl Woods Sings Rosina in ''Barbiere'
LEAD: The beginnings of Friday's ''Barbiere di Siviglia'' at the New York City Opera did not promise great things: tired orchestral intonation in the overture, a wan Almaviva, serious dislocations between stage and pit.
It was Rosina's appearance that cheered things up immeasurably.


The Market, After the Fall
LEAD: The Business Section today looks closely at the financial markets and the economy on an important anniversary.
These are some of the topics:


A Divided Electorate Ponders Which Israel Is the Right One
LEAD: With critically important parliamentary elections only 30 days away, Israel seems evenly divided on what kind of a country it should be: an assertively nationalistic and unyielding nation of the right, or a more conciliatory and traditionally liberal state of the left.


Give 'Em Hell, Mike
LEAD: Given George Bush's natural advantages, as the designated heir of a highly popular President in prosperous times, he has a surprisingly narrow lead in this campaign.
The election is still there to be won by Michael Dukakis.


Sports of The Times; Green to Gold, Now Green Again
LEAD: Once green amateurs, they're Olympic boxing champions now.
Ray Mercer, Andrew Maynard, Kennedy McKinney.
They hope to turn their gold medals into million-dollar contracts.
But in turning pro, they'll soon be green again.


Parking Rules
LEAD: The annual Pulaski Day Parade will begin at noon today at 26th Street and Fifth Avenue, marching north to 52d Street, then east to Third Avenue.
Because of the Jewish holidays of Shemini Atzereth and Simhath Torah, which conclude the harvest festival of Succoth, alternate-side parking will be suspended in New York City tomorrow and


Gadgetry To Foil Thieves
LEAD: BRICKTON KRISTY has taken auto gadgetry to new heights and designed a sophisticated door-locking system that he believes should foil most car thieves.


Stuck in Second
LEAD: If baseball history repeats, and in Cincinnati it has demonstrated an uncanny recent ability to do just that, it would seem a fairly safe bet that the Reds will be coming in second in the National League West for the next couple of years.
After all, in four full seasons under Pete Rose the Reds have never finished anywhere else, and since


Question Of the Week; Which Is The Better Team, '86 Mets, Or '88 Mets?
LEAD: The 1988 edition of the Mets is superior.
This year's pitching was more consistent and at times overpowering.
It certainly had to compensate for poor hitting.
Yes, in 1986 they ran away with the division, however this year they had to overcome a crippling injury to Hernandez, blend in a weak hitting rookie shortstop, Elster, and deal with the sudden lack of offense from Carter.


TV's Coverage Of Conference
LEAD: The Cable News Network plans live coverage of the astronauts' news conferences from space, tentatively scheduled for 8:57 A.M.
Eastern daylight time.
ABC News, CBS News and NBC News will report on the news conference in their regular news broadcasts.


Auto Insurance: Another Aspect
LEAD: Representative Jim Courter's Aug. 14 Opinion page article, ''Auto Insurance: A Better Way,'' focuses on the Joint Underwriting Association's mega-buck deficit and argues for fairness for corporate behemoths and a still heavier club of enforcement against the owners of 400,000 uninsured vehicles who disobey the law.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: East; Penn State's Sacca Wins in First Start
LEAD: Tony Sacca, the first true freshman to start at quarterback in Joe Paterno's 23 seasons as coach, threw for two touchdowns tonight as Penn State routed Temple, 45-9.


THE SEOUL OLYMPICS: Roundup; Yugoslavia Gets Gold in Water Polo
LEAD: It was a repeat of the water polo championship matchup in the 1984 Games.
It was a repeat of the outcome, too.


Susan McClellan Becomes the Wife Of Linsday Valk
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Michael the Archangel in Greenwich, Conn., Susan Jane McClellan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Wells McClellan of Greenwich, was married yesterday to Garry Lindsay Valk, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Garry Valk of Cutchoque, L.I.
Msgr.
Thomas Guinan performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


Elsa Margaret Kellstrom Weds Dwight Stocker 3d
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Morristown, N.J., Elsa Margaret Kellstrom, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arne A. Kellstrom of Singapore, was married yesterday to Dwight Lathrop Stocker 3d, a son of Mrs.
Thomas Webb of London and the late Mr.
Stocker Jr.
The Rev.
Phillip Dana Wilson performed the ceremony.


Miss Murphy Marries John Cannizzaro
LEAD: St.
John's Episcopal Church in Little Silver, N.J., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Rachel Elizabeth Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Bradford Murphy of Little Silver and Harwichport, Mass., to John Anthony Cannizzaro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Cannizzaro of South Plainfield, N.J.


After the Hurricane: What to Do
LEAD: ''HAPPY to be out alive'' is a typical response of vacationers who got out of the resort areas of Mexico - Cancun and Cozumel - and Jamaica and Grand Cayman Island after Hurricane Gilbert hit two weeks ago.
With 400 people dead or missing, mostly in Mexico, and damage estimates at $10 billion in the century's most powerful hurricane, those who got safely home have good reason to be relieved.


Social Events; Aid for Many Needs
LEAD:  Graham Returns


A FEW MORE PLOWSHARES, COMRADES
LEAD:  THE OTHER SIDE OF ARMS CONTROL  Soviet Objectives in the Gorbachev Era.
By Alan B. Sherr.  325 pp.
Boston:  Unwin Hyman.
Cloth, $49.95.
Paper, $17.95.


Testing the Limits
LEAD:  RICHARD III  Starring Laurence Olivier (in photo), Cedrick Hardwicke, Ralph Richardson, John Gielgud, Claire Bloom.
Produced and directed by Laurence Olivier.  1955. 155 minutes.
Janus Classic Collection.
Nelson Entertainment. $19.98


J. C. Bastis Weds Laurie Bruckner
LEAD: At the Greek Orthodox Cathedral of St.
Paul in Hempstead, L.I., Laurie Anne Bruckner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Bruckner of Upper Brookville, L.I., Vero Beach, Fla., and New York was married yesterday to Jason Christopher Bastis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Christos G. Bastis of New York and Palm Beach, Fla.


A Tale of Two Trees
LEAD: THIS is a tale of two trees, one that we lost and one that we saved.


THE REAL CHARLES DICKENS, OR THE OLD ANIMOSITY SHOP
LEAD: In his life Charles Dickens was like the rest of us, but maybe more so: another poor and wonderful soul attempting to deal with his and the world's pain and confusion in the best way he knew how.
There is a large Dickens constituency, part of which has a vested interest in idealizing the great novelist.


THE SEOUL OLYMPICS: Soccer; Soviets Top Brazil For First Gold Since '56
LEAD: The Soviet Union won its first Olympic gold medal in soccer since 1956 tonight in the Olympic Stadium, beating Brazil in overtime, 2-1.
Afterward the team's coach proclaimed Soviet soccer ready to join the sport's international elite.


Walton Keeping Things Simple
LEAD: Joe Walton has been so concerned about not overloading his young Jets with too many plays that he admits he did not push them to try to get a big early start.


THE SEOUL OLYMPICS: Track and Field; Pride and Frustration for the Americans
LEAD: The United States won the gold medal in the men's 1,600-meter relay today and the silver medal in the women's 1,600-meter relay.
Florence Griffith Joyner added a gold and a silver medal to her two previous golds.


Flannery O'Connor's Works
LEAD: To the Editor:


BOOZE AND MUSES
LEAD: Westbrook Pegler dropped into Harry's New York Bar in Paris one afternoon in 1936 and decided that the joint's best days were over. ''The old saloon,'' he wrote, ''smells of dead cigars, beer and the past.'' Peg had a way with words, but it seems not to have occurred to him that at Harry's they sold the past and booze was just a sideline.


BUSH IS DISPUTED ON U.S.-NORIEGA TIE
LEAD: Stansfield Turner, President Carter's intelligence chief, said today that the Central Intelligence Agency cut off its payments to Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega of Panama in the Carter Administration and resumed them after the Reagan Administration took office in 1981.


WHO HIRED THE ASSASSIN?
LEAD:  ALL THE RIGHT ENEMIES  The Life and Murder of Carlo Tresca.
By Dorothy Gallagher.
Illustrated. 321 pp.
New Brunswick, N.J.:  Rutgers University Press. $24.95.


Miss Stafford Weds Doctor
LEAD: Carolyn Anne Stafford, an associate at the Boston law firm of Hill &amp; Barlow, and Dr.
Eric H. Stein, a resident in head and neck surgery at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, were married yesterday at the Hilton Hotel in Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Barbara Jenkins, a Presbyterian minister, and Rabbi Charles


Question Of the Week; Which Is The Better Team, '86 Mets, Or '88 Mets?
LEAD: They will not win 108 games in 1988.
They have played without the leadoff success of Dykstra-Backman, and without the '86 seasons of both Gooden and Carter.
There was no Keith Hernandez with his Gold Glove and ballet-like grace at first base for far too many games.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-19


Gorbachev's Shake-Up: Logical and Apparently Urgent
LEAD: The shakeup in the Soviet leadership this week, although unexpected in its timing and breadth, represents a logical step in Mikhail S. Gorbachev's effort to restructure the political system and flows from the other initiatives he has taken to reshape the country since assuming power in March 1985.


Antidote for Auto Theft
LEAD: An innovative, inexpensive New York City program promises genuine relief for the epidemic of automobile thefts in American cities.


A Healthy Vacuum
LEAD: FOR nearly 30 years, Calvin Parks, a garage mechanic, had the hazardous job of cleaning out asbestos grit from brake drums.
It was a job so dangerous that his partner, who performed the same tasks, died from asbestosis in 1982.


Parole Action Could Close Landmark Murder Case
LEAD: Sometime early next month, New York State prisoner 66A0003 will ask the Parole Board to write the final chapter in the Wylie-Hoffert murder case - a landmark legal saga that was pivotal in abolishing the state's death penalty and in restricting police interrogations throughout the country.


Sign of Growth For the Future
LEAD: A sign of growth in the months ahead came in a Government report showing that its chief forecasting gauge rose four-tenths of 1 percent in August.
Some analysts interpreted the report as a signal that another dose of higher interest rates from the Federal Reserve might be needed.
But others were cautious about drawing such sharp conclusions from a single month's figures.


The Art of Navajo Sand Paintings
LEAD: METICULOUSLY the old Navajo brushes the flat ground, then begins to spread the layer of sand that in another time and another place would have been the way to make a sick man well, the means to put the universe in balance.


Reviews/Dance; Kevin Jeff's Choreography In a Benefit Performance
LEAD: The Jubilation Dance Company had a good reason to celebrate when it offered a benefit performance Friday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
This season it will embark upon its second international and fourth American tour.
No wonder Jubilation was jubilant.


Anger and Praise Follow Pope's Letter on Women
LEAD: In the United States, first reactions to Pope John Paul II's letter ''On the Dignity of Women,'' issued Friday in Rome, were mixed, and there was immediate speculation about the impact of the papal document on the pastoral letter on women's issues now being drafted by the American bishops.


From the Heartland: Nudity, Lemurs And Picasso
LEAD: After visiting America some years ago, James Monahan, a British dance critic, wrote how amazed he was by the way Americans seemed ''addicted to congregations and to worrying, in congregation, a subject to death - or to life.''


Key Excerpts From Speech By President
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Mikhail S. Gorbachev's acceptance speech on his election as state Presdient today, as translated by Reuters from the official Russian text issued by Tass:


Strait of Magellan
LEAD: To the Editor: In response to the question in the July 17 Q &amp;A column regarding cruises through the Strait of Magellan, I would like to advise you that Sun Line has a cruise on that itinerary.


CHOSEN AND GIVEN
LEAD: I am getting tired of a nation of ''walking wounded'': every complaint gives rise to a new field of psychology and a resulting rash of support groups.


Changing the Styles As the Styles Change
LEAD: DRESSING mannequins may look like child's play, but Susan McIntyre and Lisa Wagner know better.
As employees in the ''visual merchandising'' department of Saks Fifth Avenue in White Plains, it is their job to keep the store's lifelike models au courant and enticing to customers.
When the outfits they have assembled are sold right off the display figures - as frequently happens - it is a tribute to the women's savvy and sense of style.


MAN AGAINST HIS BRAIN
LEAD:  MEMORIES OF AMNESIA  By Lawrence Shainberg.  219 pp.
New York.
Paris Review Editions/  British American Publishing. $16.95.


Ideas Wanted for the Census
LEAD: Marketing students in colleges and universities are to devise ways to promote participation in the 1990 census in a contest sponsored by the American Marketing Association.
The Census Bureau is asking for ideas on appealing to ethnic groups that have sometimes balked at being counted.
Three hundred and fifty-two college chapters of the marketing association have been invited to compete.


Michelle DeMuth Weds W. W. Gay
LEAD: At the Reformed Church of Bronxville, N.Y., Michelle Denise DeMuth, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Dennis L. DeMuth of Ida, Mich., was married yesterday to William Wingate Gay, a son of William K. Gay of Mahwah, N.J., and Mrs.
E.
Virgil Conway of Bronxville.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert W. Bedingfield performed the ceremony.


Italy 'Snipers' In Legislature May Now Fall
LEAD: Everybody here calls them the snipers.
They are several dozen members of Parliament from the governing coalition who publicly pledge allegiance to the Government but who in reality are busily trying to ambush it to settle personal or factional scores.


THE ESTONIANS SAY, LET US BE ESTONIAN
LEAD: While Mikhail S. Gorbachev was busy in Moscow shaking up the high command of his social revolution, the residents of the tiny republic of Estonia today advanced the front line.


A High-Tech Bus Terminal
LEAD: IF there is a cutting edge to the tour-bus business, Domenico Tours says it is in Bayonne, at the company's new airport-like bus station, Port Quintstar.


Dying Maple Leaves Roots
LEAD: AS soon as I opened the door and saw him, a burly, blond, sunburned young man who carried his hat in his hands and kept his eyes downcast to avoid the questioning look in mine, I knew he had come to deliver bad news.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our home is covered with aluminum siding in a blue-gray color.
Last Halloween, children threw eggs against one corner, leaving a stain.
There are also some white stains from bird droppings.
The rains have lightened these stains considerably, but I have been reluctant to scrub the siding, as I have heard this might strip it down to the bare metal.


FILM VIEW
LEAD: In the first half hour of ''Patty Hearst,'' as the blindfolded heiress is systematically berated by one shrill Symbionese Liberation Army member after another, the film tries to convey what Miss Hearst's nightmarish experience must have been like.
That it isn't truly able to capture this, either then or later, can be explained only partially by the film's assumption that, as far as Miss


PUTTING THE WORLD ON HOLD
LEAD:  SOLITUDE  A Return to the Self.
By Anthony Storr.  216 pp.
New York:  The Free Press. $17.95.


Let's Go Back to the True Olympic Spirit
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Assembly Race Suddenly Changes
LEAD: UNTIL just more than a week ago, Paul H. Chrystal Jr. of Eastchester, a Democrat, was a relatively solitary figure in his campaign to oust Gordon W. Burrows as the 23-year Assemblyman from the 84th District.
Mr.
Chrystal was attracting few volunteers and little money.


Comforting Rituals For a New Season
LEAD: WINTER is coming.
I can feel it hanging on the cold breeze that sweeps through my bedroom window and wakes me to the steel-gray day that lies outside.


Creating Penthouses From Air Rights
LEAD: FROM Park Avenue through Chelsea to Greenwich Village, perspicacious Manhattan developers are coming up with innovative ways to create expensive new space out of thin air by adding floors atop existing buildings and selling the resulting penthouses for millions.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: The Square Feet Numbers Game; How Much of What Is Paid For Is Usable Space?
LEAD: ONE of the more rapacious tricks that Manhattan landlords found irresistible earlier this decade - sleight-of-hand inflation of floor space - no longer dupes most tenants shopping around for office quarters.


Kalikow Complex Up for Landmarking
LEAD: THE New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission will hear testimony Thursday for and against landmark designation for City and Suburban Homes, a 14-building complex of turn-of-the-century tenements on Manhattan's Upper East Side.


The Day the Nation's Cash Pipeline Almost Ran Dry
LEAD: LAST Oct. 20, a day after the nation's financial markets collapsed, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company found themselves short of cash by a total of more than $1.5 billion, according to people close to the firms.


THE WORLD: Anti-U.S. Feelings; Amid Glamor of the Games, Korea Sees Warts on an Ally
LEAD: WHILE the world has been watching South Korea during the Olympic Games, Koreans have been staring back - alternately riveted, charmed and disgusted by the encounter.


Postscripts for the Next President
LEAD: ''A BRIEFING for the Next President,'' a series of columns in the Business Forum, featured articles by Lester C. Thurow (Aug. 21) and Robert L. Heilbroner (Sept. 4).
The articles prompted an unusually strong response from readers concerned about keeping America competitive.
Some of their comments follow:


SIGMUND THE CONQUEROR
LEAD:  FREUD IN EXILE  Psychoanalysis and Its Vicissitudes.
Edited by Edward Timms and Naomi Segal.
Illustrated. 310 pp.
New Haven:  Yale University Press. $32.50.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.64
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
7.71
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.02
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.43
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
16.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
16.90
Bank of America, San Francisco
21.25


DATA BANK: October 2, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'88
I Q'88
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,988.1
$3,915.4
$3,796.0
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
3.0
3.6
2.6
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'88
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
162.7
$149.4
$136.4


Tudor Suffers Hip Spasm
LEAD: The status of John Tudor, scheduled to pitch Game 2 of the National League Championship Series against the Mets here next Wednesday night, remained in doubt today after he suffered a muscle spasm in his right hip with one out in the second inning Friday night against San Francisco.
Tudor had to leave the game, which the


'Olympus' Offers Old-Style Fun
LEAD: WITH big-time musical theaters subsisting on spectacles and secondary theaters relegated to replicating each other's retreads, along comes ''Olympus on My Mind.'' Here is just the sort of breezy and brainy divertissement that could serve as a restorative for jaded musical-comedy aficionados.


Out of a Clear Blue Sky, a 'Love Affair' of Collecting
LEAD: THE exhibition ''A Love Affair'' comes to the Montclair Art Museum much as love comes to individuals - out of a clear blue sky.
A selection of 72 works, it was culled from a collection five times the size that a New Jersey couple have been amassing - unbeknownst to the art world - for the last half century.


New York Sued Over Rent Program for Elderly Poor
LEAD: Thousands of elderly tenants in New York City have been forced to sacrifice food, clothing and medical services to pay for unnecessary rent increases because the city has failed to notify them of a program intended to freeze rents for the elderly poor, a law suit filed by the Legal Aid Society has charged.


The English Find a Revolution on Their Own Shores
LEAD: APART from Dover sole and fish and chips, Great Britain has not been famous for its seafood.
One would never think it was an island surrounded by waters teeming with fish to judge by the standard stocked in many of its shops: frozen plaice fillets and codfish sticks (aptly named fish fingers).


Police and Fire Depts. Face Massachusetts Smoking Ban
LEAD: Massachusetts has become the first state to prohibit newly hired police officers and firefighters from smoking on or off the job.


L.B.J.'S HOMESPUN GROUSING
LEAD: Richard Goodwin's article seems to suggest that Mr.
Johnson was merely engaging in hortatory ventilation in conversations with junior aides, a manipulative device that Mr.
Goodwin seems not to have recognized.
The President's observation that a face-to-face meeting with Ho Chi Minh ''could work things out'' explodes the author's observation of paranoia.


Lillian Hellman's Temperament
LEAD: To the Editor:


Go Slow, Even on Son of Star Wars
LEAD: Lieut.
Gen.
James Abrahamson resigned last week as head of the Star Wars program because deployment of a comprehensive space-based missile shield by the late 1990's is an idea whose time has passed.
That, however, prompts new pressure to build a smaller system that seems more plausible than President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative.


CHOSEN AND GIVEN
LEAD: Robin Marantz Henig's article ''Chosen and Given'' (Body and Mind, Sept. 11) dismays adoptive parents like ourselves because it makes adoption sound fatally flawed, or, at least, statistically risky.
It stigmatizes without offering much in the way of helpful suggestions, and adopted children already suffer enough from prejudices about adoption.


Joachim Blunck And Miss Hughes Exchange Vows
LEAD: Mary Larkin Hughes, a daughter of Eileen L. Hughes of New York and the late Emmet John Hughes, was married yesterday to Joachim Blunck, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl-Werner Blunck of Oakland, N.J.
Edward J. Hannabury, a town justice of Shelter Island, L.I., officiated there at the Shorewood Estate.


Lorraine Simonton and John S. B. Oler, Both Bankers, Are Wed in New York
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York, Lorraine Simonton, a daughter of Mrs.
Bennet Stocum Simonton of Rye, N.Y., and Salvatore Frustaci of Ardmore, Pa., was married yesterday to John Scott Brooks Oler, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Clarke Kimberly Oler of Pasadena, Calif.
The bridegroom's father, associate rector of All Saints Episcopal Church in Pasadena and former rector of the Episcopal Church of the Holy Trinity in New York, performed the ceremony.


Matthew Troy Describes a Politician's Temptations
LEAD: Going to prison ''did not make me a better person, and it didn't make me a more moralistic man,'' the former New York City politician told a law class at Pace University. ''What it did was to make me a little bit scared about practicing law and a bit more careful about how I handle my clients.''


Round and Round in Circles the New Issues Go
LEAD: THE United States Postal Service is issuing a particularly attractive set of four stamps this weekend to recall the golden days of carrousels.
The 25-cent stamps, in blocks of four, are part of the popular folk art series.


Marybeth Dorman Weds Thomas David Jacobson
LEAD: Marybeth Dorman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. Dorman of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to Thomas David Jacobson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Jacobson of Westfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Kenneth White performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in Bethel Park, Pa.


Managua Jails 2 Economists, Stirring Fears
LEAD: The Government's right to keep economic data secret is at the heart of a legal case that has sent shock waves through Nicaragua's white-collar sector.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Smoking Ban for Officers


Setting Sail in Pants That Billow
LEAD: WHAT'S new this week on the fashion marquee?
It's Pantasia, a full-length feature with a cast of thousands of yards of material and, to keep you on the edge of your seat, several surprise endings.


Thrift May Leave
LEAD: Three years after he took over a financiallystrapped loser and turned it into a money-making contender, Syd Thrift, the general manager of the Pittsburgh Pirates, may be on the verge of getting his reward.
According to the club president, Carl Barger, there is a ''distinct possibility'' that Thrift will be dismissed this week.


Plea by Leon Spinks
LEAD: Leon Spinks, the former world heavyweight boxing champion, pleaded no contest Friday in Rochester Hills, Mich., to a charge of driving while impaired stemming from his arrest in April.


MISHEARD WORDS
LEAD: The term ''homeboy'' is an old and common feature of American black vernacular.
Originally, it referred specifically to a male from the speaker's hometown and tended to be used in conversation between two men not living in their hometown.
Thus, when two Austinites are living in New York, one says of the other, ''He's my homeboy,'' and greets him, perhaps, by saying, ''What's happening homes?


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.  $355,000  70 Fuller Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old split level; country kitchen, brick fireplace, walk to shopping; taxes $5,335.
North Tarrytown, N.Y.  $280,000  139 Hunter Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 61-year-old Tudor; fireplace, sunroom, porch, walk to station; taxes $4,460.


Caroline Brodnitz Engaged
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest W. Brodnitz of Harding Township, N.J., of the engagement of their daughter Caroline Francoise Brodnitz to Michael Joseph McNally, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph McNally of Denville, N.J.
Miss Brodnitz is a vice president of marketing with Mastercard International in New York.


Reviews/Music; William Blaine, a Pianist
LEAD: William Blaine, a pianist who is an artist in residence at Northeast Missouri State University, played a roof-rattling concert at Weill Recital Hall on Friday evening.
The performance certainly had its points of interest, and in each of the works he played, Mr.
Blaine offered a few unusual interpretive twists.


THE SEOUL OLYMPICS: Tennis; Tennis Returns to Good Reviews
LEAD: From Philippe Chatrier's perspective, the experiment was a success.
But that is to be expected.
Chatrier is the president of the International Tennis Federation, whose dream it was to see the sport regain medal status in the Olympics Games after a 64-year absence.
For the past two weeks, spectators watched some of the top players in the world compete for gold instead of prize money.


Columbia Shows Signs, but Not Enough
LEAD: Columbia's record losing streak moved to 44 and counting today.
A loss in each of the seven games left this season and the Lions will have more consecutive football defeats than any college football team in history - major, medium or small college.


NONFICTION IN SHORT; NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE BOZ: Confessions of a Modern Anti-Hero.
By Brian Bosworth with Rick Reilly. (Doubleday, $17.95.) For someone so young, 23 years old, Brian Bosworth - The Boz - has picked up an awful lot of wisdom.
He's an expert, for instance, on the generation gap: ''Adults are so screwed up.
There's no pleasing them.


Cristina Ryan, Editor, Weds Andrew Wilson
LEAD: Cristina Ryan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Ryan of New York and East Hampton, L.I., was married at the Lotos Club in New York yesterday to Andrew Wilson, the son of William S. Wilson 3d and Ann Wilson, both of New York.
Justice Harold Silverman of State Supreme Court in the Bronx performed the ceremony.


Octoberfest Fare in East Patchogue
LEAD: AUTUMN's nippy nights and hearty German food are a perfect pair.
Both are available now at East Patchogue's Pine Grove Inn, where they've been serving skyscraper-size portions of German fare since 1910.
October also brings the added bonus of German music and Octoberfest gaiety.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/PEOPLES OF THE WORLD
LEAD:  PAINTING FACES  By Suzanne Haldane.
Illustrated. 32 pp.
New York:  E. P. Dutton. $12.95.


Sealing Double-Hung Windows
LEAD: DOUBLE-HUNG windows, so named because they have two vertically sliding sashes, are difficult to seal against drafts.
Even well-made models eventually develop gaps between the sashes and frame, allowing air to pass between them.


Question Of the Week; Which Is The Better Team, '86 Mets, Or '88 Mets?
LEAD: Alas, the answer to the question at hand can be drawn from the tragic history of Romeo and Juliet.
The one came too soon, the other too late.
Me thinks however that it would be a sweet, sweet union indeed if The Mook '86 at the plate could meet The Doc '88 on the mound (well, this only works if the '88 team wins all the beans too).


Downtown, They Take Rock Seriously
LEAD: The new-music composers Elliott Sharp, John Zorn, Wayne Horvitz, Hank Roberts and George Cartwright (who leads the group Curlew) are radically different from each other, but they do have a few things in common.
They are all members of the Downtown School, if only because they perform in the same places, to the same audiences.


Support Group Helps Smokers Fight Addiction
LEAD: THE white-haired woman sat nervously in the first row.
All too soon, it was her turn to speak. ''My name is Rose,'' she said, ''and I'm a nicotine addict.'' ''I can't brag tonight, I've been kind of bad,'' Rose continued, her lips forming a nervous half smile. ''I keep saying, 'I hate you, cigarettes,' but


Easy Goer Captures Cowdin
LEAD: Anyone who had seen him run knew he was something special, but it took a stakes victory yesterday to make it official: Easy Goer is the best 2-year-old in the country and might turn out to be a great one.


Workers' Health Remains a Problem, Despite Progress
LEAD: DESPITE the growing attention industries have paid to occupational diseases in the last 10 years, serious problems remain, the medical director of the Yale-New Haven Occupational Medicine Program, has charged.


2 Men Save Woman and Son From Brooklyn Building Fire
LEAD: Two men saved a Brooklyn woman and her child from a burning building yesterday, and were recommended for Fire Department civilian commendation, a department spokesman said.


Remembering A Tokyo Boy With a Future
LEAD: At the beginning of an English class in Tokyo shortly after the end of World War II, Elizabeth Gray Vining asked her Japanese pupils what they wanted to be in later life.


Al Holbert, Racing Driver, 41
LEAD: Al Holbert, whose 63 victories ranked him first among International Motor Sports Association drivers, was killed when his twin-engine airplane crashed shortly after takeoff from a Columbus airport Friday night, officials said.
He was 41 years old.


Ethnic Rioting in Karachi Kills 46 and Injures 50
LEAD: Ethnic riots erupted today in Pakistan's largest city, Karachi, in reaction to a massacre Friday in nearby Hyderabad.
Forty-six were killed in today's riots and 50 were injured.
The reported death toll in the two days of clashes was at least 208.


D. D. WOLFF WEDS LUCINDA M. GATCH
LEAD: At the Episcopal Chapel of St.
James the Fisherman in Wellfleet, Mass., yesterday, Lucinda McCormick Gatch, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Milton McCormick Gatch Jr. of New York and Wellfleet, was married to David Daniel Wolff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Edwin Wolff of Cokato, Minn.


Mrs. Thatcher's Britain
LEAD: There have been some important and probably lasting changes in British society since Margaret Thatcher was first elected as Britain's first woman Prime Minister in 1979.
While it is a good deal less than the ''revolution'' she proclaims, it is rather more than just another swing of the pendulum between left and right.


BEST SELLERS: October 2, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
9
THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan races to the rescue of America's highest-ranking secret agent in the Soviet Union.
2
5
2
BREATHING LESSONS, by Anne Tyler.


Headliners; Speaking of Virtue
LEAD: Some historians say that when the Rev.
Junipero Serra was setting up Franciscan missions along the Pacific coast in the 18th century, the Indians he encountered considered him no saint.
After its own investigation, the Vatican differs.
Last week, Pope John Paul II beatified Father Serra, bringing the missionary one step from sainthood.


Three in Haiti Force Way Onto Airliner and Are Seized in New York
LEAD: Three armed security guards at the international airport in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, forced their way aboard an American Airlines passenger jet bound for New York City yesterday afternoon, airline officials said.
The men were arrested on arrival at John F. Kennedy International Airport at about 8:10 P.M.


The Building Wars: News From the Front
LEAD: ANOTHER secret invasion has been launched, not in the jungles of Southeast Asia or Central America, nor in the mountains of Afghanistan.
It one waged not by contras, terrorists, or ommunists.
I'm referring to the raid by American developers on Connecticut's leafy backyard.


Satellite Threat Is Seen at End
LEAD: The nuclear core of an errant Soviet space satellite has broken free into an orbit in outer space and will pose no radiation threat anywhere on earth, the West German Government said today.


Dukakis Vows a Vast Coastal Sanctuary
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis stepped up the battle for the environmentalist vote in this critical state today by promising its residents that he would ban offshore drilling along two-thirds of the California coast.


2 Bribery Inquiries Examine Newark School System
LEAD: Federal and Essex County prosecutors are investigating allegations that some school officials here sold administrative jobs, officials familiar with the inquiries said.


Returning to Revlon's Glory Days
LEAD: A WOMAN strides into a department store and weaves her way to the cosmetics area.
She dodges a man in a tuxedo spraying perfume into the air.
She passes a salesman in a lab coat clutching a jar of cream, and another waving a compact of multicolored eyeshadows.
Never mind the ladylike clouds of pink powder and floral fragrance, this woman has entered a war zone.


Anne Cameron Married on L.I.
LEAD: The marriage of Anne Hamilton Cameron, a daughter of Mrs.
Richard R. Dailey of New York and Lyme, Conn., and William A. Cameron of New York and East Hampton, L.I., to Terrence Patrick Cunningham took place yesterday at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in East Hampton.
The bridegroom is a son of Col. and Mrs.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: South/Southwest; Alabama Rallies For 31-27 Victory
LEAD: Richard Fain scored the only touchdown today on a 32-yard interception return to lead a defense that shut down the Louisiana State quarterback, Tommy Hodson, in Florida's 19-6 Southeastern Conference victory.


Views and Conflicts On Recycling Issue
LEAD: In the article ''Legislators Adopt Recycling Program''  [ Sept. 11 ] , County Executive O'Rourke refers to the plan as ''a model for the State of New York and maybe the whole country.'' I consider the plan a model of deception.


Willie Chan, the Nabob of Hong Kong Cinema
LEAD: Willie Chan, who may be Hong Kong's hottest movie agent, breezed into New York from Vancouver last week to help open the Hong Kong Film Festival at the Asia Society, and breezed right out again to Toronto, demonstrating the out-of-suitcase life style that is the stamp of his trade.


Closing the Gap Between the Brain and the Mind
LEAD: Flipping from station to station by remote control, inveterate television watchers can tell almost instantly when they have chanced upon an educational science show.
It is hardly even necessary to glance at the channel indicator.
Earnest people in white coats sit in book-lined studies gesturing meaningfully.


Ranger Fan Knows the Score
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


COMES THE COUNTERREVOLUTION
LEAD:  BABY BOOMERS  By Paul C. Light.  319 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


Asbestos: Two Troubling Aspects
LEAD: THOUSANDS of buildings in New Jersey are contaminated with asbestos, and most of them will undergo remediation in the coming years.
The remediation process could be hazardous to health, but the abatement contractor's insurance policy may not be worth the paper on which it's printed.


What Does It Take To Make a Landmark?
LEAD: Call the city and suburban Homes a block of tenements and it does not seem like a natural candidate for landmark status.
Call it utopian housing, however, and it begins to look a lot better.
And utopian housing is precisely what this is - since this sprawling series of structures, which runs along the south side of 79th Street from York Avenue to the East River, is one of the most ambitious attempts in the history of New York to create viable housing for the poor.


RUNNING AWAY
LEAD: THE TRAGEDY OF APRIL SAVINO'S abbreviated life is that when she finally found a home it was among the homeless - on the benches and in the bleak recesses of Grand Central Terminal.
There, at last, she felt needed and even, by the strange code of the streets, respected.


More Suburbs Accepting Middle-Income Housing
LEAD: A growing number of communities across the region are approving moderate-income housing projects as more residents discover that high prices are barring their own children and parents from living nearby.


It's Now or Never on Shoreham
LEAD: IF Long Islanders want Shoreham to close, and I believe that the overwhelming majority does; if Long Islanders want the lowest utility rates possible, and I know the overwhelming majority does; then there can be no argument.
Our settlement is not only the best way to go; it's the only way to go.
First Shoreham.


THE GODDESS IN TENNESSEE
LEAD: Bruce Weber writes that a full-size replica of the Parthenon was constructed, ''for some reason,'' in Nashville, in 1897, as part of the city's centennial celebration (Works in Progress: ''The Goddess in Tennessee,'' Aug. 28).
I am happy to be able to supply the reason.
A friend living in Nashville told me that, in those days, Nashville was known as ''the Athens of the South.


Spain's Chief Criticized on U.S. Defense Pact
LEAD: When he was a leftist student leader and later head of the Socialist opposition, Felipe Gonzalez was against nuclear weapons, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and a defense treaty with the United States signed in 1953 by Gen.
Francisco Franco.


Floods Destroying Island Way of Life
LEAD: ONCE, before the devastating floodwaters came, it was an island renowned for its quiet serenity: a dozen clapboard summer cottages dotted its two-and-a-half-acre expanse.
Ducks roamed its Pompton River shoreline, and residents fished from their yards.
But times change, say residents here, just like the tidewaters, and there came a chance to move.


Fishing for a Cooler Idea
LEAD: TRUE to the adage that necessity is the mother of invention, Dennis Calton came upon his product because he was fed up.
A stream fisherman, the 30-year-old had a habit of putting his hand-held lunch cooler aside as he worked his way casting upstream - only to watch it go the way of the fish. ''I got tired of losing my six-pack,'' he said.


PLAIN AND FANCY
LEAD: Casseroles may have been unfashionable during the last 10 years, but these one-dish meals have always meant robust, sensual pleasure to me.
Though absent from trendy restaurants, one-dish meals did not vanish from family dinners and buffet tables.
Their ease of preparation alone should assure eternal popularity.


Science Fiction
LEAD: THE TOYNBEE CONVECTOR (Knopf, $17.95) is Ray Bradbury's first book of new fiction since his collected stories appeared in 1980.
Mr.
Bradbury published his first short story in 1941, when he was 21 years old.
In the two decades that followed, he created a body of work - including ''The Martian Chronicles,'' ''The Illustrated Man'' and ''Fahrenheit 451'' - that made him the best-known science fiction writer in the world.


Varying Standards on Steroid Use
LEAD: THE desire to enhance athletic performance is one of man's oldest pursuits, traceable, perhaps, to that point in time when speed, strength and agility became recreational pursuits rather than survival techniques.


COMPASS AND MAP ARE HUNTER'S FRIENDS
LEAD: Unless you know the country you are going to hunt this fall and winter like the back of your hand, now is the time to obtain the relevant maps and to make sure that you haven't mislaid your compass.


Bernstein's Mahler: In Tune With Genius
LEAD: There have always been conductors who championed the music of Gustav Mahler, starting with Gustav Mahler.
From Bruno Walter to Otto Klemperer to Dimitri Mitropoulos, Jascha Horenstein and others, Mahler the composer never lacked eloquent advocates.


Symbolic Presidency Proves Better Than None in Lebanon
LEAD: THE Middle East, the Lebanese factional leader was saying, ''lives always with its history; we are obsessed with history.'' He might have added that in his country, history has been overtaken by guns and demography, outside maneuvering and internal dissent to produce a present in which tolerance and hope have become strangers.


Commercializing Space
LEAD: When the space shuttle Discovery and its crew were lofted into orbit last Thursday, it ended America's 32 month hiatus from manned spaceflight.
On the same day that the Discovery was launched, the United States and 11 other nations signed a pact to build a space station capable of supporting scientific and commercial endeavors and a sustained human presence.


THE REGION - Pro &amp; Con: Landlords, Tenants and Rent Control; Should Any Low-Income Housing Be Left in Private Hands?
LEAD: WHEN New York City landlords lobby for rent increases from the city's Rent Guidelines Board, they often argue that low-income tenants do not pay enough each month to meet basic operating costs.
Tenants in turn usually tell the board, which sets maximum increases for rent-stabilized apartments, that landlords are earning enough - and if they aren't, perhaps they should leave the business.


Q and A
LEAD:  Claim on Co-op


Melissa Morgan, an Editor, Married to Benedict Chant
LEAD: Melissa Jo Morgan, the daughter of Judith Barnes of New Rochelle, N.Y., and Anthony Ian Morgan of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Benedict Guy Chant, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Chant of Braishfield, Hampshire, England.
Frederick E. Schulman, a retired town justice of New Castle, N.Y., officiated at the home of the bride's father and stepmother, Mercedes Lopez


CANADA ELECTIONS CALLED FOR NOV. 21
LEAD: Prime Minister Brian Mulroney sought the dissolution of Parliament today and scheduled a general election for Nov. 21.


America by Rail
LEAD: To the Editor: In their two-part sequence, ''Across America by Rail'' (Travel, July 24), neither Nancy M. Debevoise nor William Borders touched on the key point: that a major upgading of rail passenger facilities is desperately needed.


The Many Kinds Of Human Abilities
LEAD: Poor Christine Meding! (''Readung My Way to Success,'' Opinion page, Sept. 4).
She has graduated from high school woefully ignorant, in spite of her reading and high S.A.T. scores.
She doesn't seem to realize that her linguistic ability is only one of many kinds of human abilities - artistic, mathematical, physical, organizational, entrepreneurial, spatial, interpersonal, mechanical - to name a few.


Quayle to Speak First In Debate Wednesday
LEAD: Senator Dan Quayle, the Republican Vice-Presidential nominee, will receive the first question and give the first closing statement in his debate Wednesday night with his Democratic opponent, Senator Lloyd Bentsen.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Cashing Checks Free in Paris


Where Ancient Peoples Thrived
LEAD: NORTHERN ARIZONA is so vast and rocky and windswept that first-time visitors sometimes wonder how the ancient peoples of the Southwest came to live there.
At sunset, or during one of the region's violent thunderstorms, the light may be extraordinary, incandescent gold pouring through purple clouds, and the expanse of space is sublime.


Getting Smart by Sitting Down
LEAD: BILLED as the ''Edison of Japan'' because he holds the world record of 2,360 patents, Yoshiro NakaMats created a sensation by showing up with his invention, which he told a disbelieving audience can heighten intelligence and even extend life.


Debt Distortions
LEAD: To the Editor:


STREETSCAPES: The Old Squibb Building; 'Restoration' Is Adding Color To Original All-White Design
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the 1930 Squibb building at Grand Army Plaza was built to the architect's original design, renovations meant to make up for what had mistakenly been thought to be cutbacks brought on by the crash of '29 are still being carried out.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Sept. 11 described the work of the artist Balcomb Greene incorrectly.
He paints in a realistic style.


Louganis Wins Award for Spirit
LEAD: Greg Louganis, who defended his Olympic title in the men's 10-meter platform and 3-meter springboard diving events in the Seoul Games, was named today as the winner of the United States Olympic Committee spirit award.


Treasured Islands
LEAD: THERE ARE MAGIC MOUNTAINS AND happy valleys, haunted woodlands and enchanted rivers, but no natural feature on the map is more enticing than an island.
You have only to think of the names - Capri, Grand Canary, Bali, St.
Lucia, the Hebrides, the Cyclades. . . .
You have only to think of the islands of myth and fiction, from the Fortunate Isles to King Arthur's Avalon, from ''Treasure Island'' to ''South Pacific.


Richard Stern Marries Susan O. Amerling on L.I.
LEAD: Susan Oppenheimer Amerling, the daughter of Ernest Oppenheimer of the Bronx and the late Fanny Oppenheimer, was married last evening to Richard B. H. Stern, the son of Marion Haas Stern of New York and the late David I. Stern.
Cantor Debra Stein-Davidson performed the ceremony on the beach in East Hampton, L


The Subliminal Message of the Bush Campaign; Not 'Second Victim'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rutgers Swamps Cincinnati
LEAD: The emotional impact of last week's triumph over Penn State was still fresh for Rutgers in its game against Cincinnati this afternoon.
Playing with a high degree of enthusiasm, the Scarlet Knights dominated the Bearcats when it counted and registered a 38-9 triumph.


ALL SPENDING BILLS COMPLETED ON TIME
LEAD: President Reagan today signed the last of 13 spending bills for the new Federal fiscal year and praised Congress for completing its work on time.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD: MILITARY RE-ENACTMENT More than 200 soldiers of the 3d and 22d New Jersey Regiments, re-enactment groups, will clash next weekend in River Edge as the Bergen County Historical Society continues to mark the 125th anniversary of the Civil War.


Olympic Highlights
LEAD:  TRACK AND FIELD: Matching a world record set in 1968, the United States men's 1,600-meter relay team won comfortably.
But the women's 400 team needed a blazing anchor leg by Evelyn Ashford to beat East Germany to the wire.
TENNIS: Steffi Graf of West Germany gilded her Grand Slam year by winning in singles.


Custom-Made Shoes in Hong Kong
LEAD: TO the Duchess's declaration that ''a woman can never be too thin or too rich,'' I might add, ''or have too many shoes.'' Political implications aside, to women of a certain age, shoes are the ultimate sign of class.
After all, we do say ''well-heeled,'' not ''well-hatted'' or ''well-gloved.'' A trip to Hong Kong can change all that - and, if you're both persistent and lucky, maybe get you the first pair of shoes that really fit since your neighborhood shoe man last looked at your feet in that


Testing The Odds And Gravity
LEAD: A composer writing his first opera is like a parachutist stepping out of a plane for the first time.
Even if the thing opens, survival still hangs by a few threads.
All the leaper prays for at the moment is the chance - maybe - to try again.
With his ''Rasputin,'' which was given its world premiere the other night by the New York City Opera, Jay


Debate Renewed on Barriers to Lawyers
LEAD: DEBATE over New Jersey restrictions on out-of-state lawyers has accelerated since the recent passage of similar limits by New York State.


Joanne Smyrk Married To John Nolan Andrea
LEAD: St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Manhasset, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Joanne Smyrk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Rodney Smyrk of Manhasset, to John Nolan Andrea, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Andrea Jr., of Old Brookville, L.I.
The Rev.
Edward Doherty performed the ceremony.


Sparta Journal; Country Living, but at What Price?
LEAD: FRONT yards of field grass and yarrow at 18 of the 61 houses in the new Sussex Mills residential development here convey the obvious: the spacious homes - built on speculation - are for sale.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; What Did You Think Of the Seoul Olympics?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Make Steffi Play Lefty
LEAD: The most awesome thing about this Miss Steffi Graf is not that she is 19 years old and has already won the Grand Slam Plus One.
That's history.
Oh, no.
The real scary thing about this Miss Graf is that she roared through the final match of the Summer Games, not just a kid having a fine time at the


A Car That Floats on Air
LEAD: AMONG those who were elated by the convention was Ernst Knolle, whose bullet-shaped magnetically suspended car received three tentative offers from investors and two offers from Hollywood producers. ''It's the simplest thing you can imagine,'' said the 63-year San Franciscan, a retired mechanical engineer who has worked 20 years on it.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  FIDDLING AROUND  What's in a name?
Not that much if you're a devotee of traditional music.
So what used to be the Fiddlers Convention has become the Long Island Fiddle and Folk Music Festival this year, meaning that today's proceedings are officially open to those who not only fiddle around, so to speak, but also enjoy or make music with banjos, guitars, mandolins and the like.


The Compact Disk at 5: Music by the Numbers
LEAD: The compact disk is so much a staple of modern musical life that we are astonished to think how young it is.
It was only five years ago that the CD made its American debut.


Question Of the Week; Which Is The Better Team, '86 Mets, Or '88 Mets?
LEAD: I think the 1986 Mets were better.
They had more action, they won more games and lost fewer games.
I am not too sure the Mets will go to the World Series this time.
Let's see.
ANGEL EUGIEO  Brewster, N.Y.


Martha Graham Dances With the Future
LEAD: Martha Graham sits in an airy mirrored studio on East 63d Street in Manhattan,immaculately made up, her skinned-back hair crowned by a wide floppy black chiffon bow that flares out over her pointed ears and somehow looks like Cleopatra's coiffure.
She wears Mary Janes on her famous feet and chunks of turquoise around her neck.


Crossing Obstacles for 'Delancey'
LEAD: IF it isn't one obstacle, it's another for the film maker Joan Micklin Silver, who has a knack for sidestepping them. ''I just keep on keepin' on, peddling scripts,'' as she put it.
And those scripts, according to the description of her husband, Raphael Silver, are ''about real people and real relationships, with warmth and humor; not the obvious stuff that'll sell.


Headliners; Speaking of Silence
LEAD: The grand jury before which Tawana Brawley has refused to testify apparently has found no evidence of a crime against the New York teen-ager, The New York Times reported last week.
In a case that for many has come to symbolize racism in the criminal justice system, Miss Brawley, who is black, said she was abducted and raped last fall by six white men, one of whom wore a badge.


Youthful Memories of a Superhighway
LEAD: WHEN the Connecticut Turnpike was built in the mid-50's to decimate the driving time between Boston and New York, we were teen- agers, and we were thrilled.


Smuggling Snakes For High Profit
LEAD: THE Federal charge against 43-year-old Agremiro Espana was smuggling.
Drugs?
No, boa constrictors - 700 of them.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Golf  Barr Takes Lead on Course Record: Dave Barr, charging from 10 shots behind, tied the Green Island Country Club course record yesterday with a nine-under-par 61 to take a 1-shot lead after three rounds of the $400,000 Southern Open tournament.
Barr, even-par after 36 holes, overtook the second-round leader, Jeff Sluman, with a round that included nine birdies and finished at 201.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 2, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE DARK TOWER: The Gunslinger, by Stephen King. (Plume/NAL, $10.95.) Volume One of a series about a young man's pursuit of an evil force.
2
9
FALLEN HEARTS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $4.95.) The scandals and horrors of her past return to haunt a bride in a backwoods town.


NANCY FRIEDMAN ENGAGED
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Peter H. Neuhaus of Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Neuhaus's daughter Nancy Ellen Friedman to Dr.
Barry Scot Horowitz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan H. Horowitz of Hartsdale, N.Y.
Ms.
Friedman, a daughter also of the late Marvin D. Friedman, is a diamond buyer for Macy's New York.


No Headline
LEAD: Dr.
Katherine Lucy Swan, a fellow in rheumatology at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, and Dr.
Geoffrey Steven Ginsburg, a fellow in cardiology at Beth Israel Hospital and Children's Hospital in Boston, were married yesterday at the Bel Age Hotel in West Hollywood, Calif.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Lloyd Ogilvie, a


Cubans Meet U.N. Group
LEAD: About 1,500 Cubans requested meetings with a United Nations human rights delegation during its visit to Cuba, many of them complaining that they were barred from leaving the country, an official said Friday.
The delegation returned from Cuba this week after a 10-day visit.


Sealing Double-Hung Windows
LEAD: DOUBLE-HUNG windows, so named because they have two vertically sliding sashes, are difficult to seal against drafts.
Even well-made models eventually develop gaps between the sashes and frame, allowing air to pass between them.


Battling Subway Crime, Both Real and Perceived
LEAD: In the New York City subway system, where dark passageways and steel bars can create the aura of menace even in the best of times, the transit police are battling a real increase in serious crime as well as the public's exaggerated perception of crime that threatens to erode ridership and confidence in the system.


Bridgeport Law School to Add 5 Lecture Halls
LEAD: THE largest law school in the state, the Bridgeport University School of Law, has started a $7.5 million expansion.


Winning the Future
LEAD: 'The progress of the European Community is one of the promising world trends.
By creating a community of 12 European democracies, we won a victory over national egoism, power-political thinking and prejudice.
It is the greatest and finest victory in the history of Europe.
It has not cost one single human life, yet it is winning us the future.


The Attack of the Beeping Intruder
LEAD: Bleep.
Bleep.
There you are in the midst of a busy workday, waiting for an important message from the West Coast.
Suddenly the facsimile machine pulses into action, chirping and buzzing, ejecting a printed page 30 seconds later.


Afloat on the Ancient Nile
LEAD: IT IS BEST TO APPROACH ASWAN BY WAY OF the desert, for in this journey between two worlds -one savage and one tranquil, one barren and one beneficent - it is possible to understand why it was that Aswan became a legendary place.
The desert is a fearful thing, an abode of death, but as the airplane swoops over its endless blankness of sand, there is suddenly a glimpse of green banks, of palm trees and vegetation, and then of water.


Abenakis' Chief Pursues Cause Through Conflict
LEAD: The Abenaki Tribal Council is housed in the old railroad station on the outskirts of this town five miles south of the Canadian border.
The station is run down and too small to accommodate the tribal chief's vision of an Abenaki nation.


CANADIANS DECLINE TO LET WOODS BURN
LEAD: While officials in the United States are beset by controversy over the fires that have destroyed more than two million acres of forest in the Western states, including large parts of Yellowstone National Park, the officials who run Canada's national parks say this country lost less acreage to fire this summer than it did in decades.


Lafayette Gains 3d Victory in a Row  P.S.A.L.
LEAD: Lafayette, a school that won only twice last season, has become one of the powers in the Brooklyn A Division of the Public Schools Athletic League this season.
Led by Chris App, its first-year coach, and Craig Harris, its senior fullback, the Chiefs improved their record to 3-0 yesterday with a 21-6 victory over a Brooklyn rival, Sheepshead Bay.


New York Businesses Turn to Elderly to Fill Jobs
LEAD: ''Seventy-one: Oh, my God,'' Ardath Cifuni exclaimed when asked her age.


Karl Weintz and Teryn L. Bevan Exchange Vows
LEAD: At Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn., Teryn Leigh Bevan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Bevan 2d of Old Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Karl Frederick Weintz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Frederick Weintz Jr. of Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Jack Bishop performed the ceremony.


Concessions After the Preliminary Fumble
LEAD: MOST slashing mating attacks, no matter how imaginative or cunning, would never have had a chance to occur without some preliminary fumbling on the part of the opponent.


FICTION
LEAD:  HOUSE OF HEROES: And Other Stories.
By Mary La Chapelle. (Crown, $18.95.) ''It's like birch bark, rough and smooth at the same time.'' The simile refers to a character's voice, but it's an equally apt description of the stories in Mary La Chapelle's first collection.
In ''House of Heroes: And Other Stories,'' she chooses rough-hewn subjects - a mime and a giant who struggle with nonconformity, a boy who finds a dead body.


POSTINGS: Danbury Project; Zigzagged Offices
LEAD: When a national business magazine selected Danbury, Conn., this year as the best place to live in America, residential developers were expected to come running.
But one of the most active builders there spent 1988 erecting not homes but a $20 million office building near the conference-center hotel it finished in 1981.


Review/Opera; Gruberova and Araiza in Met 'Lucia'
LEAD: You never can be sure what was done in the distant past, and the Metropolitan Opera itself is making no claims, but Friday night's performance was almost certainly the closest thing to an unabridged ''Lucia di Lammermoor'' ever given by the company.


In Chile, Unofficial Polls Show 'No' Taking Lead Over Pinochet
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dr. Judith Fine to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Ingram Fine of Bayside, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Judith Susan Fine to Dr.
David C. Preston, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Channing Preston of Lyndhurst, Ohio.
Dr.
Fine, an intern in medicine at University Hospital in Boston, graduated from the Tufts University School of Medicine.


Clubs Reply to a Daring Move
LEAD: It was a daring move for so young a club.
With little more than a sailing season behind it, the Manhattan Yacht Club issued a challenge to yacht clubs around the world for a regatta in New York Harbor this fall.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  New Rochelle Events  New Rochelle continues its tricentennial celebration with three events this week.
An exhibition at the public library, ''The Restoration of an Old City,'' traces the 20th-century history of La Rochelle in southern France, revealing some parallels with its Westchester counterpart.


Sealing Double-Hung Windows
LEAD: DOUBLE-HUNG windows, so named because they have two vertically sliding sashes, are difficult to seal against drafts.
Even well-made models eventually develop gaps between the sashes and frame, allowing air to pass between them.


In Brazil, It's Lonely in the Avant-Garde
LEAD: Whether Gerald Thomas's principal objective when he returned here from New York four years ago was to introduce a new genre of theater, to upset the local cultural establishment or simply to gain fame, the Anglo-Brazilian stage director can fairly claim - and frequently does - to have achieved all three.


'Glory Days' Over, Apple Farms Turn to Peaches
LEAD: NEW JERSEY'S wholesale apple industry, battered by heavy competition and the loss of farmland, is in the midst of a sharp decline.
What was once a $14-million-a-year industry has dropped in value by more than 30 percent in recent years, growers and state agricultural officials say.


Q and A
LEAD:  Guadeloupe


Budapest As a City Of Museums
LEAD: BUDAPEST is a city of museums.
Some brim with archeological treasures, others with monumental sculptures, paintings from all parts of Europe, beguiling examples of folklore, fabulous arts and crafts collections, and galleries of exhibits that portray the social, economic and agrarian history of Hungary.


Julianna Witkowski Marries William M. Brewster
LEAD: Julianna Susan Witkowski, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vernon J. Witkowski of Detroit, was married yesterday to William Mark Brewster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rodney L. Brewster of Seattle.
The Rev.
Arthur McGovern performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's on the Lake Roman Catholic Church in Grosse Pointe Farms,


FOCUS: Broward County, Fla.; A 10,000-Acre City Is Growing in the Everglades
LEAD: AROUND Broward County they call it Muck Mountain - 40 feet of oozing black dirt scraped off the surface of the Everglades so that neat new houses could be built.
It is a manmade mountain and from its peak, one of the highest points in this low-lying plain, it is possible in a few seconds to understand the forces that brought it into being.


Let's Go Back to the True Olympic Spirit; Chats and Commercials
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yanks' Loss Is Their 75th
LEAD: The race was really over a week ago, perhaps even two weeks ago, but it did not officially end for the Yankees until Friday night.
They had kept their hopes and their chins up beyond reality, even though they knew the chase would probably end soon.


Clinton Grad Sees 490 'Big' Games
LEAD: Bernie Sherman was there again Friday when DeWitt Clinton won its third game of the high school football season, a 13-6 decision over New Dorp.


Apology Due From Anderson
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Mobutu Agrees to Visit South Africa
LEAD: President P. W. Botha of South Africa was given a red-carpet, brass-band welcome today on his first visit to black Africa's second-most-populous nation.


The Outlook for the Competitive Senate Races: From Delaware to California; INCUMBENCY NOT ALWAYS AN EDGE
LEAD: This is the outlook for the competitive Senate races this year:


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/PEOPLES OF THE WORLD
LEAD:  GREEK MYTHS: GODS, HEROES AND MONSTERS  Their Sources, Their Stories and Their Meanings.
By Ellen Switzer and Costas.
Photographs by Costas.  208 pp.
New York: A Jean Karl Book/Atheneum.


Flannery O'Connor's Works
LEAD: To the Editor:


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Midwest; Notre Dame (4-0) Rolls, 42-14
LEAD: Tony Rice rushed for two touchdowns and passed for another to lead Notre Dame to a 42-14 rout of Stanford tonight.
Rice completed 11 of 14 passes for 129 yards and rushed for 107 yards.


IRONY TO THE RESCUE
LEAD:  THE HIDDEN READER  Stendhal, Balzac, Hugo, Baudelaire, Flaubert.
By Victor Brombert.  226 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press. $27.50.


U.S. Studying Safety of Workers On Top-Secret Jet Fighter Project
LEAD: Federal health inspectors and Pentagon investigators have begun a joint inquiry into assertions by Lockheed Corporation workers that they are endangered by chemicals used in making the top-secret Stealth fighter.


Dollar's Domain
LEAD: To the Editor:


DATA UPDATE: October 2, 1988
LEAD:
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Aug. 88
July 88
Aug. 87
New York
4,156
4,786
5,029
New Jersey
4,412
3,764
4,287
Connecticut
1,692
1,849
2,067
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
*3*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


L.B.J.'S HOMESPUN GROUSING
LEAD: Richard N. Goodwin's article ''The War Within'' (Aug. 21), laced with the private political utterances of a beleaguered President Lyndon B. Johnson, purports to document L.B.J.'s descent into clinical paranoia in midsummer 1965.
However, Mr.
Johnson's outbursts denote no thought disorder, merely his homespun grousing that the limousine liberals were croaking arrant pacifism while he ordered what was plainly needed to win the Vietnam War.


Leaders and Experts Join in Child Care Drive
LEAD: Organized child care, it has long been argued, is beneficial to children, to working parents and to families.
But more and more, organized child care is also being considered essential to a healthy economy.


Shoreham Concern Isn't a Phobia
LEAD: ''Nuclear Phobia Over Shoreham''  [ Opinion, Aug. 21 ] , the writer not only ignores a number of near meltdowns in American commercial reactors over the years, but also ignores the whole body of epidemiological evidence in the scientific literature on the health effects of low-level radiation.


BOND PLAN CALLED WEAK ON BRIDGES
LEAD: The emotional and political trauma caused this spring by the closing of the Williamsburg Bridge because of structural defects is being used to persuade voters to approve the $3 billion transportation bond issue on the New York State ballot next month.


Next Time
LEAD: STAGING THE OLYMPICS IS, OF course, an Olympian feat in itself, and today, as the burden is lifted from the city of Seoul, it is building on the shoulders of Barcelona, host-to-be of the 1992 summer games, the first-ever Spanish Olympics.
The city is erecting a complex of stadiums and other facilities - known as La Anilla Olimpica, or the Olympic Ring - that overlooks the Mediterranean from a plateau on Montjuic


HEROIC RESISTANCE
LEAD:  PRAISES &amp; DISPRAISES  Poetry and Politics, the 20th Century.
By Terrence Des Pres.  246 pp.
New York:  Viking. $18.95.


THE FED'S PLUMBER: E. Gerald Corrigan; A Crisis Manager Takes on the Mechanics of the Market
LEAD: WHEN the declines in stock prices reached alarming proportions last October, the first phone calls by bankers and securities dealers were to E. Gerald Corrigan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.


Virginia Smith Wed To Douglas J. Ellison
LEAD: Virginia Loving Smith, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin Calton Smith Jr. of Charlotte, N.C., was married there yesterday to Douglas James Ellison, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Henry Ellison Jr. of Simsbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Henry N. Parsley Jr. performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.


Japan Clings to a Vague, Historic Reverence
LEAD: IN the opening days of Emperor Hirohito's reign in 1926, a Japanese newspaper, The Tokyo Nichinichi, printed an exclusive report from the Imperial Palace: The new Emperor's era would be named Kobun, connoting ''light of civilization.'' The Palace was enraged and, perhaps to prove the paper wrong, named the era Showa, or ''enlightened peace.


Starting Sundays With Klaus Column
LEAD: Reading the Long Island Section of The Sunday Times used to be O.K; it was nice reading about local events in Nassau and out in the Hamptons.
Nice, but not fun and exciting.


Chairs That Suggest Mondrians Come to Life
LEAD: Gerrit Rietveld's ''Red-Blue'' chair, the first object made in the De Stijl palette, looks today as it did when the design was new 70 years ago - like a three-dimensional Mondrian.
A rare early example of the Dutch architect's chair, its stained surfaces faded and worn, it is one of many surprises to be seen in ''Gerrit Rietveld: A Centenary Exhibition,'' opening tomorrow at the Barry Friedman gallery, 1117 Madison Avenue (at 84th


THE NATION: Change of Command; A New NASA Guides Space Program Into the Post-Challenger Era
LEAD: THE agency responsible for launching the space shuttle Discovery last week has new leadership and a new organization since it was shaken to its roots by the explosion of the Challenger in 1986.


Quayle, in Difference With Bush, Urges Tougher Tack in Arms Talks
LEAD: Senator Dan Quayle today outlined a basic difference with the Reagan Administration and Vice President Bush over strategic arms negotiations, saying their pace should be slowed and demands on the Soviet Union should be increased.


House Panel Approves Lobbying Restrictions
LEAD: A bill that would for the first time restrict lobbying by former Presidents and former members of Congress has cleared the House Judiciary Committee.


Alone With Venice in Winter
LEAD: I DON'T KNOW IF RALPH WALDO EMERSON EVER COMMENTED ON Venice, but in that city in mid-January I'm reminded of his once writing that the part of the church service he liked best was the silence before the preaching begins.
That is Venice in the winter.
The sun seems never to rise, but to remain low and diffused in the sky, as if shining through a window of milky glass or alabaster, and the shadows are as long as church aisles.


Reviews/Music; Clarinetist's Idiomatic Approach
LEAD: Roger Salander's evening at Weill Recital Hall on Wednesday brought us a side of clarinet playing we rarely hear.
His program was different yet substantial - anchored by Weber's great Duo Concertant for Clarinet and Piano but offering elsewhere substantial pieces by Saint-Saens, Milhaud and Krenek and also music by two less-known Viennese composers, Erich Eder de Lastra and Alfred


Headliners; Speaking of Ethics
LEAD: As independent prosecutor in the case of the former White House aide Michael K. Deaver, Whitney North Seymour Jr. says he has developed ''strong views on how to achieve a higher standard of ethics in govenrment.''


ORDER AND CHAOS
LEAD: The crisp facade of Villa Zapu forms an imposing barrier as it cuts across a high ridge of land on the western edge of the Napa Valley.
The house, pool and tower-guesthouse form the heart of Anna and Thomas Lundstrom's 130-acre home and winery.


BASEBALL'S RENAISSANCE MAN
LEAD: I attended many Dodger games at Ebbetts Field as a child, and I share Bart Giamatti's thoughts about the game bringing back nostalgic memories.
Your article also brought to mind nostalgic memories of my favorite professor at Mount Holyoke College in 1954, teaching ''Dante's Inferno'' at an 8 A.M. class - Bart Giamatti's father!


The Subliminal Message of the Bush Campaign; Nuclear Freeze
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; Which Is The Better Team, '86 Mets, Or '88 Mets?
LEAD: I'm sure that most of the letters will discuss Mitchell vs.
McReynolds, Orosco vs.
Myers and the like.
In my mind, as long as Mookie plays every day and Darryl keeps acting like a mensch (as he has all season) the Mets will win it all.


Emelin's Guest Artist Series Opening
LEAD: THE Emelin Theater's guest artist series will bring several notable chamber ensembles and soloists to the county this season.
The Ridge String Quartet, for example, which will play later in the season, is one of the top young groups in the country, and there is no gainsaying the reputations of the pianist Rudolf Firkusny, the cellist Nathaniel Rosen and the Buswell-Parnas-Luvisi


The Tangled Case Of Artists' Agent
LEAD: HE WAS described once in a magazine profile as one of the world's most successful agents for fashion photographers, with receipts estimated at $12 million a year.
In January he was portrayed in a news article as an ''agent who left by night,'' reputedly leaving in his wake a mountain of debt, unpaid fees to artists and no forwarding address.


Are Automatics Truly Foolproof?
LEAD: WHEN I was an infant, I expected my parents to take care of things like food and shelter.
I assumed that they always had everything under perfect control.
Only later, when I was forced to provide for myself, did I find out that life isn't always as neat as it seems.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Locals; Wagner Routs Montclair
LEAD: Doug Kovar and Terry Underwood, the 1-2 offensive punch of Wagner, accounted for five touchdowns as the Seahawks crushed previously undefeated Montclair State, 51-21, yesterday in the 10th annual Pride Bowl before 13,000 at Schools Stadium, Newark.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Historic Pillars Take New Form


No Headline
LEAD: VISITORS who want to see Francie Berger, Keith Fetridge and Karsten Kristensen must first share a waiting room with a six-foot hippopotamus that carries a surfboard.
Then they are escorted to a room where another hippo stands by the window, ''Betsy Ross'' sits with the Stars and Stripes draped over her lap, Mr.


Austrian Beds
LEAD: To the Editor: Oscar Millard's ''How to Sleep in an Austrian Bed'' (Travel, July 24) covers more sleeping couches than those in Austria.
I had a similar experience in Munich at a five-star hotel where the staff responded to every request except that of providing me with a topsheet instead of a Tuchent.


A French Restaurant Turns Italian
LEAD: USUALLY when restaurants are not doing well, they go out of business.
La Plume in Bethel has tried a different approach: it changed its name to Pappagallo's and its cuisine from formal French to informal Italian.
What remains the same is the cast of characters - the chef and owners - and the locale - an 1850


The Search for a Lighter Laptop
LEAD: LAPTOP computers are great in theory but disappointing in real life.
If you want power, you get weight.
If you want less weight, you sacrifice power.
But recent advances in technology may change that lamentable equation.


The Subliminal Message of the Bush Campaign
LEAD: To the Editor:


POSTINGS: Low Rent on the Fringe; The Option Play
LEAD: On one side of 96th Street is the 1,484-unit Normandie Court, where one-bedroom rents start at $1,295 a month.
But when the apartment building rising across the street at 1865 Second Avenue opens in December, rents for its 18 two-bedroom units will be about $350.


Austrian Beds
LEAD: To the Editor: Twelve hours before discovering ''How to Sleep in an Austrian Bed'' I had been reading the following:


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Indianapolis; Solo No More Next to a Canal
LEAD: RODNEY HALL is growing lonely next to the narrow canal that skirts the western edge of downtown Indianapolis.


The Difficult Degas: A Mystery Still
LEAD: Until a year or two ago there could not possibly have been a Degas exhibition like the one that opens to the public at the Metropolitan Museum on Oct. 11 and has been seen in a slightly different form at the Grand Palais in Paris and the new National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa.
Without multinational good will on the grand scale, and without the close cooperation that is now standard form between museums in France and the United States, the show would never have made it out of dreamland.


CHOSEN AND GIVEN
LEAD: Ms.
Henig quotes Dr.
David Brodzinsky's statement that ''the majority of them  [ adoptees ]  do very well in life.'' However, his message is quickly buried beneath an avalanche of assertions implying that adoptees are at high risk for a multitude of emotional behavioral and learning problems.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Ivy League; Cornell Overwhelmed by Lehigh, 27-14
LEAD: Mark McGowan of Lehigh ran for a 67-yard touchdown and threw two fourth-quarter scoring passes to lift Lehigh to a 27-14 victory over Cornell today.


Donna Loves Sneaks
LEAD: EVERYBODY wears sneakers.
For walking.
For sports.
For comfort.
What's left to be said about sneakers?
Simply that they're fashionable.


A Pair of Shows for a Pair of Trendy Twins
LEAD: To someone outside the orbit of SoHo, reputations in contemporary art can seem based as much on manipulation as on merit.
There is a widely held but seldom-voiced suspicion that a cabal of New York dealers, curators and critics periodically conspires to put certain names on the artistic map regardless of the ultimate merit of the work involved.


G.O.P. Appears to Be Losing Struggle for Control of Senate
LEAD: As the election campaigns across the country this fall have heated up, Republican chances of regaining control of the Senate seem to have become more remote.


Shading Sun Glare A Healthy Vacuum
LEAD: GREGORY F. AINSWORTH has come up with a solution for page glare, an irritant that bedevils book-reading sun-worshipers.


A New Center to Keep New York's Finest Fit
LEAD: In its continuing effort to chart the physical well-being of its officers, the New York City Police Department has developed a cardiovascular-fitness center, complete with nutritionists, cholesterol charts, weight machines and trained instructors who also happen to be police officers.


When America Starts to Tinker
LEAD: THE American genius, who invents at his kitchen table or in a corporate laboratory, is losing ground to innovators from abroad.
Last year, United States residents were granted only 54 percent of the patents issued the Patent and Trademark Office, according to Government statistics.


Catherine Ziehm Weds
LEAD: Catherine S. Ziehm, a daughter of Frederick G. Ziehm of Albany and the late Ruth Hickey Ziehm, was married yesterday to Mark Warkala, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Warkala of Point Pleasant, N.J.
The Rev.
John Halborg performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.


How Title Insurance Comes to the Rescue
LEAD: WHEN a next-door neighbor staked out an area to build an addition to his home, a couple in lower Westchester believed the stakes were on their property line.
So they contacted their title insurance company, which entered the dispute and provided $5,000 for legal costs.
The result was that the stakes were moved.


80'S ART WITH A PASSPORT TO WEST GERMANY
LEAD: With the Carnegie International and the Whitney Biennial on this art season's horizon, two Boston museums have got the jump on showing us what the newest art of our time might look like. ''American Art of the Late 1980's,'' organized by three curators from the Boston Museum of Fine Arts and the Institute of Contemporary Art, includes the efforts of 26 artists and artist teams and brings together some of the best work being made today.


Law Protects Art from Owners
LEAD: SEVERAL years ago, a mural by the painter Michael Borders, ''The Genesis of the Capital City,'' was removed from a public building in Hartford and cut up for billboards.
When the artist found out about it, there was nothing he could do, because it was no longer his property.


Sealing Double-Hung Windows
LEAD: DOUBLE-HUNG windows, so named because they have two vertically sliding sashes, are difficult to seal against drafts.
Even well-made models eventually develop gaps between the sashes and frame, allowing air to pass between them.


Jacqueline Moore Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of of Jacqueline Kent Moore, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Koelle Moore of London and Cove Neck, L.I., to Christopher Wren Watson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Deering Watson of Gibson Island, Md., and East Hampton, L.I., took place yesterday at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.


Joseph F. Kern, Publisher, 73
LEAD: Joseph F. Kern, publisher of Popular Mechanics magazine for 17 years until his retirement in 1980, died of heart failure Friday at his home in Garden City, L.I.
He was 73 years old.


CATHARINE MCCORMACK WED
LEAD: Catharine Mary McCormack, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Michael McCormack of New York, was married yesterday to Robert McDonald Totman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Totman of Phoenix.
The Rev.
Michael Quinlan officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Saviour in New York.
Mrs.
Totman is a foreign exchange trader and her husband a credit analyst at the Sumitomo Bank in New York.


Maine Shellfish Deaths
LEAD: The mud flats of Maquoit Bay are off-limits to clam diggers pending results of tests to determine the cause of mass deaths of quahogs, razor clams, mussels, periwinkles, marine worms and soft-shell clams.
Some officials suspect a toxic algae.
The shellfish harvest is worth about $1.5 million a year.


Grappling With the Problem Of School Prayer
LEAD: ''DARK as the night that covers me, black as a pit from pole to pole, I thank whatever gods may be for my unconquerable soul.''


No. 3 in a Growing-Up-Jewish Trilogy
LEAD: DURING the last few seasons, the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst has been presenting Israel Horovitz's trilogy about growing up Jewish in Sault Ste.
Marie, Ontario.


Let's Go Back to the True Olympic Spirit; Why No Soccer on TV?
LEAD: To the Editor:


L.I. Village Cuts Frills In Schools
LEAD: For public-school children in this Nassau County village, there are no buses this year.
There are no new library books.
There are only a few after-school sports, and students have to pay to play for a team.
In short, there are no frills.


Welcome, President Gorbachev!
LEAD: As the people of Israel, Pakistan and the U.S. prepare to go to the polls next month, the people of the Soviet Union were treated to an election Communist-style: at the shortest meeting of the Central Committee in 70 years, Mikhail Gorbachev added the presidency to his powers.


Books of The Times; Love in the Mind's Interior and in the Wilderness
LEAD:  Of Such Small Differences  By Joanne Greenberg  262 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $18.95.
Private Woods  By Sandra Crockett Moore  302 pages.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $18.95.


Officers Resign At Bank Leumi
LEAD: The chairman and seven board members of Bank Leumi, one of Israel's leading commercial banks, have resigned after public outrage over huge sums awarded to 25 senior bank executives, the bank said Friday.


DR. GARY TANNENBAUM WEDS DR. MARY BRITTIS
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
Mary Ellen Brittis, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Nicholas J. Brittis of Yonkers and East Hampton, L.I., to Dr.
Gary Alan Tannenbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Tannenbaum of Scarsdale, N.Y., took place yesterday at the Caramoor estate in Katonah, N.Y.
Rabbi Albert Sturmer and the Rev.


Food Mergers Worry Some Officials
LEAD: Fierce competition among supermarket companies has prompted a wave of mergers, making a once highly fragmented business more concentrated.
In some major cities, as much as 39 percent of all grocery-store business is controlled by a single chain.


How Did the Dodgers Do It?
LEAD: THEY began hearing the question some time after Memorial Day, when the Los Angeles Dodgers took hold of first place in the West Division of the National League and refused to let go.
How have they done this?


No Lightweight in Class
LEAD: At 115 pounds, James Martin may have been the lightest athlete ever red-shirted at a major university.
But the Penn State wrestling coach, Rich Lorenzo, felt that Martin, a three-time Pennsylvania state high school champion in weight divisions ranging from 98 to 105 pounds, was too light to compete in the lightest collegiate division, which is 118 pounds, when he arrived at University Park,


Muriel Snowden, 72, Pioneer in Integration
LEAD: Muriel Snowden, co-founder of the non-profit Freedom House that pushed for integration and self-help in Boston's predominantly black Roxbury section, died of cancer at her home Friday.
She was 72 years old.


CARRIE BORETZ WEDS
LEAD: Carrie Boretz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin Boretz of Woodmere, L.I., was married yesterday at the Lotos Club in New York to Edward Nicholas Keating, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Keating of New Canaan, Conn.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony.
The bride, a freelance photojournalist who will keep her name professionally, graduated from Washington University in St.


More Fighting Brings Hunger to Sudan
LEAD: Increased fighting in the Sudanese civil war, which international relief workers say threatens two million people with starvation, has resulted in a sudden Government setback.


End of Tradition
LEAD: When Carl Braun, Butch van Breda Kolff and Bud Palmer were the 1947 Knick heroes, New York defeated the Providence Steamrollers, 89-75, in a game that began a longstanding tradition: the Christmas Day game at Madison Square Garden.


Rebel Mine Kills Guatemalan
LEAD: One officer died and seven were wounded when a mine planted by guerrillas went off in northern Guatemala, the army said today.
The incident happened Saturday near San Juan, 315 miles north of the capital in the Peten region, the announcement said.


Medal Winners of the 1988 Seoul Olympics  Final Medal Standings
LEAD:
Country
G
S
B
Total
Soviet Union
55
31
46
132
East Germany
37
35
30
102
United States
36
31
27
94
West Germany
11
14
15
40
Bulgaria
10
12
13
35
South Korea
12
10
11
33
China
5
11
12
28
Rumania
7
11
6
24
Britain
5
10
9
24
Hungary
11
6
6
23
France
6
4
6
16
Poland
2
5
9
16
Italy
6
4
4
14
Japan
4
3
7
14
Australia
3
6
5
14
New Zealand
3
2
8
13
Yugoslavia
3
4
5
12
Sweden
0
4
7
11
Canada
3
2
5
10
Kenya
5
2
2
9
The Netherlands
2
2
5
9 $


Doubt, Hope At the Finish
LEAD: Questionable decisions in the ring and the possible physical dangers of competition have prompted executives of the International Olympic Committee to review whether boxing should continue in the Olympics.


Outdoors: On the Sugar River in Search of Trout
LEAD: MY wooden wading staff vibrated in the waist-deep water as I made my way across the rapids above the head of a big pool on the Sugar River.
I had been daydreaming about getting here for the previous three days, and I reminded myself that there was no need to rush, that five hours of fly fishing lay ahead of me before nightfall.


DU PONT ASSERTS IT FULLY DISCLOSED REACTOR PROBLEMS
LEAD: E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said today that it had fully disclosed information about a number of serious accidents at the Savannah River Plant, a Government complex that produces fuel for nuclear weapons.


Gretzky Shifts Spotlight to L.A.
LEAD: They are calling it sacrilege in Edmonton, where Wayne Gretzky was regarded as a national monument on ice skates.
But the unprecedented trade that sent the world's greatest hockey player to its most improbable marketplace has been heralded as nothing less than revolutionary by the rest of the image-conscious National Hockey


Cardinals Hand Rams First Defeat
LEAD: Neil Lomax threw for 342 yards and two touchdowns today as the Phoenix Cardinals ended the conference's last undefeated run by beating the Los Angeles Rams, 41-27.


Metro Datelines; Telephone Workers Get Discounted Rate
LEAD: Top officials, employees and retirees of Southern New England Telephone Company receive local telephone service for free or at a 50 percent discount under a rate-benefit policy worth about $4 million annually.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Renaissance Women
LEAD: Among the many women's groups with headquarters in the capital is one called Renaissance Women, with 3,000 members across the country and overseas.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  The economy grew in September at the slowest pace in six months, the nation's purchasing managers said in their monthly report, adding that industrial production increased at a respectable rate and that orders for exports rose.
Many economists and Government officials have been hoping for signs of slower overall growth, out of fear that the economy may overheat.


Edmonton Will Be Difficult to Dethrone
LEAD:  SMYTHE DIVISION


North Carolina Tops Soccer Mark
LEAD: Wendy Gebauer, Ava Hyatt and Shannon Higgins scored goals as North Carolina's women's soccer team defeated William and Mary, 3-1, Saturday in Williamsburg, Va., and set a National Collegiate Athletic Association record with its 58th consecutive game without a defeat.


Hopes Rise for the Release of Hostages in Lebanon
LEAD: Hopes for the release of foreign hostages in Lebanon rose today as the spiritual leader of a pro-Iranian group believed to be behind the kidnappings said a solution was in sight.
The kidnappers themselves promised to free one of their captives.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-13  News analysis: Soviet leadership changes in the last two days underscore a paradox: the more Mikhail S. Gorbachev tries to disperse power in an attempt to expand democracy, the more he must concentrate it in his own hands.
Page A1


Tag Sale, As a Show Of Shows, Is a Hit
LEAD: Despite the esoterica on sale, yesterday in Lincoln Center could have been Dec. 23 at Bloomingdale's.
The brand names were Ziegfeld, not Kamali, and Sondheim, not de la Renta, but the stock (as in summer) moved just as fast.


New Hampshire Trips Itself
LEAD: Among the lowlights and highlights of college football in the East on Saturday were the bumbling of an overconfident New Hampshire team, the emergence of Princeton as a potential Ivy title contender, the redemption of a Boston College quarterback, Mike Power, once booed by his own fans, and another triumph for a


Review/Film; At Work and Home, a Difficult Life
LEAD: ''Jacob,'' Mircea Daneliuc's new Rumanian film, is about a gold miner whose life is very difficult, in the mines and out.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Gracious Response
LEAD: While the tone was decorous at the White House last week, with official statements lauding the 1988 winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, disappointment pervaded 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.


Latin Military Still Seems to Stress The Role of Fighting Communism
LEAD: Even with democracy now in place in most Latin American countries, the region's military forces still appear to view their principal role as that of combating Communism, according to secret resolutions adopted at the most recent Conference of American Armies.


Green Arrested Again
LEAD: Mitch Green, the heavyweight boxer, was arrested early yesterday and charged with driving while impaired after he was found in a car that had crashed into a parked vehicle in Queens, the Housing Authority police said.
It was Green's third arrest in 11 days.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the Jewish holidays of Shemini Atzereth and Simhath Torah, which conclude the harvest festival of Succoth, alternate-side parking are suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Parade Held for General as Balloting Nears
LEAD: Thousands of cars and trucks rolled through Santiago today in a parade of support for Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, three days before Chileans vote on extending his presidency.


Purchasers Find Drop In Growth
LEAD: The nation's economy grew in September at the slowest pace in six months, the National Association of Purchasing Management said in a monthly report that is scheduled to be released today.


Soviets Urge Nations to Provide a U.N. Army
LEAD: The Soviet Union has suggested that countries routinely earmark some of their armed forces for United Nations peacekeeping duties, effectively giving the United Nations an army of its own.


Metro Datelines; City Schools Restate Policy on Religion
LEAD: Parochial schools are still permitted to use the athletic fields, auditoriums and other facilities of New York City public schools as long as they are not being used for religious purposes, a spokesman for the Board of Education said yesterday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Today, up here where the blue sky turns to black, we can say at long last to Dick, Mike, Judy, to Ron and El, and to Christa and Greg: Dear friends, we have resumed the journey that we promised to continue for you.
Dear friends, your loss has meant that we could confidently begin anew.
Dear friends, your spirit and your dreams are still alive in our heart.


Review/Music; A Violinist of South India
LEAD: The World Music Institute opened its new season on Friday with an extraordinary concert of music from south India.
M.
S.
Gopalkrishnan, one of India's leading violinists, and Guruvayur Dorai, a mrdangam drummer, were joined by a small electronic instrument that produced calm drone tones to back their fevered improvisations.


Review/Fortepiano; Instrument as Co-recitalist
LEAD: We are still at the stage in the old-instrument movement where attending a Malcolm Bilson recital means going to hear an instrument as well as an instrumentalist.
The properties of Mr.
Bilson's fortepiano - modeled after Mozart's own and used to play four Mozart sonatas at the Miller Theater at Columbia University Saturday night - are now familiar to many.


Campaign Trail; A Bandana Is More Than a Neckerchief
LEAD: The press corps traveling with Governor Dukakis got an object lesson the other day in the old saying that all politics is local.
After a stop at a farm in West Texas reporters were delighted to discover that each of them had been given a bright red or blue cowboy bandana, and many of them promptly tied them around their necks.


U.S. Car Gain In Japan Seen
LEAD: The head of the Japanese Automobile Importers Association said Friday that the group expected sales of American cars in Japan to increase greatly in the next five years. but he warned that the cars still faced important market obstacles.


Chrysler Sets Price Rise
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation announced that the price of its 1989 models would increase an average 2.3 percent, the same figure as the tentative price rise it announced in August.
The increase by Chrysler, for the fourth straight year, is the lowest of the United States auto makers.
The General Motors Corporation said in August that it was increasing prices by an average 2.9 percent based on comparably equipped models.


Hershey Decides to Shift Its Cadbury Accounts
LEAD: The Hershey Chocolate Company, Hershey, Pa., has decided to shift its recently acquired Cadbury U.S.A. business from Wells, Rich, Greene/ New York, to its two agencies of record, DDB Needham/New York and Ogilvy &amp; Mather.
The entire budget is estimated at more than $30 million.
Sources said DDB Needham's share falls somewhere between $15 million and $20 million, with Ogilvy &amp;


Army Drops Colt as M16 Rifle Maker
LEAD: The Army has dropped Colt Industries Inc. as the manufacturer of America's standard infantry weapon, the M16 rifle, according to a published report.
The move could affect employment at strike-plagued Colt plants in Connecticut.


Orthotics Work for the Whole Body
LEAD: IN 1984, Isabele Carmichael of New York, a top road racer, qualified for the first Olympic marathon trial for women.
Later that year she developed recurring tightness in her right leg that caused her foot to grow numb.
Forced to cut her high-level training to mere jogging, she desperately sought a medical solution to her problem.


Rate Moves Hinging On Jobless Data
LEAD: With Treasury bond yields around 9 percent, investors and traders have found a balance between the risk of higher interest rates if the economy continues to expand rapidly and the chance of lower interest rates if oil prices fall and put a lid on inflation.


Shoreham on a Seesaw: The Art of Shifting Blame for Nuclear Plant's Fate
LEAD: In the three months since Governor Cuomo announced a historic agreement to abandon the Shoreham nuclear power plant, he has retreated from his original position that the State Legislature must approve a bill describing the deal as ''in the public interest.''


Bears Demolish Disjointed Bills, 24-3
LEAD: Sixty-one seconds remained in the third quarter when the Buffalo Bills were at the Chicago Bears' 14-yard line.
It was fourth-and-1.


Tight Race Seen in Patrick Division
LEAD:  PATRICK DIVISION


Undone by Ballpoint
LEAD:  1.
Book of Hours  Those calligraphic pitfalls required by state law,  ''Push-pulls and ovals'' at a clip,  Showed fictive citizens the way to write and draw.
Ten-inch Palmer letters rode  White cards around the blackboard top.
Our Bayeux, its sloping figures flowed.
One fat fifth-grader with no breasts  Twice licked the dip-pen tip.


Reviews/Television; What Teen-Agers Do Not Know
LEAD: The ignorance of America's high school students is the subject of tonight's episode in ABC's ''Burning Questions'' series.
The one-hour documentary, which can be seen at 8 P.M. on Channel 7, offers no new answers to the title question, ''America's Kids: Why They Flunk,'' but lays on the appalling evidence in the form of test results and interviews.


Metro Datelines; 10 Held in Protest By Gay Catholics
LEAD: Ten demonstrators were arrested yesterday after they laid down in Fifth Avenue outside St.
Patrick's Cathedral to protest John Cardinal O'Connor's stance on homosexuality.


Baseball; Lanier Dismissed as Astros' Manager
LEAD: Hal Lanier was dismissed as manager of the Houston Astros today after a disappointing season that ended with the team losing 13 of its final 17 games.


Rangers End Preseason With Victory
LEAD: The Rangers closed their exhibition season with a 4-2 triumph over the Whalers tonight, and the performance prompted Coach Michel Bergeron to say the club was ready for its regular-season opener on Thursday.


Murder Conviction Is Upset by One Word
LEAD: The 1972 murder conviction of a Rochester man was reversed by a state appellate court because the trial judge repeatedly substituted the word ''and'' for ''or'' while instructing the jury about the insanity defense.


Oakland Journal; In a Gym, They're All Contenders
LEAD: Sweat pouring from his brow, John Raymond delivers a series of staccato jabs to the speed bag hanging in King Boxing Gym, on one of this city's meanest streets.
Thump-a-ta, thumpa-a-ta, thump-a-ta. ''I come here,'' the lawyer glowers, ''when I'm in the mood.''


Chief of a DDB Ad Office Will Head Porsche in U.S.
LEAD: The president and chief executive of Porsche A.G.'s North American operations will be Brian Bowler, a British-born advertising executive.


The General and the Sergeant: Confreres in Haiti
LEAD: Since the coup in Haiti two weeks ago, the new President, Lieut.
Gen.
Prosper Avril, and Sgt.
Joseph Hebreux have been sharing an office in the presidential palace, jointly greeting visitors and attending meetings.


Museums Feel the Pinch of Tax Law Changes
LEAD: When museum officials get together these days, their talk is as likely to turn to taxes as to art.
Phrases like ''unrelated business income,'' ''alternative minimum tax'' and ''disincentives'' roll smoothly off their tongues as they worry over the latest rulings of a Congress and an Internal Revenue


Bright Vermont Foliage Masks Concern for Trees
LEAD: The buses and campers and the neon no-vacancy signs are a sure indication that the fall foliage season has arrived in Vermont.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Home Products Corp., New York, a manufacturer and marketer of medicines, foods and household products, elected Frank A. Bennack Jr., president and chief executive of Hearst Corp., to its board.


Two Bombs in Holiday Bread Wound 3 Girls in Jerusalem
LEAD: Two bombs hidden in loaves of Jewish holiday bread exploded in Jerusalem today and slightly wounded three young girls, the police said.


Washington Talk: Congress; Welfare Overhaul: Right Timing for a War Dance
LEAD: It was the best of bills, it was the worst of bills.
It was a bill everybody wanted, it was a bill nobody wanted.
It was a bill that evoked boldness, it was a bill that evoked fear.


Pipe Bomb Kills Child in Texas
LEAD: A pipe bomb exploded in a residential neighborhood last night, killing an 8-year-old boy and injuring five other children, the authorities said.
Capt.
Roy Knight of the Fire Department said the children found the device along a curb in front of a home near a light-industrial area on the city's south side.


Thucydides Knew
LEAD: To the Editor:


TV Notes
LEAD:  Out of South Africa


Harvard Research Plan Advances Public Health; Like a Newspaper
LEAD: To the Editor:


&gt;Review/Opera; Capobianco's 'Rigoletto'
LEAD: ''Rigoletto'' at the New York State Theater on Saturday afternoon did not offer a very promising environment for the young singers who took on its leading roles for the first time with the company.
The Tito Capobianco production, new this year, is an embarrassment, the kind of show that brings ''traditional'' opera into severe disrepute.


IC's Rail Spinoff Ruling
LEAD: The Interstate Commerce Commission ruled that IC Industries' proposed spinoff of its Illinois Central Railroad Company was not within its jurisdiction.
A spokesman for IC Industries, a Chicago-based consumer products company, said that the ruling cleared the way for a spinoff of the railroad, but an I.C.C.


U.S. and Soviet Officials Uniting To Discourage Athletes' Drug Use
LEAD: An Olympics tainted by a drug scandal ended today with the sports officials of the United States and the Soviet Union agreeing to work together against drug use among athletes.


MARY C. JURKASH MARRIES DANIEL BERICK, A LAWYER
LEAD: At the Bond Chapel on the University of Chicago campus, Mary Carol Jurkash, the manager of professional services at the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy, was married yesterday to Daniel G. Berick, an associate at the New York law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan.
The Rev.
John Sanaghan, a Roman Catholic priest, and Cantor Sidney


Taylor Helps Giants Hold Off Redskins
LEAD: During the last few days, several people have wondered whether the impact of Lawrence Taylor's return was being exaggerated.
They wondered whether one player could make that great a difference in a sport where the whole was supposedly greater than the individual parts.


Hong Kong Journal; Where Wall-to-Wall Means People
LEAD: The tiny park is hard and gray and uninviting - concrete benches sitting on concrete pavement.
The only green is a little strip of grass with a few wispy trees, and these are fenced off from the public.


Generoso P. Pope Jr. Dead at 61; The National Enquirer's Publisher
LEAD: Generoso P. Pope Jr., the millionaire owner and publisher of The National Enquirer, suffered a heart attack yesterday at his home in West Palm Beach, Fla., and was pronounced dead on arrival at the J.F.K.
Medical Center in Atlantis, Fla.
He was 61 years old.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Lessons of the Holocaust  Many schools are not only teaching it as history but exploring it in terms of modern-day prejudice.
Page A16.
Pinochet's Risky Course  Chile decides Wednesday on the rule of the man that one backer calls a ''very peculiar dictator.'' Page.
A10.


Campaign Trail; A Beloved Mug Shot For the Bush Forces
LEAD: ''I've Seen Elvis in the Flesh!'' ''Statue of Elvis Found on Mars!'' ''Kablaam!
Body Builder Explodes as He Was Pumping Iron Too Fast!''


Italy's Proposed Budget
LEAD: The Italian Cabinet has approved a proposed 1989 budget that would put the deficit at 117.25 trillion lire, or $83.7 billion.
The plan, which Parliament must approve, was adopted late Thursday.
It includes cutbacks in some health-care and cultural programs as well as in the national railroad.


Police Theorize Sight of Gun Led to Shooting of Officer
LEAD: The shooting by a half-dozen police officers in Queens on Saturday, in which a sergeant and two unarmed kidnapping suspects were wounded, might have started when an officer thought one of the suspects had a gun, the authorities said yesterday.


It Used to Be Sedition; Now It's on Estonian TV
LEAD: Mart Niklus was not a hard man to spot in the crowd of go-to-meeting suits and studiously civic-minded faces.


El Salvador, U.S.A.
LEAD: Last week, I escorted my little boy to his first day at kindergarden.
On the bulletin board was a tree filled with apples, on which were written the names of all the children in the class.
Esteban, Mia, Rafael, Melina . . .
I began to count, and discovered that almost half of the children in this Washington public school's entering class were Hispanic, and most of those were


Review/Opera; A Debut in 'Giulio Cesare'
LEAD: Barbara Kilduff, a soprano, was scheduled to sing her first Cleopatra in the Metropolitan Opera's new production of Handel's ''Giulio Cesare'' on Oct. 19.
But because Kathleen Battle was indisposed on Saturday evening, Ms.
Kilduff stepped into the role a couple of weeks earlier than expected.


Finding The Sweet Spot In Golf
LEAD: FOR the golfer who has everything and wants more, there's a new gadget, the Check Go, for finding the sweet spot on a golf ball.


Mets Finish Up With a Flourish
LEAD: The Mets rang down the curtain with flourishes and home runs yesterday when they completed a three-game sweep of the St.
Louis Cardinals and headed for Los Angeles with 100 victories, a record attendance and a shot at their second National League pennant in three years.


British Growth Is Expected to Slow
LEAD: Britain's economic growth is expected to slow to 2.1 percent in 1989 from 3.6 percent this year, according to a British Treasury survey published Friday.


Fitness; Running a Marathon A Day for the Elderly
LEAD: RUNNING with Sam Freeman is rather ordinary: a gentle five-mile-per-hour pace, slow enough to chat and step easily out of the way of oncoming traffic along the Jefferson Davis Highway here should a driver hug the shoulder of the road too tightly.


Allied Closing 5 Stores
LEAD: The Allied Stores Corporation said it would close five Stern's department stores: in Philadelphia, King of Prussia, Langhorne and Media, Pa., and Moorestown, N.J.
The department store chain will continue to operate 24 units.
It said closing is expected in about 30 days on agreements with the landlords on termination of store leases of all but the Philadelphia store, which the Campeau Corporation, parent of Allied, owns.


Mastercard And Visa: Rival Donors
LEAD: THE never-ending marketing rivalry between the big bank credit cards is not just over fees and perquisites.
It is over ''causes,'' too.


Campaign Finance; In Election Spending, Watch Ceiling and Use a Loophole
LEAD: Federal limits on spending by Presidential campaigns have become the political version of the 55-mile-per-hour speed limit: They're there, but they don't matter much.


Interco Describes Its Plan
LEAD: Interco Inc. yesterday released details of a financial restructuring approved last month to thwart a takeover attempt.


Campaign Trail; Bentsen's Eyes Glaze (Briefly) in Carolina
LEAD: It's getting to be the time on the campaign trail when the cities and the states and the tarmacs and the Hyatts run together.


Bipartisan Caucus Calls for a Shift in Favor of Conventional Forces
LEAD: The next President should increase spending for non-nuclear weapons and meet military budget restrictions by canceling new weapons rather than reducing training for conventional forces, a bipartisan group of legislators has recommended.


Men's Volleyball; U.S. Repeats Gold-Medal Performance
LEAD: Is America ready for a new America's Team?
As Karch Kiraly of the gold-medal volleyball team noted this afternoon, the Dallas Cowboys are not exactly claiming the title these days.


At Cathedral, a Blessing for Algae
LEAD: After a summer of polluted beaches, soaring temperatures and devastating drought, it was time to get back to basics.
And so, at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine yesterday, there was a special blessing for the algae.


Letter: On Phone Service; Price Caps Plan Still a Wrong Number
LEAD: To the Editor:


Advertising for Hasbro Doll Seeks to Dethrone Barbie
LEAD: The doll wars will begin to heat up today with new advertising by Hasbro Inc., even though the start of the frantic Christmas shopping season is still eight weeks away.


Metro Datelines; Long-Term Shelters In Plan for Homeless
LEAD: City officials have unveiled a $15 million plan to help the homeless that calls for the creation of 12 neighborhood residences that would provide long-term shelter and support with the aim of helping the homeless finally break out of poverty.


U.S. Sees Stable Relations Despite Kremlin Shake-Up
LEAD: American officials said today that they did not expect any major changes in Soviet policy toward the United States as a result of the shake-up in the Kremlin leadership over the last two days.


Now, the City's Country Jail Is Crowded
LEAD: The fresh air, mild and damp as it wafts over the St.
Lawrence Seaway from Canada, immediately impresses prisoners when they arrive here for an extended stay at New York City's newest jail.


Metro Matters; For Parks Chief, Offbeat Charm Is His Signature
LEAD: Everyone has a favorite Henry Stern story.


No Mistaking Tylor's Return
LEAD: On the third play of the game today, the Giants' defender crashed into the Washington Redskins backfield and sacked the quarterback, causing a fumble and setting up the Giants' first score.
Lawrence Taylor was back. ''He's a great football player,'' said the Redskins' young quarterback, Mark Rypien, the object of Taylor's attentions throughout the game at Robert F.


Blacks in U.S. Are Lobbied By Angolans
LEAD: Increasingly skilled in the arts of political tourism, Angola's left-wing Government unveiled its deluxe package tour recently for a group of black American churchmen.


Business and the Law; Bid to Drop Judge Renews Old Fight
LEAD: THE upcoming confrontation between a Federal judge in Manhattan and a leading New York trial lawyer in the securities fraud case of Drexel Burnham Lambert will not be the first for the two men.
More than a decade ago, Judge Milton Pollack and Arthur L. Liman locked horns in a bitter lawsuit involving complex securities issues.


Lawyer Back in Buyouts With Bid for Fischbach
LEAD: Andrew N. Heine, a New York lawyer who has participated in leveraged buyouts off and on since the 1960's, is back on the scene with an offer to buy the Fischbach Corporation, whose chairman is Victor Posner, the financier.


Harvard Research Plan Advances Public Health
LEAD: To the Editor:


Twice Right on Trade
LEAD: President Reagan struck two mighty blows for consumers the other day when he vetoed a bill to throttle imports of textiles and clothing, and then, minutes later, signed another to expand trade with Canada.
An effort by misguided House Democrats to override the veto this week is a further extension of pure political mischief.


Death Toll in India After Heavy Floods Is Reported at 1,000
LEAD: The death toll from floods that have submerged many areas in India's northwest was nearing 1,000 today, according to reports from the region.
Hundreds of thousands of residents in four states have been evacuated to higher ground.


Maxwell Gets French Stake
LEAD: Robert Maxwell, the British publisher, said he had bought just under 5 percent of Bouygues, the giant construction group based in France, in a bid to fend off a hostile takeover of the company's privately owned French television channel TF1.


Pakistan Court Ends Zia Ban on Party Candidates
LEAD: Overturning a decree issued by the late President, Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, the Supreme Court ruled today that candidates in next month's election may run under the banner of any political party.


Pinochet, a 'Very Peculiar Dictator,' Faces Voters
LEAD: After 15 years of authoritarian rule, Gen.
Augusto Pinochet is - to all appearances - about to risk his grip on power.


U.S. Has No Strategy at All for War on Drugs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Canada Faces National Vote On U.S. Trade
LEAD: When Prime Minister Brian Mulroney called a general election on Saturday, he presented Canadians with a choice that all three parties have said is the most important that voters here have faced this century.


Reproducing Charlie Parker's Art With Modern Technology of 'Bird'
LEAD: ''Bird,'' Clint Eastwood's film tribute to the legendary saxophonist Charlie Parker, starts out with a high-voltage scene.
Parker, played by Forest Whitaker, is hunched over his saxophone, unreeling gorgeously tense lines to a club audience.
The rhythm section is right there with him; the music is riveting, intensely creative.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Calendar Shuffle
LEAD: What do the Supreme Court Justices know about the Presidential election that the rest of us don't?


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Time Lowers Guarantee To Hold Back Ad Costs
LEAD: Despite rising publishing costs, Time magazine announced Friday that it would maintain its current national page costs through 1989 by reducing its circulation rate base guarantee to 4.3 million, from 4.6 million.


High Hopes Ride on Quayle Debate Performance
LEAD: The Vice-Presidential debate Wednesday is Senator Dan Quayle's moment in political history, when he can overcome, or confirm, the public's unease about him as a candidate, a possible Vice President and a potential President, analysts in both parties agree.


Fannie Mae Set to Price $500 Million Issue
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market, starting with today's regular weekly auction of three-month and six-month bills.


Brodsky and Paz at PEN
LEAD: Joseph Brodsky and Octavio Paz will appear tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. at the CUNY Graduate Center Auditorium, 33 West 42d Street, in an event sponsored by the PEN American Center.
Mr.
Brodsky and Mr.
Paz will engage in a discussion, then Mr.
Paz will read a selection of his poems in Spanish and Eliot Weinberger will read the English translations.


Candidate Is Culprit in 1-Vote Loss
LEAD: Herbert Connolly lost the primary election for a nomination to the Massachusetts Governor's Council by just one vote: his own.


Shuttle Return On TV Today
LEAD: The ABC, CBS, NBC and Cable News networks plan live coverage of the shuttle landing, scheduled for 12:37 P.M. today, Eastern daylight time, at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.
All four networks plan to begin live coverage about half an hour before the landing and to stay with the shuttle until shortly after it touches down.


A Sport in Turmoil From Start to End
LEAD: ''Peace, Harmony, Progress,'' the motto of the Games of the XXIVth Olympiad, was left battered at the end of the 429-bout boxing tournament.


A Soviet Paradox; Concentration of Power by Gorbachev Seems at Odds With Democracy Push
LEAD: The dramatic leadership changes that Mikhail S. Gorbachev engineered in the last two days underscored a central paradox of his program to reshape the Soviet Union: the more he tries to disperse power, the more he finds it necessary to concentrate power in his own hands.


South Koreans Feel Triumphant as the Games End
LEAD: South Korea, which came into the Olympics hoping for six gold medals but fearful that it might fall short, emerged from the Games in triumph both as host and competitor.
It placed sixth in the overall medal standing with 33 and fourth in the gold-medal standing with 12.


U.S. Is Successful Despite Low Status
LEAD: All that talk about the demise of track and field in the United States is just that: talk.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Frost Prevails: David Frost of South Africa, a nine-time runner-up in four years on the PGA Tour, earned his first victory yesterday by knocking in a five-foot birdie putt on the first playoff hole to capture the Southern Open at Columbus, Ga.
Frost caught Bob Tway with a six-foot birdie putt on the final hole of regulation play, then won when he birdied and Tway two-putted from 10 feet.(AP)


Detroit Catholics Vow to Fight Closings
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church announced a plan to close more than a third of Detroit's 112 Catholic churches, and stunned and saddened parishioners attending Mass today vowed to fight the move.


Injured Gibson Improving
LEAD: As Kirk Gibson walked slowly, very slowly, through the entrance to the Los Angeles Dodger clubhouse, Mickey Hatcher, his teammate, looked up and smiled. ''Hey, Walter Brennan,'' Hatcher said.
The good news for the Dodgers was that as slowly as Gibson was moving, he could see progress.
He played six innings


Harper In TV Film On Network She Sued
LEAD: Two weeks after her courtoom victory in a trial in which she heard herself accused of unprofessional, unstable conduct, Valerie Harper is starring in a two-hour movie at 9 P.M.
Monday for NBC, one of the parties she sued for breach of contract when she was dismissed from the comedy series ''Valerie.


Foreign Stocks Lower Over All in Third Quarter
LEAD: Foreign stock markets, on the whole, declined again in the third quarter of this year, but many of those that were down from April through June rebounded in the last three months.
A similar reversal befell many second-quarter winners.


In the South, Dukakis Faces an Uphill Climb
LEAD: The scene in Charlotte, N.C., on Friday would have swelled the heart of Walter F. Mondale, who sometimes seemed the loneliest Democrat around when he headed south in 1984 and sought the embrace of his party's elected officials.


Bengals (5-0) Rout the Raiders
LEAD: Boomer Esiason picked apart a revamped Los Angeles secondary today, passing for 332 yards and three touchdowns as the Cincinnati Bengals, the National Football League's only unbeaten team, rolled to a 45-21 victory over the Raiders.


Campaign Trail; Campaign Courtesy: Bush Calls on Bishop
LEAD: Quietly but persistently, Vice President Bush has gone out of his way in recent weeks to court leading Roman Catholic clergymen in the Northeast and Midwest.
The purpose is perfectly straightforward: Mr.
Bush is seeking to appeal to Catholic voters, in part because of his opposition to abortion.
Governor Dukakis has not met as many Catholic leaders as Mr.


State by State; Liberals in Madison See Little Choice
LEAD: This is one place, even in the age of Ronald Reagan, where the ''L-word'' is not a dirty word.


Chiefs Rally to Tie Jets
LEAD: The Jets didn't lose today.
In a solemn locker room, they just looked as if they did.


Christian Science Publisher Expands Into TV and a Magazine
LEAD: In a broad effort to expand its historically modest reach, the organization that publishes The Christian Science Monitor is spending more than $100 million on a new evening news program for cable television and a new general-interest news monthly, both of them called ''World Monitor.'' The name says a great deal about the growing ambition of the newspaper, which has been published in Boston by the Christian Science Publishing


U.S. Scientists Discount Findings in French AIDS Treatment Study
LEAD: An unproved AIDS drug has been reported to have some temporary benefit by French scientists, but the results have been discounted by American experts and called inconclusive by the company that makes the drug.


Tunes for Tax Man Say Pay as You Owe
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service has reported a rare case of rendering unto it what is Caesar's - in this case, Irving Caesar's.
The 93-year-old songwriter - ''Tea for Two,'' ''Swanee,'' ''Just a Gigolo,'' ''I Want to Be Happy,'' ''Crazy Rhythm,'' ''Is It True What They Say About Dixie'' and more than 1,000 other lyrics - wants to give the I.R.S.


Olympic Games End on a Note of Friendship


Book Publishers Try New Kinds of Promotions
LEAD: A week from today, Delacorte Press will begin shipping to bookstores more than 90,000 hardcover copies of ''Killing Time in St.
Cloud,'' a novel set in that Minnesota city.
To stimulate sales, the publisher is sponsoring a contest in which the winner can choose a trip to St.
Cloud, worth $5,000 including expenses, or $5,000 in cash.


Seven Years Without Directing, And Billy Wilder Is Feeling Itchy
LEAD: If Billy Wilder could hide the fact that he is 82 years old, he would.
Hollywood pays homage to old age but doesn't appreciate it.


Philadelphia Shelters Turn Out the Homeless
LEAD: About 20 private shelters evicted at least 1,000 homeless people when contract negotiations with the city ended without an agreement, officials said today.


Harvard Research Plan Advances Public Health; Working Partnership
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: In the last 35 years, the Dodgers - in Brooklyn and Los Angeles - have had only two managers, Walter Alston (1954-76) and Tom Lasorda.
During that span, which major league team has had the next fewest number of managers?


The Matron Stakes To Some Romance
LEAD: The Matron Stakes at Belmont Park yesterday was among the most boring Grade I stakes races ever run, but it did settle an important question: Some Romance is the best 2-year-old filly in New York.


First Monday, Second Tuesday
LEAD: Obedient to the law, the Supreme Court reconvenes today, the first Monday in October.
Even more than usual, a sense of imminent change attends the high court's new term.
As of the second Tuesday in November, America will have chosen a new President and many people expect new Justices and legal changes soon thereafter.


Review/Dance; Mixed Bill by Nureyev And 7 of His Friends
LEAD: Over the years, Rudolf Nureyev has often toured with a small troupe called Rudolf Nureyev and Friends.
Composed of dancers from various companies and performing works in several choreographic idioms, these ensembles have had considerable success.
On Saturday night, Mr.
Nureyev brought his newest group of dancing friends - seven members of American Ballet Theater - to Lehman Center for the Performing Arts, at Lehman College in the Bronx.


Takeover Stocks at Top In 3d Quarter
LEAD: Takeover stocks continued their dominance as the best and, in some cases, the worst performers during the third quarter.
But if those names are omitted, the three months just ended are likely to be quickly forgotten by investors.


Sir Sacheverell Sitwell Dies at 90, Last of Trio of Literary Eccentrics
LEAD: Sir Sacheverell Sitwell, the poet, art critic and last of the Sitwell trio of literary siblings, died Saturday at his home, Weston Hall, 50 miles north of London, said his son, Francis Sitwell.


THOMAS A. WEST WEDS EVE STRAUSS, A STUDENT
LEAD: Eve Meredith Strauss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter J. Strauss of New York, and Thomas Alexander West, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. West of Blue Bell, Pa., were married yesterday.
Acting Justice Frederic S. Berman of New York State Supreme Court performed the ceremony at the Burden Mansion in New


STEVEN BLISS WED TO JUDITH SACKS
LEAD: Judith Abby Sacks, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David G. Sacks of Larchmont, N.Y., and Longboat Key, Fla., was married yesterday to Steven Jeffrey Bliss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin B. Bliss of Yonkers.
Rabbis Abraham Klausner and Leonard Poller officiated at the Beach Point Club in Mamaroneck, N


Quayle Derided for His Comment on Arms
LEAD: A top aide to Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis asserted today that Senator Dan Quayle ''sounds dangerous'' in disagreeing with the Reagan Administration by saying that strategic arms talks with the Soviet Union should be linked to Soviet concessions on non-nuclear arms.


Coming of Age in Raritan: A Sense of Loss
LEAD: Suzette Dalton, a 16-year-old from Texas, misses Corpus Christi's warm beaches on the Gulf of Mexico.
Kit Mischler, her new 16-year-old friend from Georgia, misses Atlanta's shopping malls.


Kamsa Hamnida, Ben Johnson
LEAD: SHORTLY before the Olympics began, a large wall clock in The Associated Press office here fell to the floor.
Ever since, its hour, minute and sweep-second hands have turned counter-clockwise, as if these Olympics were going back in time.
And in a way, they did.


Piniella's Return Unlikely
LEAD: Lou Piniella, unable to bring the Yankees a division title in his second attempt as manager, may be on his way out again.
A dismissal is reportedly imminent, as is the choice of Dallas Green as Piniella's successor.


Maxwell Says Rival Knew of Bid
LEAD: In another twist in the battle for Macmillan, Maxwell Communications said yesterday that papers filed in Washington confirmed that during the auction process a rival bidder knew the terms of one of its recent offers.


Market Place; Software Stocks Under Pressure
LEAD: WITH rapid growth and high profit margins, the stocks of the Big Three personal computer software companies have typically traded at a healthy premium to the market.
But delays in core products from the Ashton-Tate Corporation and the Lotus Development Corporation and a drop in fourth-quarter operating margins at the Microsoft Corporation have recently put pressure on these stocks.


Drug Dealer Dies 10 Hours After Torching
LEAD: A man described by the New York City police as a drug dealer died yesterday morning, 10 hours after he was doused with a flammable liquid and set afire across the street from Madison Square Garden.


Veterans From 2 Armies and 2 Wars Finding Shared Wounds in Moscow
LEAD: The table was covered with food and bottles of drink, and the men were sitting around it, talking of their soldier days.
Silverware clattered and glasses tapped in fraternity, until one of the the men recalled how eerie the nights were.
And in the sudden silence, they all remembered.


Bordin of Italy in Late Surge Gains Gold
LEAD: With about a mile remaining today in the men's marathon, the last of the 237 events in the Seoul Olympics, Gelindo Bordin of Italy felt his strength slipping away. ''I thought it was over,'' he said.
Lucky for him, the two runners just ahead were having the same thoughts.


Hirohito Survives Blood Loss
LEAD: Emperor Hirohito of Japan is still suffering from internal bleeding, but has weathered the latest crisis in his two-week fight for life, palace officials reported today.
They said the 87-year-old monarch lost a small amount of blood today and received another transfusion this morning.
On Saturday, the Emperor suffered a sudden loss of blood and a sharp drop in his blood pressure.


Priest Killed in 4-Car Collision
LEAD: A priest who headed a New Jersey Catholic school died yesterday after being thrown from his car during a four-vehicle collision in midtown Manhattan, the police said.


Sport Imitates Art
LEAD: When the International Olympic Committee stripped Ben Johnson of his gold medal in the 100-meter dash at the Seoul Olympics because of anabolic steroid use, the controversial body-building drug received front-page attention in newspapers around the world.
And that may prove to be good news for Disney Educational


Premier of Bavaria Remains Seriously Ill After a Collapse
LEAD: Franz Josef Strauss, the conservative Premier of Bavaria and one of the last of the politicians who helped found West Germany, was reported in critical condition today after collapsing during a deer hunt.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  Construction Spending Aug.
Factory Orders Aug.
Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  None  Friday  Unemployment Rate


Rickel Moves Account To Harvey Herman
LEAD: Rickel Home Improvement Center, South Plainfield, N.J., has moved its business to Harvey Herman Associates from the Venet Companies, Union, N.J.
The budget is $4 million.


Audit of Fire Department Shows Inspection Positions Left Vacant
LEAD: Most of New York City's standpipes and sprinkler systems, which protect about 16,700 commercial and residential buildings, have not been inspected in more than five years, according to an audit released yesterday by Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct. 3, 1988:
MONDAY
Carolina Freight
Nevada Pwr
Central Vt Public Service
Oxford Indus
TUESDAY
Blessings Corp
Southwest Gas Corp
Pacific Enterprises
WEDNESDAY
General Dynamics
Murphy Oil Corp
Houston Industries
Southwestern Energy
THURSDAY
Amax Inc
Rite Aid Corp
Birmingham Steel Corp
Sierra Pacific Resources
General Public Utils
Sun Co
Orange &amp; Rockland Utils
Zayre Corp
Puget Sound Pwr &amp; Lt
FRIDAY
Hannaford Bros
U S West Inc
Travelers Corp


Campaign Trail; Ohio Gives Bentsen A Sparring Partner
LEAD: He's youthful!
He's photogenic!
He's Dennis E. Eckart.
And the Democratic Congressman from Ohio is portraying Sen.
Dan Quayle in Senator Lloyd Bentsen's preparation for the Vice Presidential debate.


Hollywood Entices the Japanese
LEAD: Flush with cash and eager to learn about the entertainment industry, the Japanese are starting to invest in Hollywood.


Abuses Up in Salvador, Rights Group Says
LEAD: A human rights group gave details today of what it called a dramatic increase in political killings and other abuses in El Salvador and accused the United States of ignoring Government violations.


Civilian Handguns Are Crime Stoppers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Literacy Is Defense
LEAD: To the Editor:


Account
LEAD: *
Melvin Simon Associates, Indianapolis, a shopping center manager, to Pagano Schenck &amp; Kay, Providence, R.I.


College Football; Backs Right in the Running
LEAD: So far this season, quarterbacks are getting most of the attention in the run for the Heisman Trophy.


Analysts See Good Reasons For Price Rise in Cable Deals
LEAD: The price-per-subscriber paid in cable television acquisitions has soared over the past two years, and most analysts agree that the big increases will stick and prices may even go higher.


KAREN O'TOOLE AND PAUL GROMER MARRY
LEAD: At St.
David's Episcopal Church in South Yarmouth, Mass., Karen Doran O'Toole, the daughter of the late Mrs.
Wilfred Ernest Schofield of South Yarmouth and the late Col.
Lawrence Aloysius O'Toole Jr., U.S.A.F., was married yesterday to Paul Wolfgang Gromer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Joseph Gromer Jr., of New Canaan, Conn.


K.G.B.'s New Chief: 'Spymaster' Up From Ranks
LEAD: When the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, came to Washington last December for the summit meeting with President Reagan, American experts were startled that his traveling party included Vladimir Aleksandrovich Kryuchkov, a K.G.B. official who directs overseas spying.


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Spain is forecasting 5 percent inflation by the end of 1988, overshooting a 3 percent target, but economic growth is also set to outpace previous forecasts, Finance Minister Carlos Solchaga said.
At a news conference on Saturday to unveil full details of the Government's 1989 budget plans, he said the Government was committed to bringing inflation down to 3 percent by the end of 1989.


Pretoria Chief, Ending Zaire Visit, Presses Diplomacy in Black Africa
LEAD: South Africa, exploiting the good will generated in the region by its promise to grant independence to Namibia, is intensifying a diplomatic campaign to develop more normal relations with the rest of Africa.


Haiti Seems Less Than Perturbed By Ouster of a Powerful Colonel
LEAD: At the mustard-colored headquarters where Col.
Jean-Claude Paul had reigned until this weekend as Haiti's most powerful troop commander, the soldiers today were quietly accepting his forced retirement.


JOHN CATSIMATIDIS WED TO MARGO VONDERSAAR
LEAD: At the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York, Margo Vondersaar and John A. Catsimatidis were married yesterday by Archbishop Iakovos, primate of the Greek Orthodox Church in North and South America.


Once Rarely Explored, the Holocaust Gains Momentum as a School Topic
LEAD: The Holocaust, which was once too painful and bewildering to deal with in schools, has become a growing subject in American classrooms.


Mr. Gorbachev's Surprise
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev's economic reforms were failing dismally, nationalist protests were growing and conservative critics carping.
But instead of succumbing, the Soviet leader called last week on his capacity for dramatic surprise.
He summoned the state and party leadership, drastically rearranged it and emerged stronger than ever.


Reviews/Television; Marrying for Murder, Not for Love
LEAD: Easing into the new season with a slew of made-for-television movies, CBS is clearly determined to stick with tired old tactics.
At 9 tonight, ''Unholy Matrimony'' opens with the familiar label ''based on a true story.'' Then, buried in the final credits, is the almost subliminal proviso: ''However, some names, locations, events, dates and characters have been changed or fictionalized.


Toads Invade Florida Complex
LEAD: A black horde of tiny toads invaded a retirement complex Saturday, literally blocking doors.
The toads began moving in Friday. ''The whole yard looks like it's moving,'' said Donna Abshier, assistant administrator of the Forest Glen Lodge. ''They just completely cover everything.
It's unreal.'' Bob Steiger, agricultural extension agent for Pasco County, said the infant toads were a byproduct of flooding in parts of the area.


Bridge
LEAD: Players from Long Island dominated the final standings Saturday in New York's Grand National Pairs Championship.
In play at the Penta Hotel, at 33d Street and Seventh Avenue, these three pairs earned a trip to Reno for the finals in March:  First - Mel Colchamiro, Long Beach, L.I., and Leigh Steinberg, Port Washington, L.I.; second, Ronald Cohen, Woodmere, L.I., and Alan Miller, Manhattan; third, Frank and Diana Schuld, Glen Head, L.I.


20 Are Trapped in a Broken Roller Coaster
LEAD: A roller-coaster ride screeched to a halt in the middle of a loop at a fair here, trapping 20 people upside down 50 feet in the air for more than an hour Saturday.


10 Arrested in 'Angels' Fight
LEAD: A fight on a corner between eight Guardian Angels and a man and his son in Manhattan yesterday resulted in the arrests of all 10 when they filed cross-complaints of assault against one another, the police said.
The fight occurred about 5:30 P.M. at 22d Street and Eighth Avenue, the police said.
No one was seriously injured, the police said, and those arrested were issued tickets ordering them to appear later in court.


People
LEAD: *
Brian Hurley has been promoted to senior partner at Tatham-Laird &amp; Kudner Advertising, Chicago.


For New York's Poles, a Day of Pride


A New Breed of TV Critic Asks: to Zap or Not to Zap?
LEAD: GENE SISKEL and Roger Ebert are not yet quaking in their armchairs, but a new generation of critics is joining them on the television tube, in this case to judge the most pervasive contemporary cultural form - advertising.


Yankees End Up in Fifth Place
LEAD: THE prediction Don Mattingly offered last January came from nowhere, like a pop fly that is gathered in by a powerful wind and blown suddenly into the bleacher seats.
It was simply not expected.


Hussein Postpones Elections For a Promised Parliament
LEAD: King Hussein of Jordan postponed parliamentary elections today, three months after dissolving a Parliament in which half the seats were held by representatives of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.


League Leaders
LEAD:
$
AMERICAN
NATIONAL
Batting average
Wade Boggs, Red Sox
.366
Tony Gwynn, Padres
.313
Home runs
Jose Canseco, Athletics
42
Darryl Strawberry, Mets
39
Runs batted in
Jose Canseco, Athletics
124
Will Clark, Giants
109
Stolen bases
Rickey Henderson, Yankees
93
Vince Coleman, Cardinals
81
Earned run average
Allan Anderson, Twins
2.45
Joe Magrane, Cardinals
2.18
Victories
Frank Viola, Twins
24
Orel Hershiser, Dodgers
23
Danny Jackson, Reds
23
Saves
Dennis Eckersley, Athletics
45
John Franco, Reds
39
Strikeouts $


Medal Winners of the 1988 Seoul Olympics
LEAD:  Archery  MEN  Individual  Jay Barrs, United States  Park Sung Soo, South Korea  Vladimir Echeev, Soviet Union  Team  South Korea  United States  Britain  WOMEN  Individulal  Kim Soo Nyung, South Korea  Wang He Kyung, South Korea  Yun Young Sook, South Korea


U.S. Investor in Congo Defies Trend in Africa
LEAD: Across black Africa, American investment is declining.
But at a eucalyptus plantation here, Kim A. Barkan is going against the trend with a fully American-equipped factory due to start production in November.


Who Participates In What, and Where
LEAD: THE National Sporting Goods Association has released its Sports Participation Index, a state-by-state analysis of participation in 33 sports, from aerobics to water-skiing.
Not only does the survey show the top five participant sports in each state for 1987, it also shows how participation levels in each of the 33 sports stack up in the 11 most populated states.


Soviet Bank For Projects
LEAD: A new Soviet bank has been created to finance high-risk scientific and engineering projects, the newspaper Pravda said last week.


HONORS THE 7 LOST
LEAD: In a solemn tribute televised from orbit, the astronauts aboard the space shuttle Discovery paid homage today to the crew of the ill-fated Challenger, saying, ''We have resumed the journey that we promised to continue for you.''


Scherer Studies Its Options
LEAD: The R. P. Scherer Corporation will consider selling the company, a course of action that had been advocated by dissident shareholders during a bitter dispute with management.
In a statement issued late


15-Year-Old Boy Is Indicted As Adult in Synagogue Fire
LEAD: A 15-year-old boy who was arrested in the arson of a Brooklyn synagogue in which five Torah scrolls were destroyed has been indicted by a grand jury and will be tried as an adult in State Supreme Court, instead of Family Court where the possible punishment is less severe.


Myerson Trial's Opening Statements to Start
LEAD: The Federal judge in the Bess Myerson case held a closed conference yesterday with the prosecutors and defense lawyers, then announced that the trial's opening statements would begin on schedule this morning.


Celcor Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Celcor Inc
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,504,000
706,000
Net loss
b1,221,000
b3,499,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $1,478,000 for the latest year and $638,000 for the year-earlier period.


U.S. Accuses 4 Of High Profits In Fake Dali Art
LEAD: Four people were charged yesterday with operating a Manhattan gallery that sold more than 1,000 fake Salvador Dali lithographs for $3.4 million.


Bergen Brunswig Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bergen Brunswig Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
898,970,000
783,735,000
Net inc
7,715,000
c3,820,000
Share earns
.42
.21
Yr rev
3,486,368,000
3,128,981,000
Net inc
b34,730,000
c15,887,000
Share earns
1.89
.87


Bicycle Polo Pedals Toward Centennial
LEAD: To the Editor:


Louis Fried, Executive And Philanthropist, 94
LEAD: Louis Fried, a former president of the National Shoe Stores chain and a philanthropist, died of heart failure yesterday at his home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 94 years old.


Gorbachev Changes Leaders in Russian Republic
LEAD: The leadership of the Russian Republic, the largest of the 15 principal components of the Soviet Union, was shuffled today at the direction of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader.


Personal Computer Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Personal Computer Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,789,900
1,119,700
Net loss
534,600
495,700
Yr rev
10,862,800
5,000,200
Net loss
386,600
818,800


McDonnell Douglas Wins Swiss Contract
LEAD: Switzerland's military chief today awarded the McDonnell Douglas Corporation a $1.8 billion contract to build 34 F/A-18 Hornets for the Swiss armed forces, whose fleet consists of 30-year-old French-made Mirage fighters.


Literacy Project in Kentucky Wins $100,000 Prize
LEAD: To hear Sharon Darling and Jeanne Heberle tell it, their $100,000 prize-winning literacy project was born on the highway between Louisville and Frankfort, Ky.


N.H.L. Preview; Devils Have No Time to Rest on Laurels
LEAD: The Devils transformed their image from that of losers to winners last season by making the playoffs for the first time and falling only a game short of reaching the Stanley Cup finals.


Congressman Asks For an Indictment To Defend Himself
LEAD: A Georgia Congressman demanded on the House floor today that he be indicted immediately so he could answer allegations of his possible connection with a money-laundering scheme.


ICN Biomedicals Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ICN Biomedicals Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
13,036,000
10,643,000
Net inc
b1,491,000
c936,000
Share earns
.17
.11
9mo sales
37,580,000
30,552,000
Net inc
b3,464,000
c2,575,000
Share earns
.39
.29


Soviet Troops Filling In For Armenian Strikers
LEAD: Uniformed troops of the Soviet Interior Ministry have begun to substitute for the striking civilian workforce of a disputed southern territory that has been the focus of more than seven months of volatile confrontations, the press agency Tass reported tonight.


New Drug Law: The Senate's Duty; Trashing the Constitution Won't Help
LEAD: The House drug bill would weaken the exclusionary rule, which bars the use of illegally seized evidence in criminal trials.
It is up to the Senate to defend the Constitution.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Plan Helps Risky Film To Succeed
LEAD: OVER the weekend, Thomas Pollock, chairman of the MCA Motion Picture Group, received some good news.
The new release of MCA's Universal Pictures studio, ''Gorillas in the Mist,'' which was in its second week, was doing very well.


Charles R. Jonas, Former House Member, 83
LEAD: Charles Raper Jonas, a North Carolina Republican who served in the House of Representatives from 1952 to 1972, died of congestive heart failure Friday at his home in Lincolnton, Md.
He was 83 years old.
Mr.
Jonas, a member of the House Appropriations Committee, was active in efforts to curb growth in government and to achieve a balanced Federal budget.


Random House Reorganizes And Picks Crown Executive
LEAD: Bruce Harris, formerly the director of publishing of the Crown Publishing Group, was appointed yesterday to the new and highly visible position of director of publishing for the Random House trade group.


Books of The Times; Barbara Tuchman's Telling of a Nation's Birth
LEAD:  The First Salute  By Barbara W. Tuchman  347 pages.
Illustrated.
Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95.


Corrections
LEAD: The Advertising column in Business Day on Sept. 19 misidentified a company that creates advertising inserts for newspapers.
It is Valassis Direct Response of New York City.


GULF PEACE TALKS ADVANCING SLOWLY
LEAD: The Foreign Ministers of Iran and Iraq are making slow progress in talks here on a permanent peace settlement, diplomats and United Nations officials said today.


Women Need to Know Risks of Hysterectomy
LEAD: To the Editor:


My Life With Andrei
LEAD: This morning I woke up with a deep sense of nostalgia.
I was stunned when I suddenly realized who I was being nostalgic about.
Andrei Gromyko!
Mr.
Gromyko and I go back a long time together, although I wonder sometimes if he knows a thing about it.
But oh, what we went through together, the walkouts from the U.N.


Chemical Week Purchased
LEAD: A British publisher of commodity newsletters and several American investors have purchased Chemical Week magazine; a related publication, Industrial Chemist, and two affiliated press services, it was announced yesterday.


Film Festival; '36 Fillette,' a Story Of Hunger for Wisdom
LEAD: Films about the sexual initiation of adolescent girls have a way of becoming almost as coy as their heroines.
Certainly that's the case with Catherine Breillat's ''36 Fillette,'' a film that devotes inordinate attention to stop-and-go sexual maneuvers and slow, heavy breathing.
These and other related details are sure to make ''36


Campaign Trail; Yankee Ingenuity, Campaign '88 Style
LEAD: There was Vice President Bush (on a nonpolitical trip, of course) welcoming the crew of the space shuttle Discovery after it landed here yesterday.


Weakness Shown by Dollar; Drop Tied to Plunge for Oil
LEAD: The dollar weakened yesterday as oil prices plunged.


THE PLAYOFFS: Sports of The Times; On the Day Before the Dodgers, Butterflies for Jefferies
LEAD: ''YOU nervous, Doc?''


Mormon Sees Growth of Evil
LEAD: The president of the Mormon Church, Ezra Taft Benson, said Sunday that he believes evil forces are growing in influence worldwide, but that the forces of good ultimately will prevail.
In remarks at the concluding session of the 158th semiannual general conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Mr.


A Giant Glass Weed Has Sprung Up in Queens
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Television; The Day The Earth Moved
LEAD: As a source of relatively cheap programming, the independent documentary is becoming ever more prominent on the schedule of the financially strapped public-television system.
The range is considerable, with programs going from sometimes politically ''sensitive'' subjects on ''Nonfiction Television'' to the contemporary arts on ''Alive From Off Center.


Dr Pepper/7-Up Financing To Pay Off Prudential Loan
LEAD: The Dr Pepper/Seven-Up Companies are offering $422.3 million of notes and common stock purchase warrants through underwriters led by Prudential-Bache Capital Funding.


Analyst Comments Cut Digital Shares
LEAD: Shares of the Digital Equipment Corporation declined $1 yesterday after analysts at two Wall Street investment firms reduced their earnings estimates for the nation's No. 2 maker of minicomputers.
Digital closed down $1, at $92.875, on the New York Stock Exchange, after trading as low as $91.625.


Chiron Research Unit
LEAD: The Chiron Corporation, a biotechnology company based in Emeryville, Calif., said today that it had formed an affiliated company, Mimesys Inc., to research and develop the next generation of biotech drugs.
The unit will be involved with an expanded joint development agreement with Johnson &amp; Johnson and the Warner-Lambert Company.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Broadcast Exhibit
LEAD: The Museum of Broadcasting has decided to spotlight Young &amp; Rubicam in its first major retrospective on the advertising industry.
The three-month exhibit, opening Friday, will include more than 500 radio and TV spots created by the agency over the last 60 years.
Among the museum pieces will be ads from the early days of radio featuring Burns and Allen for Grape-Nuts cereal and Jack Benny for Jell-O gelatin; the most contemporary ones will include Bill Cosby as spokesman for Jell-O and ''Peanuts'' cartoon characters promoting Metropolitan Life.


Chess
LEAD: Stuart Rachels, an 18-year-old national master from Birmingham, Ala., has won the 1988 United States Junior Invitational Championship, held at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst from July 26 to Aug. 4.


All-State Properties Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* All-State Properties Inc
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,763,658
1,448,495
Net inc
1,773,584
473,118
Share earns
.56
.15


Review/Theater; Recalling the Kosher Salt of the Earth
LEAD: ''The Grandma Plays'' is a kitchen-sink comedy that provides no sustenance either for its actresses or for the audience.
Ostensibly the chronicle of pivotal moments in the life of a Brooklyn woman named Pearl Berman, the Todd Graff play is instead a trio of flimsy character sketches.


Suffolk Lawyer Says Lilco Officials Lied To Get Rise in Rates
LEAD: The Long Island Lighting Company gave out misleading information to obtain rate increases it did not deserve, a lawyer for Suffolk County asserted yesterday on the opening day of a civil trial against the utility.


Card Test at Sears
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company plans to test acceptance of Mastercard, Visa and American Express credit cards at some of its stores in addition to its Sears and Discover cards.
The tests will involve 12 department stores and 6 paint and hardware stores.
Except for two earlier tests in 1979 and 1980, Sears has not accepted either of the major bank cards or the American Express card.


Taiwan's U.S. Purchases
LEAD: Taiwan will buy $532 million worth of American wheat, cotton and industrial goods this month, the Taipei Government said today.
It will buy 480,000 metric tons of wheat, worth $98.8 million, and 200,000 bales of cotton, worth $44 million.


Talk With Piniella Put Off by Yankees
LEAD: Lou Piniella, who expected to learn of his dismissal or his rehiring as Yankee manager today in Florida, instead was told by a club official yesterday that the meeting had been postponed indefinitely by George Steinbrenner, the team's principal owner.


Autoclave Engineers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autoclave Engineers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,727,000
13,757,000
Net inc
b1,186,000
92,000
Share earns
.30
.02
Shares outst
3,950,197
3,957,279
b-Includes a gain from the sale of real estate of $554,000.


Campaign Trail; Stand-in for Quayle Discusses His Role
LEAD: The phone rings. ''This is Dennis Eckart, also known as Dan Quayle,'' Dennis Eckart tells a reporter, chortling.


N.A.S.D. Agrees on Circuit Breakers
LEAD: In a move that clears the way for the adoption of coordinated halts in trading when markets are volatile, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday that it would agree to cooperate with a plan proposed by the New York Stock Exchange and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Intron, a Schering Corp. brand of interferon alfa-2b to treat hairy cell leukemia and venereal warts, to Robert A. Becker, a health-care member of the WCRS Group.


Eurotunnel Cost Revision
LEAD: Eurotunnel, the consortium set up to build a 31-mile rail tunnel linking Britain and France, said today that the project would cost about $500 million more than previously forecast but that its May 1993 completion date remained unchanged.


Botha Promises to Press Initiative For Southern Africa Cooperation
LEAD: President P. W. Botha tonight pledged South Africa's active support for an initiative to bring together the leaders of southern Africa's black-ruled countries.


Saudis Agree to Observe Pact On Spread of Nuclear Arms
LEAD: The Saudi Foreign Minister declared today that his country would adhere to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.


Finance Dept. Aide Quits Amid Reports On Tax Reductions
LEAD: A deputy finance commissioner, whose job included making judgments on tax assessments, has resigned, city officials said yesterday.


TDA Industries Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TDA Industries Inc
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
81,248,375
72,652,601
Net inc
b17,795
b129,555
Share earns
.02
.14
b-After losses on disposal from discontinued operations of $8,000 for the latest year and $136,006 for 1987.


Fairchild Attracts Carlyle's Interest
LEAD: A unit of the Carlyle Group L.P. has purchased almost 10 percent of Fairchild Industries' common stock for about $16.8 million, according to documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The Carlyle Group, a private merchant banking and investment firm based in Washington, stated in the filing that it was exploring the possibility of acquiring all of the outstanding common stock of


Tec Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tec Inc (AMEX)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,928,000
9,760,000
Net loss
1,256,000
1,173,000


Illinois Man Arrested Twice In a Mistaken Identity Case
LEAD: A school bus driver who was mistakenly jailed twice and accused of being a Navy deserter may be at the end of his military troubles, after the authorities caught the man they believe used his identity to enlist and then disappear.


California Educators Assert Lottery Has Failed to Pay Off for the Schools
LEAD: The California lottery has created many big winners, but the public school system has yet to hit the jackpot.


Compuflight Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compuflight Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
341,939
386,005
Net inc
43,102
33,817
9mo rev
1,044,559
1,055,413
Net inc
75,219
45,613


Ethnic Strife Prompts 2 to Quit Yugoslav Politburo
LEAD: The shock waves of ethnic conflict between Serbs and Albanians in southern Yugoslavia reached the top of the Communist leadership last week when two Politburo members resigned.


Travel-Fraud Warnings Given
LEAD: Consumers in New York State receive an average of three postal cards per week for fraudulent travel schemes, the executive director of the state's Consumer Protection Board said yesterday.


A Family is Disappointed
LEAD: The release today of Mithileshwar Singh in Lebanon represented dashed hopes for the family of another hostage, Alann Steen.
They had waited listening to television and radio in their homes in Santa Cruz, south of here, as early reports indicated that Mr.
Steen was the one to be freed.


Banks Catch Mets Fever
LEAD: On the eve of the National League playoffs, Mets fever has spread to the financial industry.
Yesterday the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation announced a Mets-linked Mastercard.
Besides getting a credit card that sports the Mets' logotype, card holders will be eligible for sweepstakes prizes that include a trip to the Mets' spring training and the use of a Shea Stadium box.


Careers; Refreshing Literature For M.B.A.'s
LEAD: HUMANITIES courses have not played a large role until recently in master of business administration programs.


Prelate Attacks Condom Ads
LEAD: Archbishop John F. Whealon today criticized a state advertising campaign that encourages sexually active adults to use condoms in an effort to prevent AIDS.


Students Protest I.R.S. Closing of Russian-English High School


Conversion Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conversion Industries
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,838,317
78,026
Net inc
2,270,000
b515,388
Share earns
.33
-
9mo rev
4,810,370
343,227
Net inc
2,440,258
b1,915,662
Share earns
.35
-
b-Net loss


Campaign Trail; No Time for a Spin After No. 2 Debate
LEAD: All those Highly Informed television reporters are torn with grief.
All those eager campaign analysts, all those expert columnists covering the political campaigns, all those political consultants who appear with Bryant and Ted and Peter and Tom - all are deeply distressed.


Supreme Court Roundup; Restrictions on Religious Displays to Be Weighed
LEAD: The Supreme Court today added several important church-state cases to the docket for its new term, agreeing to revisit the sensitive question of what limits the Constitution places on the official observance of religious holidays.


Inco to Make Special Payout
LEAD: Inco Ltd., the world's biggest nickel producer, today announced a huge recapitalization under which it will pay out $1 billion to stockholders as a special dividend before the end of the year.


Review/Art; Medieval Illuminated Manuscripts In Exhibition at Getty Museum
LEAD: It would still be a little while before Gutenberg's printing press stole literary primacy from illuminated manuscripts, but during the 15th and 16th centuries in cities like Ghent and Bruges, artists of the first rank continued to lavish attention on hand-bound books.
Under commission from such culturally enlightened nobles as the Burgundian duke Philip the Good, his son Charles the Bold and Emperor Rudolf II of Vienna, a school of Flemish illumination flourished.


Sports People; Knicks Get Assistant
LEAD: Ralph Willard, a former basketball player at Holy Cross, was named yesterday as an assistant to Rick Pitino, the Knicks' coach.
Willard will specialize in coordinating videotape studies, and aid in scouting (AP)


Review/Music; Boston Trio, With Rarities
LEAD: The violinist Daniel Stepner, the gambist Laura Jeppesen and the harpsichordist John Gibbons perform individually with several American and European period instrument bands, and are among the most highly regarded of this country's early music players.
Hearing them together as the Boston Museum Trio is always a treat, not only because of the caliber of their playing, but also because they frequently turn up with a few rarely heard gems.


Blowup in the Family
LEAD: Edward Teller, the 80-year-old physicist, disclosed that he was ''angry'' at the hydrogen bomb of which he is widely renowned as ''the father.'' Speaking yesterday at the American Enterprise Institute, Mr.
Teller said: ''All these years I never received a Father's Day card.''


House Passes Bill Allowing Challenges to V.A.
LEAD: The House of Representatives today unanimously approved a bill giving veterans who dispute decisions on benefits the limited right to challenge the agency in a special appeals court, with the assistance of lawyers.


Knight-Ridder Plans to Sell 8 TV Stations to Cut Debt
LEAD: In a move to reduce its debt of nearly $1 billion and to focus on its cable television and electronic information services, Knight-Ridder Inc. announced yesterday that it would sell its eight network-affiliated television stations.


Review/Pop; Prince Mixes Erotic and Religious Messages
LEAD: Prince, who played a sold-out concert at Madison Square Garden on Sunday night, projects one of the most confusing, enigmatic images in pop music, mixing erotic love with religion, irony and humor with seriousness.
It is these contradictions that separate him from straightforward, bland mainstream performers and ultimately make him more interesting than they are.


Proxmire Makes 11th-Hour Effort for a Bank Bill
LEAD: In a last-ditch effort to save legislation that would overhaul the nation's banking laws, Senator William Proxmire proposed a new approach today to circumvent a bitter dispute between two committee chairmen in the House.


Don't Let Union Sq. Fall Back Into Neglect
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
A.
David Jones, a senior vice president at BBDO, Detroit, has been promoted to senior management representative.


Sports People; Leyva Elevated
LEAD: As expected, Nick Leyva, a St.
Louis Cardinal coach for the last five seasons, was named yesterday as manager of the Philadelphia Phillies.
Leyva replaces Lee Elia, who was dismissed Sept. 23.


Campaign Trail; Whee! the Children Talk to Big Michael
LEAD: Governor Dukakis visited Hartford yesterday for an ''informal'' session with fourth-grade and sixth-grade students at the Alfred E. Barr Elementary School.


Rosenblatt Considers Leaving Judicial Post
LEAD: Amid widespread speculation that he was being forced out of office, New York State's Chief Administrative Judge, Albert M. Rosenblatt, said yesterday that he was considering leaving his post.


Ode to Whatshisname
LEAD: In World War II the Library of Congress awarded a poetry prize to Ezra Pound, whose Fascist sympathies were well known, and Congress reacted by barring the library from giving out any new prizes.


Gunman Wounds Child at School
LEAD: A gunman in a camouflage outfit opened fire on a third-grade gym class at a playground today, seriously wounding a girl before fleeing, the authorities said.


Infotechnology Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Infotechnology Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Assets
74,197,108
76,000,730
Per share
10.15
10.42
Shares outst
7,311,759
7,291,242
Assets represent net assets.


Construction Spending Down 0.6%
LEAD: Construction spending fell six-tenths of 1 percent in August, the Government said today.
Economists said the lackluster performance was a result of rising interest rates and previous overbuilding in many regions.


National Healthcare Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Healthcare Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
60,600,000
65,700,000
Net loss
b10,400,000
c19,500,000
Yr rev
249,900,000
250,000,000
Net loss
27,800,000
c24,800,000
b-Included a charge of about $2.4 million for losses on the disposal of facilities.


Mayor of Yonkers Attacks Council for Resistance
LEAD: Mayor Nicholas C. Wasicsko today asked the Federal judge in the Yonkers housing-desegregation case to remove the City Council from the process of selecting sites for low-income housing.


Supreme Court Refuses To Lift Execution Stay
LEAD: The United States Supreme Court refused today to lift a Federal appeals court order blocking the execution of a convicted murderer who wanted all appeals dropped.


THE PLAYOFFS: Mets Confident Going Into Playoff With Dodgers; Lasorda Wipes Slate Clean On Offense
LEAD: When Tommy Lasorda was asked what the Dodgers would have to do to beat the Mets, he answered with the typically trite reply of a baseball manager. ''Score more runs,'' the Los Angeles manager said.


Business Cards Tomorrow reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Business Cards Tomorrow (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,005,000
1,591,000
Net inc
153,000
57,000
Share earns
.02
.01
6mo rev
3,959,000
3,182,000
Net inc
346,000
73,000
Share earns
.05
.01


Women Need to Know Risks of Hysterectomy; Smoking in Pregnancy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hamengku Buwono IX, 78, Indonesia Sultan
LEAD: Sultan Dorodjatun Hamengku Buwono IX, who held several high Government posts in Indonesia, including the vice presidency, after independence from the Netherlands after World War II, died at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington on Sunday.
He was 78 years old and lived in Jogjakarta, Indonesia.


Estonia Ferment: Soviet Role Model or Exception?
LEAD: With the christening on Sunday of an independent movement for political and economic autonomy, the republic of Estonia became the mecca for aspiring democrats throughout the Soviet Union.
From the neighboring Baltic republics of Latvia and Lithuania, from the more distant republics of Armenia, Byelorussia, the Ukraine, Moldavia and Kazakhstan, from the Russian cities of Moscow, Leningrad and Kuibyshev, leaders of like-minded movements sat here in the Lenin Palace of Culture and applauded as 3,000 delegates of the Popular Front of Estonia formally launched their campaign.


Sonic Boom Above, Crowd's Roar Below
LEAD: EDWARDS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif., Oct. 3 - Dazzled by shock waves that sent ripples across the clouds, about 430,000 people whooped, whistled and wept today as they welcomed the space shuttle Discovery on a dry lakebed here in the California desert.


Kinnock Thwarts New Effort By British Labor Party's Left
LEAD: The leader of Britain's opposition Labor Party, Neil Kinnock, who earlier crushed a left-wing attempt to unseat him, today defeated an attempt to block a policy review that opens the way to more cooperation with private enterprise.
Mr.
Kinnock began the party's annual conference here Sunday night by putting down a challenge for the leadership by the longtime hero of the Labor left, Tony


Candidates and Media At Odds Over Message
LEAD: While the attention of most Americans was focused Thursday on the space shuttle Discovery's climb into orbit, two other infrequent events went almost unnoticed: Both Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis held news conferences.


Canada Southern Petroleum Ltd reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canada Southern Petroleum Ltd
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,282,916
2,071,919
Net loss
b25,333
c143,853
Share earns
-
.02
b-After a tax credit of $104,000.
c-Net income and includes tax credits of $143,000.


Texas Law Seems Mixed Blessing to Bentsen
LEAD: The special state law written to protect Senator Lyndon B. Johnson in 1960 does not seem to be doing Senator Lloyd Bentsen much good in his campaign for the Vice Presidency in 1988.


Libya and Chad Restore Ties and Vow to Settle Dispute Peacefully
LEAD: Libya and Chad announced today that they would restore diplomatic ties and seek a peaceful settlement of a 15-year conflict over a strip of uranium-rich territory annexed by Libya in 1973.


Ramon Durano Dies; Marcos Backer Was 82
LEAD: Ramon Durano, a former congressman, business leader and one of the country's most colorful politicians, died today of cancer, his family said.
He was 82 years old.
Mr.
Durano virtually owned Danao, a city of 60,000 people north of Cebu.
Many Danao residents were born in Mr.
Durano's hospital, worked in his factories, retired to his home for the elderly, and were buried in his cemetery.


Bankers Trust Names Chief Financial Officer
LEAD: The Bankers Trust New York Corporation has established a chief financial officer's post and reached into the securities industry to fill it, naming William C. Jennings from Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.


National League Pennant Playoff
LEAD: Can the Dodgers do what they have not been able to do all season: score against Mets' pitchers?
All about who the players are, what their numbers are and what might happen.
Articles begin on page B9. &gt;


CSX Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSX Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,894,000,000
1,758,000,000
Net inc
b120,000,000
c104,000,000
Share earns
.75
.67
9mo net inc
b25,000,000
c9,000,000
Share earns
.11
.06
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $6,000,000 for the quarter and $9,000,000 for the 9 months, and the 9 months also included a $180,000,000 gain on the sale of discontinued operations.


Comprehensive Care Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comprehensive Care Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
58,061,000
50,152,000
Net inc
1,608,000
2,507,000
Share earns
.18
.23
Shares outst
11,972,000
12,879,000
The company said its earnings declined about $1 million in the latest first quarter because of decreased earnings in its contract operations.


Franz Josef Strauss Is Dead at 73; Conservative Led Bavarian State
LEAD: Franz Josef Strauss, the butcher's son who helped shape the West German state and exercised a caustic and often contentious influence over its politics from his stronghold in Bavaria, died today.
He was 73 years old.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


WORKERS IN BURMA RETURNING TO JOBS
LEAD: Tens of thousands of Burmese Government workers returned to work today, heeding an ultimatum by the Burmese military to end weeks of strikes in support of political change.


School Bombing 30 Years Ago Helped Town Heal Wounds
LEAD: Thirty years ago, Pat Johnson recalls, the windows rattled, rousing her from sleep.
When she and her family ventured out into the cool fog they saw a fire a mile away downtown.


Thompson Medical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thompson Medical Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
42,444,700
32,864,961
Net inc
2,411,118
1,686,768
Share earns
.32
.22
Shares outst
7,446,614
7,557,314
9mo sales
132,843,815
110,477,845
Net inc
11,411,660
8,586,785
Share earns
1.53
1.04
Shares outst
7,446,614
8,248,543


Margerie Lowry, 83, Actress and a Writer
LEAD: Margerie Bonner Lowry, an actress and a writer, and the widow of the writer Malcolm Lowry, died in a Los Angeles nursing home last Wednesday.
She was 83 years old.


J. Ralph Corbett, Manufacturer, 91
LEAD: J. Ralph Corbett, founder the NuTone Company, a maker of home door chimes, died today at a retirement community.
He was 91 years old.


Sir Alec Issigonis, 81; Designer of Minicar And Morris Minor
LEAD: Sir Alec Issigonis, who designed the popular, boxy ''Mini'' cars and the practically invincible Morris Minor, died Sunday at his home in Birmingham.
He was 81 years old and had suffered from Parkinson's disease.


Factories' Orders Show A 3.1% Rise
LEAD: Orders for manufactured goods surged 3.1 percent in August, the Government said today, indicating that the economy is continuing to grow at a robust pace.


Sikes Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sikes Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
33,625,000
30,752,000
Net inc
2,362,000
2,272,000
Share earns
.26
.25
6mo sales
66,112,000
59,606,000
Net inc
4,469,000
4,381,000
Share earns
.50
.49


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Addendum
LEAD: * Kobs &amp; Draft Advertising has moved its offices to 633 Third Avenue.


New Egg-Implanting Technique Avoids Surgery
LEAD: DOCTORS in Australia have developed a new technique for implanting fertilized eggs in women's fallopian tubes.
They hope the technique will improve the success rate of in vitro fertilization, without surgery.


F.T.C. to Oppose McKesson's Bid
LEAD: The McKesson Corporation, the nation's largest wholesaler of drugs and toiletries, said the Federal Trade Commission would seek a court order blocking McKesson from buying the Alco Health Services Corporation, another large drug wholesaler.
The F.T.C. also voted to try to stop McKesson's acquisition of the Northwestern Drug Company, based in Auburn, Wash.


DNA Pioneer to Tackle Biggest Gene Project Ever
LEAD: DR.
James D. Watson, who is about to assume a key role in the largest biological research project ever contemplated, sees that effort as the redemption of a longstanding bargain between scientists and other citizens.


Regan Wary On the Market
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, the former Secretary of the Treasury, said yesterday that the factors that caused the stock market collapse last Oct. 19 were still present and had not been dealt with effectively by policy makers.


American Nursery Products reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Nursery Products
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,332,000
2,837,000
Net loss
935,000
612,000


Remy Starts Bid for Piper
LEAD: The cognac maker Remy Martin began a bid for a controlling stake in Piper-Heidsieck, one of the last family-owned French champagne concerns.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
8.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.10
8.54
7.48
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.24
7.26
6.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.44
7.46
6.90
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.74
8.76
9.34
30-YR.


City of Tokyo Sets U.S. Offer
LEAD: The City of Tokyo is offering in the United States debt market $175 million of 9 1/4 percent guaranteed bonds due in 1998 at a price of 99 7/8 to yield 9.269 percent through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Bush on Trial, Too
LEAD: When the two Vice-Presidential candidates take on each other in televised debate tomorrow, George Bush will be as much on trial as either of them.


NEW HAITIAN CHIEF SEEMS ENTRENCHED
LEAD: After a tense weekend, Haiti was quiet today, and Lieut.
Gen.
Prosper Avril, the new President, appeared in control of all major units in the military.


A Composer's Son Remembers Life With Father, Through Fiction
LEAD: In ''Waiting Weeping,'' the wrenching final story of Jonathan Schwartz's new book, ''The Man Who Knew Cary Grant,'' Norman Savitt, an ailing songwriter, and his journalist son, Jesse, attend the father's 84th birthday party at Sardi's.
For an exhilarating moment, Norman Savitt seems to shed 30 years as he performs many of the pop standards he has written, accompanying himself on an upright piano and singing in a voice reminiscent of Fred


Fashion: By Design; The Button as Focal Point
LEAD: A button's function is to fasten things.
This season, however, buttons are the stuff of fashionable decoration as well.


U.S. Gain in Computer Speed Race
LEAD: After several years of trailing Japan, the United States may be pulling ahead again in the supercomputer speed race.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Siddall Gets Account
LEAD: Kettler &amp; Scott, a diversified building and land development company in Northern Virginia, has called on Siddall, Matus &amp; Coughter of Richmond as its agency.
The budget comes to nearly $5 million.
The agency, noted for its real estate and land development marketing, plans to develop marketing programs for its client's latest developments: Sully Station, Virginia Run, Wellington and Cascades.


Mysterious Particles May Upset Theories on Radiation From Space
LEAD: RADIATION that seems to violate current theories about the energy and matter in space are striking the earth, scientists from several research installations have concluded.


For Film Trivia Buffs
LEAD: WHAT was Gower Gulch? Where did Gable and


Community Psychiatric Ceners Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Psychiatric Ceners Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
84,785,000
71,145,000
Net inc
17,319,000
15,457,000
Share earns
.38
.34
9mo rev
255,660,000
212,399,000
Net inc
53,886,000
46,747,000
Share earns
1.17
1.03


Cuomo Says Bond Issue Is Needed to Avoid Tax Increase


Zoo Mistreatment Charged As Elephant Attacks Doctor
LEAD: A zoo advocacy group is calling for an investigation into the cause of puncture wounds on the head and face of an elephant that injured a veterinarian who was trying to treat the wounds.


Lothar Wolff, Film Producer, Is Dead at 79
LEAD: Lothar Wolff, a film producer, died of prostate cancer Sunday at Rosary Hill Home in Hawthorne, N.Y.
He was 79 years old and lived in New York City and Sharon, Conn.


Paine Webber Sees Gain On Sale of Car-Rental Unit
LEAD: The Paine Webber Group Inc. said yesterday that it expects to report a third-quarter pretax gain of $46 million, reflecting the sale of its stake in National Car Rental System Inc. to the Fidelco Capital Group of Millburn, N.J.


Court to Weigh Validity Of State Antitrust Laws
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether states can offer greater protection than Federal antitrust law provides to purchasers who may have been indirectly injured as the result of a price-fixing conspiracy among manufacturers.


Four Are Accused Of Killing Producer In Soured Film Deal
LEAD: Four people have been charged with murder in the slaying five years ago of Roy Radin, the New York producer who the authorities say was involved in a soured deal to finance the movie ''The Cotton Club.''


Shaklee Holds 23% Of Garden Supplier
LEAD: The Shaklee Corporation bought a 23 percent stake in Smith &amp; Hawken, a privately held company that sells deluxe home gardening supplies through the mail.
The companies said they would cooperate on marketing their product lines to their combined customer base.
Financial terms were not announced.


Drug Emporium Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Drug Emporium Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
98,771,000
75,416,000
Net inc
1,835,000
1,070,000
Share earns
.31
.21
Shares outst
6,006,269
5,005,445
6mo sales
193,802,000
146,431,000
Net inc
3,159,000
1,513,000
Share earns
.57
.30
Shares outst
5,577,695
4,991,557


Los Angeles Journal; Hope Wins When the Homeless Run
LEAD: Ernie Garcia was hot, sweaty and tired after a five-kilometer training run on Saturday.
But his grin seemed wider than the running track and his happiness had little to do with the fact that he had finished the tree-lined course far ahead of his friends.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-14, D29  A hostage in Lebanon was released after more than 20 months of captivity, the State Department confirmed.
The hostage is Mithileshwar Singh, a citizen of India and a resident of the United States.
Page A1


Andersen Beats Clock and Cowboys
LEAD: Morten Andersen kicked a 49-yard field goal as time ran out tonight to give New Orleans a 20-17 victory over Dallas and end a 17-year drought for the Saints against the Cowboys.


The Talk of Rye; A 'Village' That Has History, Charm, Money and Pressures
LEAD: On the historic Boston Post Road here is a piece of real estate that seems to embody all the qualities of this six-square-mile city: old, verdant, valuable and threatened.


Sensormatic Electronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sensormatic Electronics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
34,079,000
26,754,000
Net inc
3,900,000
3,404,000
Share earns
.14
.12


FPA Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FPA Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
24,808,000
44,054,000
Net loss
b7,475,000
c978,000
Yr rev
100,567,000
105,919,000
Net loss
b6,274,000
c3,985,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $4,020,000 and $5,526,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and the year also included a gain of $5,700,000 from an accounting change.


Women Voters' League Drops Backing of Debate
LEAD: The League of Women Voters today withdrew its sponsorship of next week's debate between Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, but the Presidential nominees' campaigns reached an agreement that would allow the debate to proceed in Los Angeles as scheduled.


2 Inchcape Acquisitions
LEAD: The international trading group Inchcape P.L.C. said today that it had bought two United States testing and inspection companies for a total of $:12.5 million ($21.2 million).
The London-based multi-industry group said it had acquired ETL Testing Laboratories Inc., which tests electrical consumer goods and components, and PKB Scania Companies, a commodity inspection concern.


Nippon Mining Unit Appoints a Chairman
LEAD: Gould Inc., which was recently acquired by the Nippon Mining Company, announced yesterday that it had named C. David Ferguson chairman and chief executive.


We Can Have an Ethics Bill and the Constitution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hershiser Steals Center of Stage
LEAD: Your attention, please.
The role of Met nemesis in the National League Championship Series, originated by Mike Scott in 1986, will be played this year by Orel Hershiser.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It's an absolute, stunning success.''  - Rear Adm.
Richard H. Truly, head of the shuttle program.  [ A1:6. ]


Chile Waits, In Silence, For a Verdict
LEAD: THERE'S a kind of un-election campaign going on in Chile that may become the textbook case of how to get a dictator to go quietly.


Kiley Stresses Chance To Push Transit Goals
LEAD: With the end of the United States Government's 30-year Interstate highway construction program looming in 1991 and the growing problems of traffic congestion and air quality in cities around the country, advocates for mass transit have been presented with a ''convergence'' of opportunities to influence new national transportation policy into the next century, the head of the nation's largest transit system said today.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ford Account To Thompson
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company has called on J. Walter Thompson Worldwide to take on additional advertising for New Zealand and Australia.
The budget is an estimated $25 million.


Baby's Sex and Divorce
LEAD: Couples who have sons are more likely to stay married than couples who have daughters, according to a study by sociologists at the University of Pennsylvania.
While, in general, couples who have children are less likely to divorce than are those who do not, having a son reduces the risk of divorce, on average, 9 percent more than does having a daughter.


Thousands Seek Haven After Flooding in India
LEAD: As waters receded steadily today in India's northwest, thousands of people fled flood-damaged villages for shelter in relief camps, said an official in Punjab, the worst hit of four Indian states.


On Horse Racing; Staging a Pro Tour For Thoroughbreds
LEAD: Golf, tennis and bowling all have their professional tours, long strings of major events that wind across the country and through the calendar.
Fans keep close count of the leaders in tour victories, an imperfect but useful way to measure consistency and achievement.


Stake in USG Cut
LEAD: Desert Partners L.P., the Midland, Tex., investment partnership, has lowered its stake in the USG Corporation to 5.7 percent, from 9.4 percent, it said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing.
Desert Partners, which earlier this year made a bid for control of the wallboard manufacturer based in Chicago, sold two million common shares on Friday for $7.50 each.


How Mets and Dodgers Stack Up
LEAD:  Mets  Catchers (Average, home runs, runs batted in)  8 Gary Carter (.242, 11, 46)  The Kid, at 34, endured some dry spells in his 14th season, even after punishing himself into hard shape last winter.
He even went three months and 225 times at bat before he hit the 300th home run of his career.


Johnson May Give Up His Track Career
LEAD: Ben Johnson, denying that he knowingly used steroids, said that he planned to get even with those responsible for his disqualification as the Olympic 100-meter champion.


Sports People; New Friend
LEAD: Teresa Weatherspoon of Pineland, Tex., who won a gold medal with the United States women's basketball team at the Olympic Games, brought plenty of souvenirs with her on her return from Seoul last Friday.
But she left a couple of them with a new fan and friend she made at the Seattle-Tacoma International


Military Contractor Has Westland Link
LEAD: A British manufacturer of armored military vehicles bought a 22.02 percent stake in Britain's Westland helicopter company for $:47.8 million, or $80.8 million in cash.
The company, GKN, bought the holding in Westland Group P.L.C. from Italy's Fiat Motor Group and Hanson P.L.C., of Britain.


Group Lifts Stake In American Hoist
LEAD: An investment group led by Frank J. A. Cilluffo has increased its stake in the American Hoist and Derrick Company to 9 percent, from 5 percent, by buying 250,000 shares on a day when its stock price dipped to $9.50 a share, the group said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the Jewish holiday of Simhath Torah, which concludes the harvest festival of Succoth, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Bolstering an Alliance
LEAD: One of the rituals of the Atlantic alliance is the official expression of gratitude to the United States for holding a protective military arm over Western Europe for four decades at the expense of European taxpayers.


Disco Gunmen Left an Arsenal Behind


Shoreham Plan Advances
LEAD: The fight over Governor Cuomo's plan to abandon the Shoreham nuclear plant moved a step closer to conclusion yesterday.
Page B1.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Tuesday about contributions to the Republican Party misstated the source of a $120,000 donation.
It was Trammell Crow, the Dallas real-estate developer, not the Trammell Crow Company.


Quneitra Journal; A Blasted Place Where a Vengeful Spirit Thrives
LEAD: Lieut.
Khaled al-Natur, a Syrian Army officer, lowered his Soviet-made binoculars and gestured beyond his country's borders.


Perot Sues G.M. Subsidiary
LEAD: Ross Perot, the Dallas computer entrepreneur, has charged his former company, Electronic Data Systems, and its parent, the General Motors Corporation, with unlawful efforts to drive his new company out of business.


North Stars Claim Leiter
LEAD: The Islander defenseman Ken Leiter was claimed by the Minnesota North Stars yesterday in the fourth round of the waiver draft, but he said that he informed Bill Torrey, the Islanders' general manager, last Wednesday that he had decided to retire.


From Goldwater, Without Soft Soap, to . . .
LEAD: Barry Goldwater seldom minced words in more than 30 years in Washington, and he is no more circumspect in retirement.


Sports People; Allison Goes Home
LEAD: The stock-car driver Bobby Allison, cleared to go home from a Birmingham, Ala., hospital today, envisions a return to racing after a long course of rehabilitation from injuries suffered in a crash June 19.


Last Chance for Voters
LEAD: New Yorkers who put off focusing on the Presidential campaign until after the end of the World Series risk a rude shock - disenfranchisement for the Nov. 8 election.
The deadline for voter registration in New York State is next week.
To protect their right to vote, unregistered New Yorkers must move quickly.


New Goal: 3d World Debt Reduction
LEAD: A consensus has developed among many countries that ways should be sought to reduce, and not simply restructure, the third world's staggering $1.2 trillion debt.


Paradyne Expects To Report a Loss
LEAD: The Paradyne Corporation, which makes data communications equipment, said it would lose money in the current quarter because it was taking $32 million in special charges, mostly for restructuring its product line.
Paradyne said it was withdrawing from producing some switching systems, some messenger display terminals and certain peripheral products, effective Nov.


Sports People; Winning Gamble
LEAD: Byron Scott took a gamble last year and it paid off.
The 27-year-old guard signed a five-year contract with the Los Angeles Lakers yesterday that is believed to be worth more than $5 million.
Before last season, Scott signed a one-year contract, hoping his bargaining power would be increased this year.


Notes and Bonds Rise Modestly
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose modestly yesterday, as lower oil prices continued to make investors and speculators wonder whether the inflation rate may be lower than previously expected.


David E. Satterfield 3d, Former House Member, 67
LEAD: David E. Satterfield 3d, a conservative Democrat who represented Virginia's Third District in the House of Representatives, died of congestive heart failure Friday at the College of Virginia Hospitals in Richmond.


Compromise Drug Plan in Senate Includes Death-Penalty Provision
LEAD: A bipartisan group of Senators today introduced the Senate's offering in the election-year war on drugs: a compromise package that includes language permitting a death penalty for convicted drug traffickers or individuals involved in drug-related killings.


Pinpointing the Pathway of Smell
LEAD: MOLECULAR biologists have begun to crack one of nature's most complicated mysteries: how humans and other animals manage to distinguish thousands of different odor molecules and interpret them as smells.


Let a Hundred Sports Bloom
LEAD: South Korea deserves Olympian honors for staging a glorious global spectacular - the first trouble-free summer Olympics since 1964.
More athletes from more countries competed in more events than ever before.
But these superlatives raise yet another question: Is the Olympics getting to be too much of a good thing?


Ransburg Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ransburg Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
59,490,000
46,740,000
Net loss
b1,961,000
d14,785,000
9mo rev
173,884,000
143,463,000
Net inc
b51,000
cd16,837,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $3,250,000 (a reserve for losses on disposals), for both periods.


Soft Defense Worries Parcells
LEAD: In the wake of an inspirational victory over the Washington Redskins on Sunday, the Giants find themselves with a 3-2 record and a 3-0 mark in the Eastern Division of the National Conference.


Tyson in Domestic Dispute
LEAD: Mike Tyson's troubles continue.


Man Held in Plot to Kill Wife
LEAD: A 54-year-old man was arrested Sunday for possession of a pipe bomb, which the police said he planned to use against his estranged wife.
The police said the man, Charles Hill, had placed an advertisement in The Irish Voice seeking a person to perform a ''confidential assignment.'' A police informant answered the ad.


High Court Move Aids Manville
LEAD: More than six years after one of the most controversial corporate bankruptcy filings ever, the United States Supreme Court yesterday cleared the way for the Manville Corporation of Denver to emerge from Chapter 11.


Executives Are Shifted at Book-of-the-Month Club
LEAD: Lawrence M. Crutcher, the president of Book-of-the-Month Club and a vice president of its corporate parent, Time Inc., will became chairman of the club at the end of the year.
He will succeed Al Silverman, who has headed the club since 1984.


Comet Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comet Enterprises Inc
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,764,376
-
Net loss
298,483
b53,105
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income  The company said the figures include the results of operations of Video Library Inc., and Video Excitement of America Inc.


Grist Mill Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grist Mill Co (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,946,000
5,998,000
Net inc
645,000
62,000
Share earns
.14
.01


Farm Workers Fault Lack of Enforcement Of Sanitation Rules
LEAD: Federal rules issued a year ago requiring minimal amenities for farm workers, including toilets and fresh drinking water, are being widely and flagrantly ignored, legal groups representing the workers say.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Agent Acquisition Co., Washington, said it had acquired Atlas Van Lines Inc. of Evansville, Ind. from Wesray Capital Corp. for about $124 million.


Supreme Court Refuses Role In New Haven Mall Dispute
LEAD: The city of New Haven lost another round today in the continuing dispute over the proposed construction of a controversial shopping mall when the Supreme Court refused to become involved in the matter.


New Olympic Drug Test Foiled Sprinter
LEAD: Ben Johnson, the Canadian sprinter who was stripped of his Olympic gold medal for taking a steroid drug, was caught by a new, extremely sensitive test never before used in the Olympics.


Church's Fried Chicken Inc reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Church's Fried Chicken Inc (NYSE)
12wks to Sept 4
1988
1987
Revenue
105,030,000
97,662,000
Net inc
460,000
3,728,000
Share earns
.01
.10
36wk rev
290,741,000
280,713,000
Net inc
2,108,000
7,687,000
Share earns
.06
.21


Audiovox Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Audiovox Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
78,766,000
76,880,000
Net inc
195,000
2,276,000
Share earns
.02
.25
9mo sales
239,525,000
198,675,000
Net inc
2,045,000
4,772,000
Share earns
.23
.63
Shares outst
9,007,242
7,578,090


Sands Regent reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sands Regent (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,588,000
7,501,000
Net inc
1,793,000
1,148,000
Share earns
.54
.35
Yr rev
30,049,000
27,369,000
Net inc
4,103,000
3,632,000
Share earns
1.24
1.10


Walton Stands By His Costly Decision
LEAD: ''Oh, my nerves,'' is what Coach Joe Walton had to say about Sunday's game.


Dukakis Seeking Extradition Of Escapee From California
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis wants a prison escapee returned to Massachusetts to serve out his murder sentence even though the man lived a model life in Los Angeles for 14 years, it was disclosed in court today.


Business and Health; New Drugs Stress The Cost Savings
LEAD: THE Ciba Pharmaceutical Company is expected to introduce a drug today that could eliminate the need for gall-bladder surgery in more than 300,000 Americans each year.
Besides arming themselves with data about the drug's medical effectiveness, many of the company's salespeople will also carry a computer program to help medical-care providers calculate how many dollars they can save by using the new drug instead of the surgery.


Government Agrees to Relaxation Of Auto Mileage Standard for '89
LEAD: Acceding to requests by the two largest American auto makers, the Department of Transportation announced today that it would lower the fuel economy requirement for 1989 cars from 27.5 miles a gallon to 26.5 miles a gallon.


Seoul Leader Says He Is Willing to Visit the North
LEAD: In another effort to defuse tensions with North Korea, President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea said today that he would be willing to travel to North Korea to meet with Kim Il Sung, the North Korean leader.


Drought-Stricken Farmers Applying for Aid
LEAD: Farmers began signing up for payments today under a $3.9 billion benefits package to aid victims of the summer drought.


BEIRUT KIDNAPPERS RELEASE A HOSTAGE AFTER 20 MONTHS
LEAD: Kidnappers in Lebanon today released an Indian citizen after more than 20 months of captivity.


Sports People; Parrish Traded
LEAD: Hiring a new manager was not the full extent of Lee Thomas's business yesterday.
He also traded Lance Parrish, a catcher who had been a vast disappointent for the last two seasons.
Parrish, 32, went to the California Angels for David Holdridge, a minor league pitcher.


About New York; From a Business Of Numbers, A Gift of Words
LEAD: The title of the piece has the ring of a high-school writing class, one of those hardy theme topics that gently float you back to the blackboard afternoons of early fall, to the composition teacher who thought ''My Summer Vacation'' was the very crucible of inspiration.


Shareholders Vote Nov. 4 On Shoreham
LEAD: The fight over Governor Cuomo's plan to abandon the Shoreham nuclear power plant moved a step closer to conclusion today as Shoreham's owner, the Long Island Lighting Company, scheduled a shareholder vote on the plan for Nov. 4.


Japanese Re-Think Their Hirohito Obsession
LEAD: In the midst of a national vigil for their ailing Emperor, Japanese are beginning to ask themselves just how much his illness should shadow their lives.


A Playoff Veteran Goes Round Again
LEAD: He calls it a new season, not simply the resumption of the long and winding campaign that finally finished last Sunday.
Don Baylor does not allow himself to connect the regular season to the playoffs, and then to the World Series, perhaps because he knows that his body - closing in on its fourth decade and struck by more than 250 errant pitches in 17 seasons - could not tolerate the notion of playing from April to


Scientists Give Wishbone New Twist
LEAD: EVERYONE knows the purpose of a bird's wishbone -two people pull it apart while each makes a wish; the one who ends up with the larger piece will see the wish come true.
But scientists have long wondered what the wishbone's role was in birds.


Raiders Suffer Serious Injuries
LEAD: The running back Marcus Allen and the tight end Todd Christensen of the Los Angeles Raiders suffered serious injuries in the game against Cincinnati on Sunday.


Residential Apartheid Arouses Anger
LEAD: To a hushed audience, the Rev.
Allan Hendrickse described in detail how his father's ''beautiful home'' had been knocked down brick by brick when their old neighborhood in Uitenhage was declared legal for whites only.


Slim Laptop Is Appealing At 4.4 Pounds
LEAD: A NEW 4.4-pound laptop was introduced yesterday by NEC Home Electronics.


A Complex Olympic Collage
LEAD: NBC took America to another part of the world as well as to the Olympics, and that was the strength and the weakness of 179 1/2 hours of coverage.


Cheyenne Software Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cheyenne Software Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
57,167,345
99,183
Net loss
2,513,206
1,435,547
Shares outst
9,111,000
7,096,000
Revenue for the latest year included the company's F.A. Computer Technologies Inc.


5.1% Kuwait Stake In Midland Bank
LEAD: The Kuwait Investment Office, the London-based investment arm of the Kuwaiti Government, said it holds a 5.1 percent stake in Midland Bank P.L.C.
In a statement filed with London's Stock Exchange, the Kuwait Investment Office, which also holds a stake of about 20 percent in the British Petroleum Company, said it had bought 1.5 million Midland shares on Friday.


Lincoln Center and Actors Reach Pact
LEAD: Lincoln Center Theater and Actors' Equity Association reached tentative agreement yesterday on a contract for Lincoln Center's staging of its season at the Lyceum Theater.


Kean Order Halts New Construction on Jersey Coast
LEAD: Governor Kean moved today to control development along New Jersey's coastline by requiring all new construction, even of a single-family house, to be approved by the State Department of Environmental Protection.


Review/Television; A Flight From the Soviet System
LEAD: Vladimir and Masha Slepak first applied for an exit visa from the Soviet Union in 1969 and were turned down on the ground that Mr.
Slepak's work as a television researcher had entrusted him with state secrets.
The only secret he had learned, Mr.
Slepak replied, was that Soviet television was far behind developments in the


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Stocks Fall Broadly as Dow Declines 7.65
LEAD: Stock prices fell broadly but moderately yesterday, extending Friday's drop as trading volume declined.


Bush Welcomes Shuttle's Crew, As an Official
LEAD: When the five astronauts dropped to Earth today, Vice President Bush was waiting for them at the bottom of the shuttle ramp.


As Chile Prepares to Vote, U.S. Envoy Is Praised
LEAD: Among the items hanging in the office of Harry G. Barnes Jr. is a newspaper cartoon that shows him knocking in vain on the doors of Chile's fortress-like presidential palace.


Fashion; A Many-Splendored Spring: Dressing for Every Mood
LEAD: Italian designers obviously prefer to be known as benevolent fashion leaders, not despots.
So in the spring and summer showings that began on Sunday, there is almost an embarrassment of riches: clothes for women to wear to work and to play, in cities and at vacation resorts.
There is no single dominant note, like the mini of recent memory.


Computer Line Grows
LEAD: In a significant expansion of its product line, Silicon Graphics Inc. will introduce new computers Tuesday that will bring new machines to both ends of Silicon Graphics' current product line, which dominates the market for work stations offering interactive three-dimensional graphics.


Oil Prices Continue to Fall Amid the Discord in OPEC
LEAD: Oil prices continued their precipitous decline yesterday, with prices of some key Middle East crudes falling below $10 a barrel.


Fashion; Patterns
LEAD: So many men's fragrances have been introduced this year that it can't be just a coincidence.
There is something in the air, and it isn't just after-shave.


Foe of Pinochet Warns of Attempts to Hinder Vote
LEAD: As workers cleaned up the political leaflets that covered Santiago like snow this morning, an opposition leader warned that agents of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet were looking for a way to interfere with the plebiscite on Wednesday.


Barn Owls Prosper in the Suburbs, But Land Development Is a Threat
LEAD: BARN owls are alive and apparently thriving in suburban New Jersey, a 15-year study has revealed.
But their future, like that of most birds of prey, is threatened by human endeavors that destroy their nesting sites, hunting grounds and food supply.


Dukakis Says Standard of Living Is Deteriorating
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, embarking today on what aides called a pivotal phase of his effort to overtake Vice President Bush, mixed an appeal to black voters with a warning that American children are in danger of being ''unable to enjoy the same standard of living as their parents.''


Green Asks Businesses for Ideas to Help Schools
LEAD: New York City's Schools Chancellor, Dr.
Richard R. Green, looking outside the education field for ideas on reforming the vast education bureaucracy, has asked New York's business community to recommend improvements in the system's personnel policies.


THE PLAYOFFS: Mets Confident Going Into Playoff With Dodgers; First Hurdle Is Hershiser
LEAD: The Mets streaked into town today after winning 29 of their last 36 games and were installed as solid favorites over the crippled Los Angeles Dodgers to win their second National League pennant in three years.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q.How do nuclear submarines get their oxygen supply when they stay submerged for weeks and months at a time?
A.The crew of a submerged submarine can get oxygen from three sources: the air the submarine carries with it, air it takes in through a snorkel when it is just below the surface, and seawater, according to Lieut.


Corrections#NOF#
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a table in Business Day on Saturday about leading underwriters on Wall Street and the amount of capital they raised for American companies this year misstated the source of the information.
It was IDD Information Services.


Boy, 17, Is Guilty of Manslaughter in Stabbing
LEAD: After deliberating less than four hours, a jury yesterday found a 17-year-old boy guilty of first-degree manslaughter in the stabbing death of a 16-year-old boy in a confrontation between two groups of teen-agers in Queens last year.


RULING ON SEX BIAS CURBS EMPLOYERS
LEAD: Employers may not dismiss women or refuse to hire them because of suspicions that their exposure to chemicals or radiation on the job may some day cause reproductive or fetal damage, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission said today.


General Automation Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Automation Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
13,901,000
13,131,000
Net loss
b8,854,000
c1,276,000
Share earns
-
.21
Yr sales
50,929,000
42,825,000
Net loss
b11,044,000
c1,637,000
Share earns
-
.33


Golden Nugget to Purchase Atlantic City Hotel
LEAD: Golden Nugget Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the troubled 500-room Claridge Casino Hotel in Atlantic City for $110 million, subject to approval by New Jersey regulators.


Reeds Jewelers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reeds Jewelers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,935,000
10,755,000
Net loss
113,000
92,000
6mo rev
21,777,000
17,833,000
Net loss
51,000
b34,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income  Revenue represents total revenue.


Energy Dept. Says It Kept Mishaps at Nuclear Weapon Plant Secret
LEAD: The Department of Energy said today that it was responsible, along with its predecessor, the Atomic Energy Commission, for keeping secret from the public a number of serious reactor accidents that occurred over a 28-year period at the Savannah River Plant in South Carolina.


Hospital Staffing Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hospital Staffing Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,736,167
2,558,481
Net inc
209,392
80,877
Share earns
.07
.03
Shares outst
3,150,000
3,226,420
9mo rev
9,738,170
8,468,087
Net inc
501,728
383,880
Share earns
.16
.12
Shares outst
3,150,000
3,201,319


New Drug Law: The Senate's Duty; The House Offers Only Empty Promises
LEAD: Two summers ago, America discovered crack and overdosed on oratory.
The result, that election year, was a hasty bill that promised new initiatives and new billions for the war on drugs.
They were empty promises.
By early 1987, Reagan budgeteers were cutting back on the billions; many of the initiatives died for lack of follow-through.


Sports People; Green Arraigned
LEAD: Mitch Green, the heavyweight boxer, was arraigned yesterday in Criminal Court in Queens on charges of driving while impaired and driving without a license.
He was released in his own recognizance.


A Lack of Appeal
LEAD: Officials of the Justice Department officials say it might not appeal a judge's finding that one of its agencies, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, discriminates against Hispanic employees.


N.F.L. Notebook; McMahon Puts Bite in Bears
LEAD: David Tate had just leaped, landed and twisted his way through the Buffalo Bills' offensive team with his first interception as a Chicago Bear.
The Bears were already belting the Bills, 17-3, and now a few minutes before the half, thanks to Tate, the exuberant rookie free safety from Colorado, Chicago had the ball at its 42-yard line.


Texas Air Accord Seen With S.A.S.
LEAD: Scandinavian Airlines System and the Texas Air Corporation are expected to announce an agreement to coordinate their schedules in order to offer customers the shortest times between their major destinations, sources close to the negotiations said yesterday.


Americans Love Noise
LEAD: To the Editor:


DISCOVERY LANDS SMOOTHLY AFTER TRIAL MISSION IN SPACE HAILED AS 'STUNNING SUCCESS'
LEAD: The space shuttle Discovery returned to earth today, swooping out of the blue sky, safe and triumphant, to conclude a four-day mission that seemed to go a long way toward restoring confidence in the reliability of the winged, reusable vehicles and reviving the nation's space program.


Hammer View On China Deal
LEAD: The American industrialist Armand Hammer said this weekend that he remained optimistic about a giant coal project in Shanxi Province in northern China, despite technical problems that have slashed output and set off a dispute with the Chinese Government.


Satellite Information Systems Co reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Satellite Information Systems Co
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,244,422
2,312,145
Net inc
327,646
b272,762
Share earns
.12
-
b-Net loss


Grand Met Bids to Buy Pillsbury
LEAD: Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., the large British conglomerate, has offered to buy the Pillsbury Company for $60 a share in cash, or a total of $5.12 billion.


Panel Backs Gene Transplant For Cancer Treatment Test
LEAD: An influential advisory committee recommended today that the Government for the first time approve the transplanting of foreign genes into human patients.


New Faces of 1988
LEAD: Tourneau, the watch store, has ingeniously married old, as in antique or classic, to old, as in used or cheaper.
In Sunday's New York Times Magazine, it advertised ''pre-owned'' watches, with luxe names like Cartier, Patek Philippe and Rolex, displayed against distressed wood and leather-bound books.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Change in Debate Sponsor  The League of Women Voters withdrew from the next Presidential debate.
The commission that sponsored the first one took over.
Page D31.
U.S.
Envoy Influences Vote  The United States Ambassador is credited with helping to make possible the relatively free campaign environment in Chile.


Grace K. Baruch, Researcher and Author, 52
LEAD: Dr.
Grace K. Baruch, associate director of the Wellesley Center for Research on Women, died yesterday of cancer at her home in Newton Center, Mass.
She was 52 years old.


Review/Opera; 'Ballad of Baby Doe' Returns, With Faith Esham
LEAD: ''The Ballad of Baby Doe'' more than holds its own in the tiny repertory of repeatable American operas, and the latest revival by the New York City Opera on Sunday evening gave ample demonstration of the reasons why.
They begin with sturdy operatic dramaturgy.
The tale is told in short, pointed scenes; everything is as simple and direct as it is in, say, ''Pagliacci,'' and the characters are archetypes: the powerful self-made man, his unsympathetic wife, the sweet young thing who takes her place.


Studios Struck by Teamsters
LEAD: The drivers who haul stars, equipment and props for television and movie producers went on strike today.
The strike marks the second time this year the entertainment industry has been strained by a labor dispute.


Corrections
LEAD: A table in Business Day yesterday listing current interest rates misstated the prime rate and the discount rate.
The prime rate, which banks charge on loans to large corporations, is 10 percent.
The discount rate, which the Federal Reserve charges on loans to depository institutions, is 6 1/2 percent.


Hostage Release Could Play Role in the Campaign
LEAD: The sudden release of a hostage held in Lebanon for nearly 20 months has interjected into the 1988 campaign the possibility of an ''October surprise'' that could sway the outcome of the Presidential race.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
American Greetings Corp., Cleveland, a maker of greeting cards, promoted Edward Fruchtenbaum and James R. Van Arsdale to senior vice presidents, of marketing and operations, respectively.


Barry Blau &amp; Partners Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barry Blau &amp; Partners Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
15,814,912
13,581,784
Net inc
317,935
343,762
Share earns
.17
.18
Yr rev
49,362,135
49,943,189
Net inc
956,092
806,044
Share earns
.50
.42


'Not Yet Time' to Free Americans
LEAD: In the hours before the release of an Indian hostage here today, the man believed to be the mentor of the shadowy pro-Iranian group known as the Party of God said it was ''not yet the right time for the American hostages to be freed.''


Cintas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cintas Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
56,589,000
45,499,000
Net inc
4,677,000
3,766,000
Share earns
.35
.29


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


Chicago Faces a Glut Of High-Priced Hotels
LEAD: Chicago, famous for its bracing winds off Lake Michigan and stylish high-rise office buildings, will soon learn whether it has what it takes to support a horde of $200-a-night hotels.


SMUGGLER AGREES TO RUN AIDS HOME
LEAD: A Federal district judge with a tough reputation has tentatively agreed to let a man who helped import 11 tons of marijuana run a hospice for AIDS patients instead of serving a maximum 15-year prison sentence.


Bridge
LEAD: There was considerable bridge activity around the New York metropolitan region over the weekend.


Koch Proposes More Civilians At Police Dept.
LEAD: Mayor Koch, forced to cut city services to finance his planned anti-drug drive, proposed yesterday to make the trims less severe by hiring 618 civilians for the Police Department, instead of uniformed officers, an action that would have cost several million dollars more.


Owners of Delchamps Resist 3d Bid by A.&amp;P.
LEAD: The people at Delchamps, a Southern grocery chain coveted by the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, refer to the A.&amp;P.'s latest bid as the third annual offer. ''It comes along with Halloween,'' Alfred F. Delchamps Jr., chairman and chief executive, said yesterday.


Steinberg Told Paramedic He Tried to Save Child    A paramedic who responded to the emergency call last November testified that Mr. Steinberg told him that his attempts to revive Lisa after she choked on food had caused the bruises on her chest. The hearing was held to determine whether Mr. Steinberg's statements to police after the girl's death should be allowed as evidence when he is tried. (NYT/Neal Boenzi)


Farmer Brothers Co reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Farmer Brothers Co (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
47,291,222
46,509,626
Net inc
306,080
3,162,460
Share earns
.16
1.65
Yr sales
189,474,322
210,394,195
Net inc
11,248,677
18,012,184
Share earns
5,84
9.35


Commtron Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commtron Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
121,721,000
93,811,000
Net inc
897,000
b1,439,000
Share earns
.09
-
Shares outst
10,035,907
10,026,697
Yr rev
475,076,000
442,403,000
Net inc
3,739,000
2,460,000
Share earns
.37
.25
Shares outst
10,016,409
10,039,180


Quadlogic Controls Corp reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quadlogic Controls Corp (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1988
1987
Revenue
418,892
316,988
Net loss
29,333
209,914
Shares outst
3,262,812
2,568,939


Lawyers for Davis Expected to Start Defense Today
LEAD: The defense is expected to begin its case today after a dramatic conclusion this week to more than two months of testimony by prosecution witnesses in the trial of Larry Davis in the attempted murder of nine police officers.


Canadian Unit Adds Fruehauf
LEAD: The Varity Corporation, a Canadian farm and industrial equipment maker, has signed a letter of intent to acquire the vehicle parts concern Fruehauf Corporation in a stock swap, the two companies said today.
No total value was announced.
Under the proposed merger, Varity would acquire all the outstanding shares of Fruehauf's class A and class B common stock in exchange for about two shares each of Varity common stock.


Court Backs Media General
LEAD: A stockholder's lawsuit against Media General Inc. involving the newspaper company's two-tiered stock structure was dismissed on Monday by a Federal judge.
United States District Judge


Acquisition in Korea For the Ogilvy Group
LEAD: Ogilvy Group Inc. has set up a South Korean branch by buying a 30 percent stake in Korad, one of the country's largest ad agencies, with $100 million in billings.
The price was not disclosed.


Dollar and Gold Are Mixed; Action on B.P. Hurts Pound
LEAD: The dollar finished mixed yesterday in active trading, with the currency's spotty gains attributed mainly to technical factors.


Ted Chin Wins Chronicle Job
LEAD: Ted Chin &amp; Company has been called on by Chronicle Publications, a division of the Prentice Hall Trade division of Simon &amp; Schuster, to handle advertising for its two historical coffee-table books, ''Chronicle of the 20th Century,'' and the forthcoming ''Chronicle of America.'' The budget is $2 million.


School District Study Finds That Bigger Is Not Better
LEAD: Despite decades of school district mergers around the country, students perform better in smaller districts, a new study says.


In Newark, Airport to Go International
LEAD: Newark International Airport is poised to become a major international-arrivals port under an alliance announced yesterday by the Texas Air Corporation and the Scandinavian Airlines System.


Time to Look at What We've Done to Nicaragua; Right to Know
LEAD: To the Editor:


Obsolete Bases, Modernized Benefits
LEAD: With the Congressional session waning fast, lawmakers find two worthy bills tantalizingly close to passage.


New Vending Machines to Elevate Snacking
LEAD: The computer is moving into vending machines, and snacking in the workplace is going to become a more sophisticated affair.


LATEST POLL FINDS DUKAKIS IS CLOSING THE GAP WITH BUSH
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis, helped by traditional Democrats and by widespread public skepticism about Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana, is closing in on Vice President Bush, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.


Economic Scene; Airline Fares: Problems Persist
LEAD: ST.
LOUIS travelers can fly on any airline they want - as long as it's Trans World Airlines.


Short Coattails Affect Tactics in Jersey Race
LEAD: When Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis went to Jersey City to address a rally last week, Senator Bill Bradley was at his side.
But Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, who is in the midst of a tough re-election campaign, passed up the chance to be seen with the Democratic nominee for President.


Exiled Iranian President Connects Both Candidates to Hostage Talks
LEAD: Former President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr of Iran said today that representatives of both American Presidential candidates have been to Iran for talks and that an aide to Vice President Bush conducted secret negotiations on the release of Americans held hostage in Lebanon.


NBC Worker Buyout Seen
LEAD: Continuing a cost-reduction drive that has already eliminated hundreds of jobs, NBC will offer a buyout plan to 140 employees as an enticement to leave the company, network executives said yesterday.


Hot Dog an Immigrant
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pentagon Keeps Silent On Stealth Plane Details
LEAD: The Pentagon, turning a poorly kept secret into a public relations fumble, refused today to discuss details about its Stealth fighter, even after a draft press release on the plane had leaked to a newspaper and a Republican Senator had scheduled a news conference on the subject.


A Network For Women Whose Work Is at Home
LEAD: In an age of agonizing choices for women, particularly for those who decide to stay home with their children, naming a newsletter dedicated to helping them was surprisingly easy.


Manville's Shares Climb, Baffling Analysts
LEAD: Common stock of the Manville Corporation rose sharply in heavy trading yesterday, closing at $2.875, up $1.125.
Analysts were baffled at the move, saying that investors may not understand the extent of the stock dilution that will occur as part of the company's reorganization plan as it comes out of bankruptcy.


Mets Bring Hershiser's Streak to a Crashing Halt
LEAD: In one dramatic burst of three runs in the ninth inning tonight, the Mets not only ended Orel Hershiser's extraordinary streak of shutout pitching after 67 innings but roared on to upset the Los Angeles Dodgers, 3-2, in the opening game of the playoff for the National League pennant.


2 Seeking Missing G.I.'s Are Seized in Laos
LEAD: The police in Laos have seized two Americans who said they planned to distribute dollars stamped with a reward offer for any American military personnel held captive in Indochina.


Congress Deadlocks Again On Revising Clean Air Act
LEAD: The last hope for Congressional action this year to overhaul the 1977 Clean Air Act disappeared today when the Senate's leading spokesman on environmental issues announced that he had abandoned months of negotiations with utility, environmental and union lobbyists on a compromise bill.


Colleges Offer Forum To Foreign Dissidents
LEAD: Bard College and seven other liberal arts colleges have formed a consortium to give one-year fellowships to dissidents from countries throughout the world.


Oxford Journal; Reluctant Scholars at the School of Hard Knocks
LEAD: Matthew Arnold, professor of poetry here from 1857 to 1867, described it as ''that sweet city with her dreaming spires.'' But here and at every other British university, the ivory tower is tumbling down.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  The House upheld President Reagan's veto of import limits on textiles, apparel and shoes.
The 272-to-152 vote fell 11 short of an override.
Vice President Bush and Senator Dan Quayle have opposed the bill.
The Democratic Presidential candidate, Michael S. Dukakis, has not taken a public position on the measure, but his running mate, Lloyd Bentsen, supports it.


As the Object of Slurs, WASP's Are Latecomers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Afghan Rebel Attack Kills 5
LEAD: Guerrillas fighting the Soviet-backed Government in Afghanistan shelled the eastern town of Gardez, killing five people and wounding four, the official Kabul Radio said today.
The radio, monitored in Islamabad, Pakistan, said 31 houses and 11 shops were damaged in the attack Monday on Gardez, the capital of Paktia Province, which shares a border with Pakistan.


Turkey Inflation Spurts
LEAD: Turkey reported today that its inflation rate soared to an annual rate of 81.8 percent in September, prompting calls by bankers for action to bring it under control.
The State Statistics Institute said retail prices rose 4.8 percent last month, after an increase of 3.4 percent in August.


New Conflict in Macmillan Bidding
LEAD: The board of Macmillan Inc. did not know that the company's management had told Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company of a rival bid by the Maxwell Communications Corporation during the auction process on Monday evening, according to papers filed in Delaware Chancery Court.


Health Insurance Is Offered By County to All Residents
LEAD: One million residents and workers in an affluent county near the nation's capital are now eligible to obtain insurance that will cover up to $1 million of the costs of catastrophic illnesses under a plan initiated by the county.


Sun-Times Strike Vote
LEAD: The editorial staff at The Chicago Sun-Times voted Monday to authorize a strike after the newspaper's management proposed to cut salaries by 10 percent.


Newly Revealed Michelangelo to Be Shown
LEAD: A drawing attributed to Michelangelo has been revealed by conservators at the Uffizi Museum in Florence, and will go on view on Sunday at the National Gallery here as part of an exhibition of drawings by the artist.


Quayle Getting His Big Chance To Clear Doubts
LEAD: As a top official in Vice President Bush's campaign discussed Senator Dan Quayle recently, he struggled to explain several gaffes by the Republican Vice-Presidential nominee, such as Mr.
Quayle's declaration that he ''did not live in this century.''


Microwave Cooking
LEAD: FEW of us find time any more - if we ever did - to put food up for the winter, but the microwave oven can bring home-canned treats back into our lives, quickly and well.


Dow Chemical Names Anderson &amp; Lembke
LEAD: The Dow Chemical Company, Midland, Mich., has chosen Anderson &amp; Lembke, Stamford, Conn., to handle three divisions of its newly organized plastics group.
The business-to-business and corporate ad budget exceeds $5 million.


Secret U.S. Policy Against Terrorists Reported
LEAD: A former Government official said tonight that President Reagan signed a secret intelligence order three years ago giving intelligence officers broad latitude for aggressive action against terrorists, including violence in some cases if the action was taken in ''good faith.''


Ciccarelli Signs
LEAD: Dino Ciccarelli, who had been holding out for 24 days, agreed yesterday to a contract with the Minnesota North Stars, just three days before the team was to have begun assessing him $1,000 daily as a penalty.
Ciccarelli gave his verbal approval to a contract negotiated during a four-hour meeting that included his agent, Ron Salcer; Jack Ferreira, the general manager, and Dean Lombardi, the assistant general manager.


American League; Hurst To Open Against Stewart
LEAD: The ground ball that rolled through Bill Buckner's legs two autumns ago has not faded from memory.
Red Sox fans can still see it - every painful moment of it -and now, they suddenly see redemption.


Ex-Delegate for Samoa Faces Prison Term
LEAD: American Samoa's former delegate to Congress was sentenced to a prison term of 5 to 15 months today for participating in a payroll-padding scheme that prosecutors say earned him $39,000.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: FOR those who shy away from Cajun food because they find it too hot, a visit to La Trouvaille comes as a delightfully mild surprise.


Barneys to Build a Chain Of 100 Stores Nationally
LEAD: Barneys New York said yesterday that it planned to build a national chain of up to 100 apparel stores, beginning with three new stores in the East.


Directors Make Bid For Virgin Group
LEAD: The directors of the Virgin Group P.L.C. have offered to buy the 37 percent of the British music and entertainment group that they do not own for about $2.37 a share, the same price the shares were floated at in November 1986.
The offer values the company at $:248 million, or about $420.7 million.


Corrections
LEAD: The ''At the Movies'' column in Weekend on Friday misidentified the actress co-starring with Fred Ward in ''Miami Blues.'' She is Jennifer Jason Leigh.


A Club for All
LEAD: To The Living Section:


The Shoreham Paradox; While Closer Than Ever to Getting License, A-Plant Has Lost Much of Its Value to Lilco
LEAD: The Long Island Lighting Company has coveted an operating license for its Shoreham Nuclear Power Station for 20 years, but as it nears its goal the utility is showing ambivalence, simultaneously seeking permission to open Shoreham while patiently awaiting approval of an agreement to abandon it.


Britain Acts to Force Kuwait To Lower Holdings in B.P.
LEAD: The British Government today ordered the Kuwait Investment Office to cut its holdings in the British Petroleum Company by more than half.


Trial in Air Crash Resumes
LEAD: A Federal trial over a 1985 Delta Air Lines crash that killed 137 people resumed Monday after being in recess since August.
At stake in the nonjury trial before Federal District Judge David O. Belew Jr. are more than $100 million in claims from survivors and relatives of victims.
Delta wants the Government to pay part of the claims and the cost of replacing the jet destroyed in the crash at Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport.


Friendly Skies
LEAD: Somewhere over Nebraska, Representative Norman Mineta emerged from the cockpit of a DC-10 last Saturday, on a United Air Lines flight from Washington to San Francisco.


EX-NUCLEAR AIDES DENY BEING TOLD OF PLANT MISHAPS
LEAD: Top officials of the defunct Atomic Energy Commission said today that they were never informed of serious reactor accidents at the Savannah River Plant.
They suggested that the incidents had been kept secret by local managers because of national security concerns about publicizing America's problems producing atomic weapons.


Moscow Asked to Review Solzhenitsyn Exile
LEAD: The Union of Film Makers said today that it has asked the Government to review the legality of the 1974 deportation of Alexander Solzhenitsyn.
Mr.
Solzhenitsyn, the author and Nobel laureate, was deported and stripped of his Soviet citizenship after the publication in the West of ''The Gulag Archipelago,'' which documented political repression and life in Soviet prison camps.


J. Ralph Corbett, 91; Executive Aided Arts
LEAD: J. Ralph Corbett, a a patron of the arts who was founder of the Nutone Company, manufacturer of electrical door chimes, died Monday at a Cincinnati nursing home after a long illness.
He was 91 years old and lived in Cincinnati.


Enlisting the Gipper To Win One for Bush
LEAD: With the Presidential race in its final weeks, and the contest turning into a horse race, the Bush campaign is turning to - who else? - the Gipper to step up his campaigning among so-called Reagan Democrats.


Roll-Call Vote on Reagan Veto
LEAD: Here is the 272-152 roll-call vote by which the House of Representatives today fell short of the two-thirds majority needed to override President Reagan's veto of proposed limits on imports of textiles, apparel and shoes.
A ''yes'' vote was a vote to override the veto.
A ''no'' vote was a vote to sustain it.


For Japanese, A Book Drops A War Lesson
LEAD: A textbook publisher has deleted a lesson describing Japanese brutality in World War II after protests from ruling party politicians.


Classic Confrontation For Quayle at Penn
LEAD: ''Quayle, Quayle, Quayle.''


U.S. Notes and Bonds Mark Time
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were little changed yesterday, although some dealers reported that trading was a bit more brisk than in recent sessions.


Opinion Is Sought in Drexel Case
LEAD: A Federal appeals court in Manhattan yesterday asked that the Securities and Exchange Commission give its opinion about conflict of interest charges leveled against a judge in the securities fraud case against Drexel Burnham Lambert.


Hilton Offering 10-Year Notes
LEAD: The Hilton Hotels Corporation is offering $100 million of 9 3/4 percent notes due in 1998 at a price of 100 through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.


Market Place; Friendly Suitors And Pillsbury
LEAD: WALL STREET professionals speculated yesterday that the Pillsbury Company might seek a friendly suitor to defend itself against a $5.23 billion takeover bid from Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., the British food and beverage giant.
Most speculation centered on a foreign buyer, not so much because of the weak dollar but because of United States accounting rules that would make most acquiring American companies look less profitable.


Caution on Trade Offer
LEAD: The European Community gave a cautious response today to a United States offer to discuss short-term measures on world agriculture reform.
A spokeswoman for the European Commission, acting for the European Community, said that, while the community welcomed any effort to undertake short-term reforms in agriculture, the American offer would have to be studied to ''see what the U.S.


Harvey Wellman, Ex-Diplomat, Dies at 71
LEAD: Harvey R. Wellman, a United States diplomat and member of the Foreign Service for 32 years, died of a heart attack Sept. 27 at Middlesex Memorial Hospital in Middletown, Conn.
He was 71 years old and lived in Old Saybrook, Conn.


White House Policy Makers Keep an Eye on the Election
LEAD: Lee M. Thomas, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, has been highly visible in recent weeks: warning of the dangers of radon gas, announcing a strategy for dealing with the nation's garbage crisis, proposing a total ban on chemicals that are destroying the earth's ozone shield.


Dr. Harold Brown, 86, Parasitology Professor
LEAD: Dr.
Harold W. Brown, a professor emeritus of parasitology at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, died of a heart attack Monday at St.
John's Riverside Hospital in Yonkers.
He was 86 years old and lived in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  The Political Browne


Pillsbury Moves Fast To Defend Against Bid
LEAD: As Wall Street was furiously bidding up the stock of the Pillsbury Company today in response to a surprise takeover bid, the company moved to defend itself.


How Boston and Oakland Compare
LEAD:  RED SOX  Catchers(Average, home runs, runs batted in)  10Rich Gedman(.231, 9, 39)  Once a solid offensive player with good power but has slipped noticeably in last two seasons.
Still, has strong arm behind plate and will keep Canseco honest on bases.  6Rick Cerone(.269, 3, 27)


Florida Picks Senate Nominee
LEAD: Representative Kenneth (Buddy) MacKay today captured the Democratic Senate nomination over Florida's Insurance Commissioner, Bill Gunter, in the runoff of their heated contest.
Mr.
MacKay will oppose the Republican candidate, Representative Connie Mack 3d, in November.


Disabled Girl Wins Millions For Damage Suffered at Birth
LEAD: An 8-year-old girl who is blind and suffers from brain damage and cerebral palsy was awarded more than $7 million in damages yesterday when a jury in Manhattan found that a city hospital was negligent during her birth.


Middlemen, Not Dairy Farmers, Make the Milk More Expensive
LEAD: To the Editor:


Color Is Sharper In New Film Line Offered by Kodak
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company said yesterday that it would soon market a line of film that offers the finest grain, sharpness and color of any film it has produced.


The Bentsen-Quayle Question
LEAD: All the advance sarcasm makes tonight's Vice-Presidential debate sound like a trivial TV game show.
Can Dan Quayle walk and chew gum at the same time?
Can Lloyd Bentsen keep America from falling asleep by 8:35?
The wisecrackers miss the point, and so do the analysts waiting eagerly to pronounce a winner and a loser.


Corrections
LEAD: The Patents column in Business Day on Saturday misstated the uses of a removable orthodontic device.


Venezuela Refining Aim
LEAD: Venezuela is close to concluding a deal for new refining operations in the United States, Juan Chacin, president of Petroleos de Venezuela S.A., said today. ''Currently, we have about 450,000-barrels-a-day refining capacity outside Venezuela,'' he told an investment seminar at the National Press Club.


Georgetown Redefines Alumni Role
LEAD: When does an alumni association best serve its alma mater: when it is part of the university's administration or when it is independent?


Pinochet Foes, Bolstered by Polls, Hope to Oust Him in Vote Today
LEAD: Chileans will vote Wednesday in a plebiscite in which opponents of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet think they are going to end a military government at the ballot box.


People
LEAD: *
Jeffrey Avison has been named vice president, marketing, at Wilkinson Sword USA, Atlanta.


Review/Violin; Familiar Pieces, Familiarly
LEAD: Victor Tretyakov, a one-time Tchaikovsky competition gold medalist, gave a recital of familiar works in familiar fashion at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon.
Mr.
Tretyakov possesses most of the emblematic virtues of today's preferred violinists: a muscular bowing arm that rarely tires, intonation that - with the help of liberal vibrato - is almost never off, a soberly energetic approach to music making that leads him not into bad taste.


Judge Designates Alternative Site for Yonkers Housing
LEAD: The Federal judge in the Yonkers housing-discrimination suit bypassed a defiant City Council yesterday and designated an alternative to a church-owned site for housing for the poor.


Time to Look at What We've Done to Nicaragua; It's in Bookstores
LEAD: To the Editor:


Three Posts at Justice Filled
LEAD: The Senate voted today to confirm nominees for three top Justice Department posts.
In voice votes, the Senate approved Harold G. Christensen as deputy attorney general; Frank Keating as associate attorney general, and Edward S. G. Dennis Jr., as an assistant attorney general in charge of the criminal division.


Legislative Problems Seen in '89
LEAD: WHEN John O'Toole assumes the presidency of the American Association of Advertising Agencies, he will have his hands full. ''It will be our toughest year ever in Washington and in the state capitals,'' Mr.
O'Toole said in a telephone interview yesterday.


Reagan Stands Firm But Won't Get to Fly
LEAD: Ronald Reagan might have persuaded Congress to build a new Air Force One, but he's going to miss the distinction of being the first President to fly in it.


Boy, 6, Takes Car And Drives 5 Miles
LEAD: A 6-year-old took his grandmother's Chrysler and drove five miles through two states in a rainstorm until being overtaken by a chiropractor who chased him. ''The kid was driving pretty doggone good,'' said the chiropractor, Lawrence Forgacs.


Johnson Repeats Denial on Steroids
LEAD: Ben Johnson appeared at a tightly controlled news conference in a Toronto hotel today, and, reading a brief statement that had been drafted with his lawyer, renewed his denial that he had ever knowingly taken performance-enhancing drugs.


President Is Chosen For Battery Park City
LEAD: David Emil, deputy commissioner of the state's Department of Social Services, will become the next president of the Battery Park City Authority, Governor Cuomo announced yesterday.


Soviets Drop a Demand Blocking Arms Talks
LEAD: The Soviet Union has withdrawn a demand that has held up new East-West talks on cutting conventional arms, Administration officials said today.


Princeton/Newport Asset Freeze Backed
LEAD: A Federal district judge said yesterday that the Government may freeze the assets of a New Jersey investment partnership even though the firm has not been charged with wrongdoing.


Hooray for Moscow
LEAD: There is a good feeling these days at the headquarters here of the Motion Picture Association of America because of agreements concluded last week in Moscow with the Soviet Ministry of Cinematography enlarging the Soviet market for American films and filmmakers.
Jack Valenti, chairman of the association, said he had been trying for such agreements for more than two decades.


How Mr. Regan Could Clear the Air
LEAD: In a tense appearance before the New York State Commission on Government Integrity, State Comptroller Edward Regan faced new evidence that he traded state business for campaign contributions.
His answers strained credulity; he needs to do much more to reassure the public.


Lone Star Tastes
LEAD: Chateau Pecos, anyone?


Saudi Threat To Raise Oil Output
LEAD: In its toughest statement about oil policy in years, Saudi Arabia has warned Iran, Iraq and other members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to restrain their oil production or face financial ruin.


LTV Plans to Auction Its Bar-Steel Division
LEAD: The LTV Corporation said today that it planned to auction its bar-steel division, a profitable operation with nine plants that produce about 10 percent of the company's annual steel output, or about 1.2 million tons.


A Vote to End Asset Agency
LEAD: The House Banking Committee voted, 42 to 8, today to abolish the much-criticized Federal agency created to manage and dispose of the assets of insolvent savings institutions.


Former Spy Chief Talks for Dukakis
LEAD: Much like A.T.&amp;T., the Dukakis campaign is telling reporters to pick up the phone and touch someone - in this case Adm.
Stansfield Turner.


About Real Estate; South Bronx Retail Project Finally Moves Ahead
LEAD: Nearly 15 years after Mayor Abraham Beame ceremoniously turned the earth on a vacant city-owned lot at 156th Street and Third Avenue in the South Bronx to signal a commitment to the development of a supermarket and shopping center in the troubled area, the site remains nothing more than two acres of dirt.


Corrections
LEAD: The Business People column on Monday misstated the value of F.A.C.


Controlling the News
LEAD: The Pentagon's chief spokesman, J. Daniel Howard, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, appears to have won an internal struggle for control of the department's daily compendium of news clips, which ranks among the most influential publications in the Government.


Canseco Facing High Expectations
LEAD: This is the sound of Jose Canseco's power:


Savings Units' Sale Expedited
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Bank Board said today that it would offer 10 insolvent thrift institutions for sale on an expedited basis so that bids can be approved within 35 days of their receipt.


Bias Ruling Curbs Employers
LEAD: Employers may not dismiss women or refuse to hire them because of suspicion that their exposure to chemicals or radiation on the job may some day cause reproductive or fetal damage, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission said Monday.


Ripken Sr. to Return
LEAD: Cal Ripken Sr., who was dropped as manager of the Baltimore Orioles on April 12 and was succeeded by Frank Robinson, will return in 1989 as the third-base coach.
One day after dismissing four coaches and placing two pitchers - Don Aase and Doug Sisk - on waivers after a final record of 54-107, the worst in the franchise's history in Baltimore, the Orioles announced that the new coaching staff would consist of Elrod Hendricks, the lone holdover, plus Ripken Sr., Tom McCraw, Al Jackson and Johnny Oates.


Mets Rally to Beat L.A.


2 Princeton Clubs to Get New Sex-Bias Hearings
LEAD: An appeals court ruled today that two all-male eating clubs at Princeton University did not get a fair hearing when they were found guilty of discriminating against women by the State Division on Civil Rights in 1987, and ordered the case reopened.


At Historic Vineyard, A Historic Harvest
LEAD: AFTER a 181-year interval between vintages, Monticello has joined the avant-garde of Virginia wine making.
Some might say the rear guard, but let's not quibble.


Calls to 150 Planes Disrupted as Rains Flood Phone Center
LEAD: A regional air traffic control center covering an area stretching from Denver to Indianapolis lost contact with about 150 planes for 27 minutes when water flooded a communications center last week, officials of the Federal Aviation Administration say.


House Upholds Textile-Bill Veto By Close Margin
LEAD: In a major victory for the Administration, the House today upheld President Reagan's veto of legislation setting limits on imports of textiles, apparel and shoes.


Eating Well
LEAD: AMERICANS are eating out more than they ever have, or perhaps, to be precise, they are eating more food cooked by strangers than cooked by their spouses, their parents or themselves.
Whether they eat their meals in restaurants, fast-food places or school or office cafeterias, or buy from takeouts or prepared-food counters at the supermarket, fewer people are eating meals made at home.


Thrift Dismissed
LEAD: Syd Thrift, who knew better than than anyone else - and was prone to boast of it - that his personal wheeling and dealing transformed the Pittsburgh Pirates from a last-place franchise near bankruptcy into a profitable contender in the National League East, was dismissed yesterday as general manager in a unanimous vote of the Pirates' 16-member board of directors.


ABC Offers 'Open-Ended' Campaign Forum
LEAD: ABC News said tonight that it had invited the two Presidential candidates to participate in ''an open-ended discussion'' of the issues on a network broadcast that might be several hours long.


IRAN WILL NOT RELY ON U.S. OR SOVIETS, KHOMEINI DECLARES
LEAD: In a statement on Iran's postwar policies, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini has called on the Iranian people to rebuild the country without relying on either the Soviet Union or the United States.


Buyout Bid For Kroger Increased
LEAD: Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, a specialist in leveraged buyouts, said yesterday that it had raised its bid for the Kroger Company, the nation's second-largest operator of supermarkets, to $64 a share, or about $5.03 billion.


The New York Times/CBS News Poll; The Vice-Presidential Candidates: Voters' Views Before the Debate
LEAD:
Views of
Views of
Quayle
Bentsen
22%
32%
Percent saying they have favorable
opinion of the candidate
28
12
Percent with unfavorable opinion
50
55
Percent undecided or not knowing
enough about candidate to say
41
71


Bridge
LEAD: Pride and sorrow are inspired by a new book, the ''1987 World Championships,'' which records the competition in Jamaica in which a United States team scored a double victory.


'Poor Seoul,' Los Angeles Says Smugly
LEAD: The Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea, never quite achieved orbit.
We just never got caught up in them, neither the South Koreans, who stayed away from their own Games, nor the television audience in this country.
I even heard curmudgeonly grumbles from people during the two Olympic weeks, an impatient ''when is this finally going to be over?


A Better-Than-Expected '88 For Sales of U.S. Vehicles
LEAD: Strong auto sales in late September closed the 1988 model year on a solid note.
Americans bought 15.6 million vehicles in the year, making it the third-best year ever.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: I HAVE a lot of fun experimenting with variations on classic recipes.
Take, for example, veal Pojarski.
The standard recipe calls for cutting up veal and blending it with butter, seasonings and bread soaked in milk, then sauteeing it in clarified butter.


Carl Reich, Hematologist, 88
LEAD: Dr.
Carl Reich, a physician and hematologist, died of heart failure Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Memorial to the Slave Trade Planned for Senegal
LEAD: A memorial to the slave trade and an adjoining conference center are to be erected in the West African nation of Senegal at a cost of $500 million, Senegalese officials here say.


The Three People on Trial
LEAD:  Bess Myerson: 64 years old.
Grew up in a working-class home in the Bronx.
Won Miss America title in 1945, and later appeared on television on ''The Big Payoff'' and ''I've Got a Secret.'' Went to graduate school and worked for a time as a journalist.
Served as Mayor John V. Lindsay's Consumer Affairs Commissioner.


Stocks Continue Retreat as Dow Falls 3.20
LEAD: The stock market yesterday repeated its moderately lower performance of Monday, although volume accelerated.


Reviews/Dance; Experiment and History At the Lyons Festival
LEAD: The International Dance Biennale, which ends on Thursday, has spent more than three weeks here acting as a showcase for ''Four Centuries of Dance in France,'' the theme chosen for this year's festival by its director, Guy Darmet.


Honduran Seeks U.N. Patrol To Evict Neighbors' Rebels
LEAD: The Foreign Minister of Honduras today proposed an international peacekeeping force that would evacuate Nicaraguan and Salvadoran rebels from Honduran territory and patrol the borders to keep them out.


Physicians Agree Tyson Isn't Manic-Depressive
LEAD: Mike Tyson received a second opinion on his psychiatric state yesterday, and according to Dr.
Abraham L. Halpern, the fighter is not a manic-depressive.


Program at Singer Nearly Completed
LEAD: The Singer Company said it had ''essentially completed its divestiture program'' with the closing of the sale of its Kearfott Guidance and Navigation division to the Astronautics Corporation of America.
Singer, based in Stamford, Conn., has sold 8 of its 12 operating units for a total of $1.94 billion, slightly more than what its chairman, Paul A.


Cone's Brilliance Puts Luster on Trade
LEAD: ''I hear the Mets are calling it 'the steal of the century,' '' said John Schuerholz, the general manager of the Kansas City Royals, who made the deal. ''Well, considering how it's turned out so far, I suppose that's a fair assessment.''


Lawmaker Asks Quick Action
LEAD: A Georgia Congressman demanded on the House floor Monday that he be indicted immediately so that he could answer allegations of his possible connection with a money-laundering scheme.


Nation's First AIDS Head Start Project


Spy Satellite Reactor Now in a Safe Orbit, Its Trackers Report
LEAD: Western officials are continuing to track the orbit of a nuclear reactor that once powered a Soviet spy satellite but have confirmed reports that there is no longer a danger of radioactive debris falling to earth.


2 Ways Art Gives Shape To Political Horrors
''Nothing is impossible with a camera, my boy!'' Samuel Fuller bellows at his interviewer in ''Faulkenau, the Impossible.'' The director's voice is still full of bravado at the age of 76.
With his lined face and flowing white hair, even smoking a cigar he looks like an aged avenging angel swooping down from the screen to rage against war.
Leon Golub, on the other hand, is a slight, bald man of 66.
He talks without a trace of pretension about power, politics and art, and often chuckles at mundane details as he goes about his work - painting huge canvases that freeze political assassins, torturers and mercenaries.
''Golub'' and ''Faulkenau,'' which will be shown at the New York Film Festival at 6:15 tonight, are both concerned with the way art gives shape to the worst political horrors.
Otherwise, they are as different and as provocative as the artists they document, and together they offer a complicated reply to Mr.
Fuller's assertion that film can do anything.


In Milan, Flamboyance Takes Back Seat
LEAD: The spring and summer clothes introduced here this week are neither aggressively masculine nor flamboyantly feminine.
It is not a time for stormy fashion messages.


Sun Holders Back Splitting Company
LEAD: Stockholders of the Sun Company, the nation's 10th-largest oil company, approved a restructuring that spins off its $4.2 billion domestic gas exploration and production unit into a separate operation and cuts 1,300 jobs.
The new structure retains the petroleum refining and marketing operations in a slimmed-down business.


G.E. Sets Plans To Invest in Spain
LEAD: The General Electric Company plans to invest $1.7 billion over 10 to 15 years in a new silicon and plastics plant to be built at Cartagena, in southeastern Spain.
Ignacio Trillo, the chairman of G.E.'s Spanish subsidiary, said the Spanish Government would subsidize 30 percent of the value of the investment and would provide a free 1,680-acre site for the new factory.


McKesson-Alco Agreement Ended
LEAD: The McKesson Corporation, the nation's largest wholesaler of drugs and toiletries, and the Alco Health Services Corporation said they had terminated their $500 million merger agreement because of Federal opposition.
The Federal Trade Commission had authorized its staff to seek a court order to bar McKesson's purchase of Alco, based in Valley Forge,


Dukakis Cites Kennedy And Names Nixon, Too
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, who has been cloaking himself in the mystique of John F. Kennedy for months, summoned Kennedy's memory to this college town north of Chicago today to draw a parallel between Vice President Bush and the 1960 Republican nominee, Richard M. Nixon.


On Keeping Kosher
LEAD: To The Living Section:


10 Die and Dozens Missing As Storm Hits City in France
LEAD: A rainstorm that hit this southern city has killed at least 10 people and dozens more are missing, rescue workers said today.


Ticketron Account To Warner, Bicking
LEAD: Ticketron, a division of the Control Data Corporation, has appointed Warner, Bicking &amp; Fenwick to handle the seven-figure budget for its Ticketron and Teletron services.
Previously handling the account was Serino, Coyne &amp; Nappi.


PTL Reports Deal of $115 Million for Assets
LEAD: A month after Jim Bakker failed in efforts to return to its helm, the PTL ministry announced today that it had negotiated a sale of its assets for $115 million to a Canadian businessman.


Ozzie Smith Sued
LEAD: Agents who negotiated a contract for the St.
Louis Cardinals shortstop, Ozzie Smith, one of the highest-paid baseball players, filed a Federal lawsuit yesterday charging that he owes them more than $300,000 in commissions.


How It Happened; At Last, The Tide Turns for Carter
LEAD: In the first inning Gary Carter couldn't overcome the jump Steve Sax got against Dwight Gooden and in the third inning he couldn't overcome his own lack of speed.


Bentsen Faces Dual Job In TV Debate Tonight
LEAD: When Lloyd Millard Bentsen Jr. walks on the stage of the Civic Auditorium Wednesday night to debate, he will be carrying an invisible portfolio of political responsibility as detailed and heavy as any Vice-Presidential candidate in many years.


A Virginian's Boston Barbecue
LEAD: CHRIS SCHLESINGER is the first to admit that he does not have the best barbecue in the Boston area.
The atmosphere of his brand new takeout place is not grungy enough to qualify, even if the food is authentic.


Review/Television; Building Bridges in Vienna '38
LEAD: If you are not passionately interested in what the Vice-Presidential candidates have to say in their debate this evening, and if you have access to the pay-cable Disney Channel, consider watching ''A Friendship in Vienna'' at 9 o'clock.
Going back 50 years to the Vienna of 1938 - the Vienna of an impending German occupation, the Anschluss - the film tells the story of an intense friendship between two young schoolgirls, one Jewish and the other Roman Catholic.


Strawberry Looks West
LEAD: Darryl Strawberry was quoted today as saying he had decided ''it's time to go home'' and intended to leave the Mets when his contract ended after the 1990 season and would try to sign as a free agent with the Los Angeles Dodgers.


Fleisher Finds a New Career
LEAD: Larry Fleisher, who guided the National Basketball Players Association to the strongest position of any of the major sports unions, during his 27 years as its general counsel, will become a corporate vice president in charge of basketball operations for the International Management Group.
I.M.G. is a worldwide organization that represents athletes in many sports.


Accord at Marriott
LEAD: Three airline companies in the Persian Gulf have signed an agreement with the Marriott Corporation to buy 50 percent of its catering service at Heathrow Airport in London.
The new company, the Marriott-GCC Inflight Catering Service Company, will build a new kitchen at Heathrow to provide food according to Moslem rules.


Lessons
LEAD: When it comes to the humanities, American colleges and universities seem to be shooting themselves in the foot.


Boycott of Nestle to Resume
LEAD: A consumer group said today that it would resume a boycott of Nestle S.A. because of its promotion of infant formula.
The boycott would also be extended to the American Home Products Corporation.


Time to Look at What We've Done to Nicaragua
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Cleopatra's Other Side


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt  Clabir Corp. said it was in default on its 14 1/2 percent subordinated debentures due 2004, after not making a $1.02 million semiannual interest payment due Sept. 1.
While it has sufficent funds to make the payment, it was unable to negotiate a satisfactory waiver with its banks of their rights under a provision of their credit agreement.


Capitol Dome Set for a Paint Job


135 Lands Violate Human Rights, Amnesty International Declares
LEAD: Amnesty International asserted today that 135 nations committed human rights abuses in the last year, ranging from the jailing of draft resisters in Western Europe to the massacre of unarmed civilians in Iraq and the Sudan.


Hearty Food Without Skimping On Technique
LEAD: PAULA WOLFERT knows that some people, even food people, are saying that cooking is done for.
All over.
Kaput.
But she refuses to believe it.
And she is so enthusiastic, so excitable, so passionate, that it does seem that if only she could talk to everyone, in person, well, there would be a rush to kitchen stoves and voluptuous, aromatic meals would begin appearing.


Private Hospitals Planning Staff Cuts
LEAD: Rising wages, high capital costs and low Medicaid reimbursement rates have forced some private, nonprofit hospitals in New York City to seek ways to slash their payrolls, administrators and health experts say.


Wine Talk
LEAD: ''I REALLY envy the French,'' the young woman said. ''All anyone has to do is just mention French wines and everyone assumes it's great.
Most people don't even know about us.''


Just Call Him El Presidente
LEAD: When Gen.
Augusto Pinochet came to power in the military coup 15 years ago it thrust on the Chilean scene a last name not very common here and pronounced a variety of ways ever since.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-15


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Movement Is Seen in Southern Africa Talks
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that negotiations on the conflicts in Angola and Namibia were ''nearing success.''


Facing Up to School Phobia and Dealing With It
LEAD: For some youngsters, just showing up in school is a striking achievement.


DETROIT CATHOLICS WARY ON CLOSINGS
LEAD: With 43 of the Roman Catholic churches here designated by the archdiocese for closing, people at some of those churches were planning resistance today while a group of black clergy were saying the consolidation could provide added resources to help the city's majority black population.


Myerson Trial Gets Account Of Conspiracy
LEAD: A prosecutor's opening statement portrayed Bess Myerson yesterday as a glamorous and greedy public official who took part in a corrupt conspiracy to fix her companion's divorce case.


Time to Look at What We've Done to Nicaragua; Civilians Targeted
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hope Reborn in Haiti
LEAD: Thanks largely to their own persistence, Haitians now have their best chance at real democracy in more than three decades.
Cynical outsiders claimed Haiti was too poor and too-long misgoverned for there to be any realistic chance of that.
But Haiti's democrats - strengthened by the refusal of countries like the U.S.


Hungarian Exuberance
LEAD: The Kodaly Ensemble Hungarian Dance Theater made its New York debut Sunday night at the Fashion Institute of Technology.
It was a terrific evening of boisterous dancing and high spirits combined with serious thought.


The Islanders' Egos Are Still Hurting
LEAD: The Islanders, who won their division title last season and followed with a hasty first-round playoff exit, have moved into the new season at the same pace they left the old one: at a limp.


California Chain Curbs Tobacco Sales
LEAD: The largest supermarket chain in Southern California today ordered all cigars and pipe and chewing tobacco removed from its shelves because the tobacco companies that make the products had declined to place consumer warning labels on them.


Pole Under Scrutiny for U.S. Trip
LEAD: A Polish prosecutor has begun investigating Solidarity's national spokesman because he appeared last month before a Congressional committee in Washington.


Postal Fraud Case Charges
LEAD: Two top executives of Recognition Equipment Inc., a manufacturer of information processing equipment that has been under investigation for two and a half years by the United States Attorney's office in connection with a Postal Service bribery scheme, are expected to be indicted by Federal grand juries in Washington this week, the company said on


House Extends Job Bias Protection To Its Own Workers, With Limits
LEAD: The House of Representatives today extended the same protection against job discrimination to its own employees that most American workers received 24 years ago, but with a few major exceptions.


Fryeburg Journal; A Fair That Still Caters to Farmers
LEAD: Throughout New England, agriculture as a way of life has been fading, a casualty both of development pressure and the increasing difficulty of doing business in the 1980's.


Botha's Black Africa Diplomacy Is Rebuffed by Zambian President
LEAD: President Kenneth D. Kaunda of Zambia, former chairman of a group of South Africa's black-governed neighbors, today rebuffed President P. W. Botha's recent efforts to widen diplomatic ccontacts in the region.


Palestinian Is Reported Shot By a Suspected Collaborator
LEAD: A Palestinian accused of collaborating with the Israeli authorities shot and seriously wounded another Arab in the occupied West Bank today, Arab hospital officials and witnesses said.


Emerson Electric Elects
LEAD: The Emerson Electric Company said today that it had elected James F. Hardymon, a 27-year veteran of the company, to be its new president.
Mr.
Hardymon, who had been vice chairman, will retain his responsibilities as chief operating officer.
Mr.
Hardymon, 53 years old, joined Emerson's Browning Manufacturing division in 1961.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Advanced Semiconductor MaterialsInternational, the Netherlands, said it had sold its 50 percent stake in ASM Lithography N.V. to Philips N.V.
Terms were not disclosed.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Sept. 30
Sept. 23
Oct. 2
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
7.0
6.7
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.6
2.8
Gasoline stocks
221.7
218.5
229.5
Distillate stocks
129.8
132.2
128.9
Crude imports, daily
5.7
4.7
5.1
Product imports, daily
2.0
2.1
1.9
Crude stocks
324.1
318.8
334.4
Crude production, daily
8.2
8.2
8.2
Refinery utilization (%)
85.0
81.2
83.5


Book Notes
LEAD:  A Chinese Penguin


MILAN: FASHION THAT WHISPERS, PAGE C12.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''God willing, the warrior Iranian people will maintain their revolutionary and sacred rancor and anger in their hearts and use their oppressor-burning flames against the criminal Soviet Union and the world-devouring United States and their surrogates.''  - Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.


Micron Stake Agreement Set
LEAD: Amstrad P.L.C., a leading British manufacturer of personal computers, has agreed to pay $75 million for 9.8 percent of Micron Technology Inc., a maker of computer memory chips based in Boise, Idaho.


Sabonis Indecisive
LEAD: Arvidas Sabonis, the 7-foot-4-inch Soviet center who was instrumental in his country's gold medal in basketball at the Seoul Olympic Games, will probably not join the Portland Trail Blazers of the National Basketball Association this season, Bucky Buckwalter, a vice president of the team, said.
After watching the basketball competition at Seoul, South Korea, Buckwalter returned to Portland to report that the Soviets do not want to jeopardize Sabonis's future eligibility for Olympic competition, pending a vote by the Federation of International Basketball Associations in April.


No Runaround For McReynolds
LEAD: Their precious opportunities had passed so quickly through eight scoreless innings that as Kevin McReynolds approached home plate in the ninth inning, he knew there could be no other way but the direct approach.


Urine Test Detects Bladder Cancer at Early Stage
LEAD: A simple urine test shows promise as a way of detecting people with bladder cancer at an early, treatable stage, the National Cancer Institute announced yesterday.
The test may be useful in other kinds of cancer, the institute said.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:  DEAR Diary:


Angolan President Predicts an Agreement Soon for the Withdrawal of Cuban Forces
LEAD: Angola's President predicted today that an agreement would soon be reached on the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola and independence for Namibia.


Food Notes
LEAD:  Dean &amp; DeLuca Moves


Kenneth J. Thornhill, 61, Financial Adviser
LEAD: Kenneth J. Thornhill, a financial consultant and former member of the Data General Corporation's board of directors, died Saturday at his home in Boca Raton, Fla.
His wife said he probably died of a heart attack.
He was 61 years old.


Fallon McElligott Wins Minnetonka Unit's Job
LEAD: Fragrance Marketing Group, a subsidiary of the Minnetonka Corp., Minnetonka, Minn., has named Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis, to look after its Foltene hair care and Claire Burke home fragrance product lines.
The combined billings for both products, formerly handled in-house, came to about $4.75 million last year.


Sports of The Times; Simple Wisdom From the Oracle of the Mets
LEAD: BASEBALL is a cerebral game, certainly, one that in order to succeed takes much quarrying of the nooks and crannies of the noodle.
And if there is a baseball player quicker to be contemplative, a ballplayer more ready to be ruminative, a player more eager to excavate the labyrinths of the brain than Keith Hernandez of the


2 Bushes on the Stump: One Tough, the Other Gentle
LEAD: First, there was the harsh George Bush, who slashed his Democratic opponent on such issues as the Pledge of Allegiance and the American Civil Liberties Union.
Then there was the gentle George Bush, the candidate who talked about the romance of space exploration and the tragedy of a two-tiered America where the well-heeled often ignore the poor.


From Argentina, How 6 Polish Jews Hid From the Nazis
''Debajo del Mundo'' (''Under the World'') exists in dangerous artistic territory.
The film is based on a true story, of Polish Jews who in 1942 escaped to a makeshift hovel dug underground in the woods.
For the next two years the family of six moved from one squalid catacomb to another.
This subject comes so loaded with emotional power that one dishonest scene could send the film careening into cheapened sentiment, manipulation or self-righteousness.
But the exceptional achievement of ''Debajo del Mundo'' is to display the ugly truth - these hunted people could not take eating or breathing for granted - with a brutal honesty that is enhanced, not evaded, by gracefully composed visual images.
The film defines its role in Holocaust literature modestly and effectively.
It is not a philosophical or intellectual examination of evil; it does not take the exhaustive approach of Marcel Ophuls (''The Sorrow and the Pity'' and the forthcoming ''Hotel Terminus''), in which the overwhelming accretion of details is part of the viewer's experience; and it does not try to engage our sympathies easily by singling out one character, an Anne Frank, with whom we are asked to identify.
Instead, it focuses on the daily survival of parents and their sons - three young men and an adolescent boy - for whom heroism is stealing potatos under cover of darkness and drama is lighting a fire that could mean discovery.
They are nearly found by scavengers who pick up the unbearable smell of excrement that comes from their hiding place.


Review/Theater; Exploring Politics, Love And the Politics of Love
LEAD: The pleasant surprise in the Equity Library Theater's revival of ''The Male Animal'' is the fun it manages to eke out of the 1940 politico-romantic comedy, whose politics are transparent and whose romance is opaque.
It was a period when playwrights used cocktails to inspire their heroes to speak slurred truth.


President Of Rollins Resigns in Board Rift
LEAD: Darrell E. Trent, the president and chief executive of Rollins Environmental Systems Inc., announced his resignation yesterday in a letter contending that the board's executive committee had frustrated his attempts to manage the company.


Thomas J. Kelly, 65; Won Medal of Honor
LEAD: Thomas J. Kelly, a recipient of the Medal of Honor and president of the Congressional Medal of Honor Society from 1964 to 1969, died of a heart attack Sunday at Shore Memorial Hospital in Somers Point, N.J.
He was 65 years old and lived in Margate, N.J.


I.B.M. Introduces Updated Program
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation introduced a new version of its DB2 mainframe database management program designed to allow information to be stored in many locations rather than on a central computer.
But I.B.M. said the program would not be available for another year.
The software will permit access to information stored on mainframe, mid-range and personal computers.


Prime Computer Chief Leaving After 7 Years
LEAD: Prime Computer Inc. said yesterday that its president and chief executive, Joe M. Henson, would step down and be succeeded by Anthony Craig after a transition period of several months.


Little Brother Watches
LEAD: The tables are being turned on who is watching whom.
When computers and satellites came into use, big governments got powerful new tools for keeping track of their citizens and each other.
But the information explosion can work both ways.


KENYA THREATENS TO CURB CHURCHES
LEAD: The Secretary General of Kenya's sole political party has warned that Parliament may abolish the constitutional guarantee of freedom of worship.


Clerical Workers Protest at Columbia University


Irate Yugoslavs March on Parliament
LEAD: About 5,000 workers from two machine-tool factories on the outskirts of Belgrade marched on Parliament today to protest low wages.


Alec Issigonis Dies; Auto Designer, 81, Introduced the Mini
LEAD: Sir Alec Issigonis, who designed the popular, boxy ''Mini'' cars and the practically indestructible Morris Minor, died Sunday at his home in Birmingham.
He was 81 years old and had suffered from Parkinson's disease.


About New York; Fall Classics: Orange and Blue Is All the Rage
LEAD: If there really is a time for every purpose under heaven, then this is a time for blue margaritas with orange twists.
A time to give away New York Film Festival tickets, steal home and curl up by the television set.


Allen-Bradley Sets Pact With Digital
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation said it would allow the Allen-Bradley Company to manufacture its MicroVAX computers to serve the industrial automation market.
Allen-Bradley will build versions of the MicroVAX under license from Digital and package them into systems that will share information between the factory floor and other parts of a company.


Soviet Railway Blast Kills 4 and Injures 280
LEAD: Rail cars filled with explosives crashed into a coal train in the central Russian Republic today, causing an explosion that killed 4 people and injured 280, Soviet reports said.


Books of The Times; A Comedy of Contemporary Manners and Effluvia
LEAD:  This Is Your Life  By Meg Wolitzer  263 pages. Crown Publishers. $17.95.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: NEW Mexicans love their chili.


Entire Dump Panel Resigns in a Protest
LEAD: A panel named by Westchester County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke has resigned, saying he had ignored its recommendations on closing the Croton dump and had not kept the panel informed.
A spokesman for Mr.
O'Rourke, Jim Keller, said the panel tended toward secrecy and would not be replaced because its job was essentially complete.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
8.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.18
7.90
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.23
7.24
6.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.50
7.44
6.91
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.76
8.74
9.46
30-YR.


Bra Burnings, Gray Hair, Other Illusions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sergei A. Losev, 61; The Director of Tass, Dies in Soviet Union
LEAD: Sergei A. Losev, general director of the official Soviet press agency Tass, died suddenly at age 61, the agency announced here today.


Legal Gain By Suitor Of Irving
LEAD: The Bank of New York Corporation yesterday won an important legal victory that dramatically improved its chances of acquiring the Irving Bank Corporation.


400 Are Arrested in Atlanta Abortion Protests
LEAD: Four hundred people who oppose abortion were arrested at abortion clinics here today in the largest in a series of demonstrations that began at the time of the Democratic National Convention here in July.


For Red Sox Fans, Caution Amid Zeal
LEAD: Sure, the city is excited about the Boston Red Sox.


Many Minority Teachers Plan to Quit, Poll Finds
LEAD: Despite a noticeable improvement in their salaries and morale in recent years, a substantial number of teachers plan to quit teaching within five years, especially young teachers and black and Hispanic teachers, according to a new national survey.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Alfin Inc., a manufacturer of fragrances, appointed Martin D. Goldberg senior vice president, finance and operations, replacing Kenneth H. Landis, who resigned.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Steffi Graff, the winner of the tennis Grand Slam and an Olympic gold medal, is among the first to qualify for the $1 million Virginia Slims Championships Nov. 14-20 at Madison Square Garden.
Also qualifying for the 16-woman field were Martina Navratilova, Chris Evert and Gabriela Sabatini. . . .
The New York Road Runners Club announced yesterday that Sebastian Coe and Steve Ovett of Britain will compete in the seventh annual Mercedes Mile on Fifth Avenue on Oct.


Minister and Archivist Are Back on the Boards
LEAD: By JENNIFER DUNNING


Two Groups to Dance In a Memorial Tribute
LEAD: The world premiere of a dance by Saeko Ichinohe and an appearance by the Workshop Ensemble of the Dance Theater of Harlem will be part of a memorial tribute to Hector Tello, a choreographer and soloist with Miss Ichinohe's company, at 6 P.M. on Oct. 11 at the Japan Society, 333 East 74th Street.
Mr.


Citicorp Sale Of Paper Mixed
LEAD: Interest rates were mixed yesterday at Citicorp's regular weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.


Robert L. Yeager, 81, Pulmonary Specialist
LEAD: Dr.
Robert L. Yeager, a specialist in the treatment of pulmonary diseases and the head of the health center bearing his name in Pomona, N.Y., died of spine and bone cancer at Summit Park Hospital in Pomona.
He was 81 years old and lived in Pomona.


Ex-Hostage Says Three Still Held Are 'O.K.'
LEAD: An Indian citizen freed after more than 20 months of captivity in Lebanon said today that three Americans held with him were ''O.K.''


2 Companies Begin Silicon Chip Effort
LEAD: The National Semiconductor Corporation and SGS-Thomson Microelectronics jointly entered the market for silicon chips for use in advanced telecommunications systems.
The chips introduced under a technology agreement are to be used in telecommunications systems that are known as Integrated Services Digital


Officer Shoots Man Outside His Home
LEAD: A Bronx man was shot in the stomach by a police officer last night after the man pointed what the police said appeared to be a rifle at him.


Space Shuttle Now Faces Stiff Test
LEAD: The space shuttle Discovery came through the rigors of launching and flight in excellent shape, officials reported today, but getting it ready to fly again on schedule will be a severe test critical to future space operations.


Third World Debt Plan Is Defended by Japan
LEAD: The decision by Japan to promote its own proposal to help Latin American debtors stems from the danger that creditor banks and debtor nations might abandon the American approach to the problem, a senior finance ministry official said today.


Poll Finds Increased Support For Nation's Space Program
LEAD: Public support for the nation's space program has increased, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.


Politburo Demands Plan for Agriculture
LEAD: Meeting for the first time since last week's leadership shake-up, the Politburo today ordered an overhaul of Soviet agriculture and approved creation of a new party journal and a new Government newspaper.


Review/Concert; Bychkov and the Buffalo
LEAD: Semyon Bychkov, who is now 36 years old, emerged as one of the most promising conductors of his generation a few years ago, and the scope of his international career is manifest both in his series of recordings with the Berlin Philharmonic and his appointment as director of the Orchestre de Paris, starting next season.


Lebanon's Christian Forces Tighten Hold on East Beirut
LEAD: Lebanon's main Christian militia tightened its grip on East Beirut today after taking control of fighters loyal to former President Amin Gemayel.


From California, Words of Advice
LEAD: With some glee, Republican sources have leaked a private Democratic document that is faintly embarrassing and somewhat informative about the California Democratic Congressional delegation.


Natasha Richardson, on Portraying Patty Hearst
LEAD: She is abducted at gunpoint, she is beaten, she is harangued by murderous ideologists.
She is blindfolded, bound, imprisoned in a closet, and threatened with execution.
She is confined until she is too weak to stand, forced to make tape-recordings praising her captors, and then she is raped.


Fannie May Is Offering Debt Of $500 Million Due in 1993
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association is offering, through various securities dealers, $500 million of indexed sinking-fund debentures due in 1993 at a price of par.


Sheldon I. Kramer Executive, 51
LEAD: Sheldon I. Kramer, the chief executive of Research Publications Inc., died of lung cancer Saturday at Stamford (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 51 years old and lived in Greenwich, Conn.


Agency's Biggest Find Is Constant Controversy
LEAD: A trivia quiz: What is the third-largest source of Federal revenue, after the Internal Revenue Service and the Customs Service?


Knee Surgery for Turner
LEAD: Odessa Turner, the Giants' second-year wide receiver, underwent arthroscopic surgery yesterday to remove a bone chip from his left knee.
The surgery was performed by Dr.
Russell Warren at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan.


Husky's Oil Discovery
LEAD: Husky Oil Ltd. said Tuesday that the consortium it heads had made a potentially large oil discovery off the coast of Newfoundland.
Husky Oil, in which the Nova Corporation of Alberta and the Hong Kong financier Li Ka-Shing each holds a 43 percent interest, said its Whiterose E-09 well on the Grand Banks had found ''a possible accumulation of 200 million to 300 million barrels'' of recoverable oil.


Takeover Stocks Climb; Dow Advances by 4.45
LEAD: A new wave of takeover fever swept Wall Street yesterday.
But while rumors pushed many stocks sharply higher, the market managed only a small gain over all.


Fruehauf Deal At $770 Million
LEAD: The Varity Corporation's proposed acquisition of the Fruehauf Corporation would involve a stock swap worth about $70 million and the assumption of more than $700 million in debt, a Fruehauf executive said today.


Robert W. Iversen, Professor, 68
LEAD: Robert W. Iversen, a retired professor of public administration at the Maxwell School of Syracuse University, died of stomach cancer Sept. 28 at his home in Syracuse.
He was 68 years old.


Prosecutor Is Dropping Charge Against Rowan
LEAD: The prosecution announced today that it would drop a charge of weapon possession against the syndicated columnist Carl T. Rowan, whose trial last week ended in a hung jury.


Kenneth W. O'Neil, 72, Bomb-Squad Chief
LEAD: Kenneth W. O'Neil, a retired New York City police lieutenant who headed the department's bomb squad for 18 years, died, apparently of a heart attack, on Monday at the Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center in Hanover, N.H.
He was 72 years old and lived in Bristol, N.H.


The Mysterious and Lovely Lablab Vine
LEAD: THE outset of all gardeners' careers is marked by an uneasy excitement.
Every plant is new, unknown and nameless.


Tears and Triumph as Holocaust Is Recalled
LEAD: President Reagan unveiled the cornerstone today for a new museum dedicated to studying and remembering the Holocaust, and he had harsh words for the treatment of Jews by the United Nations and the Soviet Union.


The House Where Gentleman Jim Lived
LEAD: RON and JoAnn Bellistri live in a house in Bayside, Queens, that stops traffic.


With Charter, Brazil Closes Military Era
LEAD: After almost 20 months of intense bargaining and frequent squabbles, Brazil's Congress today put into effect a new Constitution, hailed here as a crucial step in the country's transition from dictatorship to democracy.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Chilean election described a decision involving a public-opinion poll incorrectly in some copies.
Opposition leaders and a research organization, the Center for Public Studies, were said to have endorsed a decision against releasing a survey showing Gen.


Review/Dance; The Slovak State Folk Ensemble
LEAD: The Slovak State Folk Ensemble brought virtuoso folk dancing to the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts on Sunday afternoon.
It was a program of nonstop merriment.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


Clarence Carnes, 61; Tried to Flee Alcatraz
LEAD: Clarence Carnes, the only inmate not killed or executed after a 1946 escape attempt from Alcatraz, died Monday at the Medical Center for Federal Prisoners.
He was 61 years old.


Maxwell Bid Is Rejected
LEAD: Macmillan Inc.'s board rejected a $2.51 billion tender offer from the British publisher Robert Maxwell, setting the stage for a court showdown over the conduct of the bidding for the publishing giant.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Sept. 21 about a speech on health care by Michael S. Dukakis misidentified the principal author of the speech.
He was David Kusnet, not Theodore C. Sorensen.


Reviews/Music; Dmitriy Cogan, A Pianist, In Recital Debut
LEAD: Dmitriy Cogan, a young pianist of more than usual dexterity and confidence, made his local solo debut at Weill Recital Hall Monday evening.
Mr.
Cogan, who comes to New York from Moscow by way of San Francisco, has been studying at Juilliard and has been heard before as the partner of the violinist Alexander Markov.


United Illuminating Issue Is Offered
LEAD: The United Illuminating Company yesterday began offering $150 million of 10 1/2 percent debentures due 1995 at a price of 99.875, to yield 10.524 percent, through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; company.


Green Seeking to Require Recitation of the Pledge
LEAD: The New York City Schools Chancellor told the Board of Education yesterday that he believed it was important for all public schools in the city to begin the day with a recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance.


S.E.C. Names Administrator
LEAD: Richard D. Marshall, a lawyer with Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, has been named the associate regional administrator of the New York office of the Securities and Exchange Commission.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Brooke Yachts International, Lowestoft, England, to TBWA Advertising,Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt.


Dr. George Hatem Is Dead at 78; Leader in Public Health in China
LEAD: Dr.
George Hatem, who under the name Ma Haide became an almost legendary figure in China for his public health efforts, died on Sunday in a Beijing hospital.
He was 78 years old.


Insurers Reap Windfall In Hospital Repayments
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drug Helps Children With AIDS, Researchers Say
LEAD: Children with AIDS improve dramatically when given the drug azidothymidine, or AZT, regaining lost intelligence, speech and the ability to walk, a study has found.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Southern Travel Is Now Called Travel South
LEAD: Southern Travel magazine has changed its named to Travel South.
The Southern Progress Corporation, a subsidiary of Time Inc. that publishes Southern Living, had bought Southern Travel in September 1987 from The New York Times Magazine Group.
Its circulation is 200,000.


Time Flies In a Stylish Fashion
LEAD: RON FLEEGER is a New York product and interior designer with a quirky mission.


Sports People; Hopson Injured
LEAD: Training camp does not open until tomorrow, but little has changed for the Nets.
Their players combined for almost 600 missed games over the last two National Basketball Association seasons with injuries and drug problems.
Yesterday, they learned that Dennis Hopson, their top 1987 draft choice and the third player selected over all, was injured last Thursday in a pickup game and would miss the entire camp with a severely spained right ankle.


Goodyear Projects Drop in Earnings
LEAD: The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company's stock tumbled yesterday after the tire maker announced that its third-quarter earnings may fall sharply.
Goodyear fell $3.625, or 6.3 percent, to $53.625 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange.


When Inspiration Strikes Twice
LEAD:  A. Graves Lounge chair, by Michael Graves for SunarHauserman, was introduced in 1981.
B.
Round Chair, by David Ebert for Modern Mode, was introduced in 1988.


National League Notebook; Strawberry Stirs Controversy
LEAD: As Alan Hendricks, a players' agent, testified in Collusion III today, an executive on one side of the conspiracy cases wondered if Darryl Strawberry had created Collusion IV.


Budget Panel Meets Openly
LEAD: A consultant to the National Economic Commission estimated today that the Government could save as much as $95 billion over five years by reducing cost-of-living adjustments, or COLA's, for entitlement programs other than Social Security.


GBC Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GBC Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,010,000
1,113,000
Share earns
.48
.27
9mo net inc
4,993,000
1,958,000
Share earns
1.19
.48


MSI Data Offers Deal to Telxon
LEAD: The MSI Data Corporation, a maker of portable computers, said it would accept an immediate $20 million cash payment from the Telxon Corporation to settle all MSI claims in pending patent infringement and tender offer lawsuits.
MSI and Telxon have filed a series of claims and counterclaims against each other since 1985, charging each other with infringement of patents and unfair competition.


White House May Soon Seek Release of Arms for Contras
LEAD: The White House is considering asking Congress to release soon $16.5 million in stockpiled weapons to the Nicaraguan rebels, Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said.


Is That Dan Quayle In a Purple Haze?
LEAD: Is Dan Quayle a child of the 60's? A former flower child? A secret hippie?


AIR TRAFFIC ERRORS LEAD F.A.A. TO CUT FLIGHTS AT CHICAGO
LEAD: Worried by a new series of mistakes by air traffic controllers in Chicago, the Federal Aviation Administration has cut peak-hour landings at the city's two main airports.


Leander Perez Jr. Is Dead at 68
LEAD: Leander Perez Jr., a former District Attorney who lost his father's legacy of power in Plaquemines Parish in fights with his brother, died of a heart attack today.
He was 68 years old.


Healthvest SBI reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthvest SBI (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
14,174,000
10,315,000
Net inc
5,785,000
6,280,000
Share earns
.50
.54
9mo rev
39,474,000
24,580,000
Net inc
18,280,000
15,287,000
Share earns
1.57
1.50
Shares outst
11,661,000
10,198,000


Bold Prediction From Dukakis
LEAD: Just hours before the Bentsen-Quayle debate, Mr.
Dukakis began a news conference yesterday with a rare confession of anxiety.


Getty Plans Bid For Clark Oil
LEAD: The Getty Petroleum Corporation said it would submit a bid for the bankrupt Clark Oil and Refining Corporation, a leading discount gasoline marketer in the Midwest.
The company said its bid for Clark and other assets of the Apex Oil Company would top the $650 million offered by the Horsham Corporation.


ABC Wants Debate With a Difference
LEAD: George Bush's aides say he is committed to two debates and no more.


Transcript of the Debate on TV Between Bentsen and Quayle
LEAD:  Participants in the Debate  CANDIDATES: Lloyd Bentsen, Democrat, and Dan Quayle, Republican.
MODERATOR: Judy Woodruff, ''MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour,'' PBS.
PANELISTS: Tom Brokaw, anchor and managing editor, NBC Nightly News; Jon Margolis, Washington correspondent, The Chicago Tribune; Brit Hume, national correspondent, ABC News.


NEAR DESTRUCTION OF REACTOR CITED
LEAD: A foreman's error almost turned a leak of reactor coolant at the Savannah River Plant into a catastrophe that would have destroyed the reactor, according to a memorandum written by a former engineer there.


Lesson in Flight for Students at Coast Guard School
LEAD: Students from Public School 26 on Governors Island using a two-way radio to communicate with classmates aboard the blimp Enterprise.
The youngsters were being given a demonstration of the principles of lighter-than-air flight.
The Enterprise is in New York for coverage of the Mets-Dodgers National League Championship Series games this weekend.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Don't Call Him Judge
LEAD: Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist is not known for standing unduly on ceremony; despite his exalted station in life, he retains a distinctly unstuffy manner.


Chile: The Pinochet Years
LEAD:  Sept. 11, 1973: The armed forces, led by Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, overthrow the Socialist-Communist coalition Government of President Salvador Allende Gossens.
Mr.
Allende dies of bullet wounds; his doctor says he committed suicide, but family members and many supporters later say he was killed.
Hundreds of leftists are killed or disappear after being arrested; tens of thousands are imprisoned or sent into exile.


Harvey Wellman, 71; Retired U.S. Diplomat
LEAD: Harvey R. Wellman, a United States diplomat and member of the Foreign Service for 32 years, died of a heart attack Sept. 27 at Middlesex Memorial Hospital in Middletown, Conn.
He was 71 years old and lived in Old Saybrook, Conn.


Hockney to Zuni: A Show House With a Difference
LEAD: SHOW houses, where interior decorators use their talents to benefit a charitable cause, seem to be coming along with ever-increasing frequency.


New Regina Chief Sounds Optimistic Note
LEAD: The besieged Regina Company has resolved many of the product-quality problems that plagued it last spring and summer, its new chairman said yesterday.


Thor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thor Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Sales
45,058,000
44,504,000
Net inc
1,772,000
2,252,000
Share earns
.35
.44
Yr sales
162,214,000
165,155,000
Net inc
5,752,000
7,362,000
Share earns
1.13
1.46


Arbor Drugs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arbor Drugs Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Sales
63,875,622
55,623,660
Net inc
1,727,572
1,504,703
Share earns
.27
.24
Yr sales
246,514,354
215,291,212
Net inc
6,657,500
5,150,433
Share earns
1.05
.81


Review/Television; Life After Divorce, in the 'Taxi' Spirit
LEAD: John Lacey, a New York teacher married for 10 years, comes home to find a ''Dear John'' letter with the news that his wife has run off with his best friend. ''Must have thrown you for a loop,'' says his nasty brother-in-law, sneering. ''And with your best friend yet!'' At the urging of his sister, John decides to visit a singles support group in a community center in Rego Park, Queens.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Mets Lose and A's Win  The Dodgers chased the Mets' 20-game winner David Cone with five runs in the first two innings and won, 6-3, in Los Angeles, tying the National League playoff at 1-1.
Oakland got baseball's best hitter, Wade Boggs, to strike out in two key situations, beating the Red Sox, 2-1, in Boston in the opener of the American League series.


Study Says Piers in Hudson Don't Damage Environment
LEAD: A 26-month study for the Public Development Commission has found that ''platforming'' - constructing large piers for buildings in the Hudson River near the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center - is not environmentally harmful.


Excerpts From Aide's Memo
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a memorandum by Frederick B. Christensen, a senior supervisor with E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, upon his early retirement, dated July 29, 1981.
The memorandum was written on stationery with a letterhead ''du Pont, Inter-office Memorandum.'' The name of the person to whom it was addressed has been deleted in the copy in the Department of Energy Public Documents Collection.


The Global Strategy at Grand Met
LEAD: The fast-paced deal-making in recent days by Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. represents the last crucial steps in an aggressive corporate overhaul intended to turn the British conglomerate into one of the world's leading food and drink companies.


Judge Seals Verdict as Trial In Suit Against Klan Ends
LEAD: A Federal jury returned a verdict today in a civil rights lawsuit against 10 present and former members of the Ku Klux Klan, but the judge immediately ordered the verdict sealed.


Health; Personal Health
LEAD: Is it such a good idea to be drinking eight or more glasses a day of the water that comes out of your tap?
Samuel Coleridge's line from ''The Rhyme of the Ancient Mariner'' - ''Water, water everywhere, Nor any drop to drink'' - could characterize a growing number of American communities, where the drinking water has been tainted by pollutants.


The Boston at Carnegie
LEAD: The Boston Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Seiji Ozawa, is to begin a series of concerts at Carnegie Hall next Wednesday at 8 P.M. with a performance of Mahler's Ninth Symphony.
The concert is to be repeated next Thursday, also at 8 P.M.
A Brahms program is also scheduled by the orchestra at Carnegie Hall on March 1 and 2, with Maurizio Pollini as the piano soloist.


Increase in Export Sales
LEAD: American companies are getting a growing proportion of their total sales from exports, according to a survey released on Tuesday by the Conference Board.
Exports from the United States accounted for at least 10 percent of total sales at 49 percent of the companies that were surveyed, compared with about 40 percent of those surveyed in 1986, the board said.


N.H.L. Preview; Rangers Relying on Defense
LEAD: After his brief emergency stay in the hospital last spring, Michel Bergeron was told by his doctors that he could either do without cigarettes and coffee or he could do without his gallbladder.
Last Sunday, Bergeron sat in his office with a cigarette in one hand, coffee in the other and a smile across his face.


Metro Datelines; Official Faults Project Near Grucci Factory
LEAD: The Brookhaven Town Supervisor ordered the planning board yesterday to reconsider its approval of a 795-unit condominium project half a mile from the Grucci fireworks factory.


Patent Plan in Europe
LEAD: The European Community Commission proposed patent legislation today to protect biotechnology inventions in the 12-nation trade bloc.
National patent laws differ so much that ''lack of legal certainty and lack of sufficient protection is commonplace in the community,'' the commission said.
Scientists in the community are at a disadvantage compared with their colleagues in the United States and Japan, where laws offer ''considerably more protection through patentability than is available in Europe,'' the commission said.


Planters Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Planters Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,146,000
2,304,000
Per share
.45
.33
9mo net inc
7,893,000
6,642,000
Per share
1.13
.96
The bank said the latest quarter included a pre-tax gain of about 4 cents a share from the sale of its Ashboro office.


Health: Psychology; Aggression in Children Can Mean Problems Later
LEAD: It is the extremely aggressive child, rather than the anxious or depressed one, who is most likely to have emotional troubles later in life, new studies are showing.
The findings contradict prevailing wisdom in child development, which holds that anxiety is the most basic source of emotional difficulties.


Judge Criticizes Pretoria for Thwarting the Courts
LEAD: A liberal South African judge has voiced criticism of the country's white political leaders for usurping the power of the judiciary and has called for a major effort to protect the rule of law.


Wright Formally Denies Breach on Nicaragua
LEAD: House Speaker Jim Wright today issued a formal denial of accusations that he violated the chamber's rules when he discussed a C.I.A. covert operation in Nicaragua aimed at undermining the Sandinista Government.


Mixing Styles With Ease
LEAD: MARK HAMPTON, the New York interior decorator, announced in March that Hickory Chair, the North Carolina manufacturer of traditional furniture, would produce the Mark Hampton Collection of about 30 pieces.
Some would be inspired by furniture in Mr.
Hampton's Manhattan apartment and Southampton, L.I., home, and others would simply be pieces he believes are easy to live with.


Eckersley Victor In Classic Battle
LEAD: With the fans' stomping threatening to shatter the towering wall in left, with baseball's leading batter, Wade Boggs, facing him in the ninth inning and the winning run on base, Dennis Eckersley of the Athletics was worried about negative vibrations.


6 Months Into Budget Cuts, Albany Agencies Feel Toll
LEAD: The Office of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities has eliminated 230 positions.
The Division of Substance Abuse Services has closed its laboratory in Brooklyn.
And the Department of Agriculture and Markets has laid off its inspector of large-capacity truck scales.


Market Place; Global Funds Draw Bond Fans
LEAD: BONDS of the New South Wales Treasury or the South Australian Finance Authority may sound obscure to United States investors, but those are exactly the kinds of issues that make up the portfolios of a fast-growing group of mutual funds.


Cummins Expects Loss
LEAD: The Cummins Engine Company said on Tuesday that it expected to report a third-quarter net loss significantly greater than its $6.3 million loss a year earlier.
Cummins said the factors contributing to the poor results included price discounting of its engines because of stiff competition in the heavy-truck market, higher costs of new engine models and difficulty in meeting orders during a company restructuring.


Justices Weigh Sentencing and Racial Hiring
LEAD: Three days into its new term, the Supreme Court grappled today with two of the most significant constitutional controversies on its docket: the validity of government-sponsored affirmative action programs and the new Federal criminal sentencing system.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Foote, Cone Subsidiary Buys Shop in Australia
LEAD: Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Pty.
Ltd., the Australian subsidiary of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, has acquired Forbes Macfie Hansen Pty.
Ltd., which is based in Sydney.
The purchase price was not disclosed.
The merged entity will be called Foote, Cone &amp; Belding and have combined billings of $80 million.


Serene Spot For Shirt Shopping
LEAD: THE new Comme des Garcons Shirt shop at 454 West Broadway, between Houston and Prince Streets in SoHo, is a striking example of a perfectly done minimalist interior.


Loss in Game 1 Doesn't Faze Sox
LEAD: Joe Morgan leaned back in his chair, with his usual post-game beer in front of him.
For the manager of a team that had just lost the first game of the American League playoff, he looked relaxed.


Bush, in Colorado, Offers Plan Of Investing 'in Our Children'
LEAD: Vice President Bush said again today that he wants to help the poor through inspirational leadership rather than with costly Federal programs.
But he promised to use some Federal dollars for a plan to help disadvantaged children.


Ford Introduces New Taurus Model
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company introduced a ''super high output'' version of its popular Taurus model that it said would compete with such luxury imports as BMW and Volkswagen's Audi.
The Taurus SHO, which is scheduled to be in dealer showrooms on Dec. 26, will have a base price of $19,700.
Ford plans to produce 20,000 Taurus S


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertsing; People
LEAD: *
Gerard Starybrat has joined Kallir, Philips, Ross as senior vice presidentaccount group supervisor.


Image Retailing Group Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Image Retailing Group Inc
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
15,876,000
11,900,000
Net inc
8,000
84,000
Share earns
-
.06


Crazy Eddie Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crazy Eddie Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 28
1988
1987
Sales
63,687,000
80,477,000
Net inc
b42,565,000
c8,012,000
Share earns
1.37
-
6mo sales
119,605,000
158,529,000
Net inc
b34,589,000
c10,294,000
Share earns
1.12
-


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - WORKING GROUP ON RIGHTS OF MIGRANT WORKERS - 11 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Sudbury Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sudbury Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Sales
142,900,000
105,400,000
Net inc
262,000
2,677,000
Share earns
.01
.22


International Lease Finance Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Lease Finance Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
53,239,000
39,785,000
Net inc
10,244,000
7,680,000
Share earns
.27
.22
Shares outst
32,432,000
32,731,000
9mo rev
150,315,000
114,104,000
Net inc
31,225,000
b27,812,000
Share earns
.82
.84
Shares outst
32,458,000
31,567,000


DCNY Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DCNY Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
2,385,967
b5,126,623
Per share
-
.64
9mo net inc
1,211,973
8,021,491
Per share
.15
1.00
b-Net income


ACCORD IS REACHED ON BASE CLOSINGS
LEAD: House and Senate negotiators agreed today on legislation that will clear the way for closing about two dozen obsolete military bases, a process so politically sensitive that Congress has prevented the Pentagon from shutting down any major bases since 1977.


Hold That Revolving Door
LEAD: There's still time for the 100th Congress to demonstrate that it cares about ethics in government.
A bill imposing reasonable cooling-off periods on ''revolving door'' lobbying by former senators and representatives might pass the House today.
This measure could then be quickly reconciled with a tougher ethics bill that has passed the


An Unstoppable Export Machine
LEAD: To the consternation of the United States and its other trading partners, West Germany is demonstrating that its export machine is virtually unstoppable.
Even a 42 percent rise of the mark against the dollar over the last three years has not dethroned the country as the world's No. 1 exporter.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''It's not that they're not sympathetic, it's simply that they will take America backwards.


Where Designers Go to See What's In
LEAD: MORE than 25,000 designers, architects and dealers are expected to gather in New York this week for Designer's Saturday, a four-day event that began yesterday and will introduce some of the newest designs for home and office.


U.S. Asking Soviets To Let World Court Settle Some Disputes
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has proposed that the United States and the Soviet Union let the World Court arbitrate specific disputes between them and agree in advance to accept the Court's verdict, a senior Administration official said today.


Metro Datelines; Queensboro Ramp Reopened to Traffic
LEAD: The ramp from the upper roadway of the Queensboro Bridge at 60th Street between First and Second Avenues reopened yesterday, one year after being closed for reconstruction.


Sinking-Fund Debentures Are Offered by James River
LEAD: The James River Corporation is offering $250 million of 10 3/4 percent sinking-fund debentures due in 2018 at a price of par through underwriters led by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.
At pricing, the yield spread was about 174 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Frederick R. Lack, 93, Retired Executive, Dies
LEAD: Frederick R. Lack, vice president in charge of radio and specialty products for Western Electric before his retirement in 1958, died of a heart attack Tuesday at the Southport Manor Nursing Home in Southport, Conn.
He was 93 years old.


A Way to Save Paper, From Posters to Charts
LEAD: ''ANYTHING that's paper can be laminated,'' said Richard Canin, the product manager of the Idesco Corporation of Manhattan.
And laminated products can be used in the home in numerous ways, said Andrew Schonzeit, president of the company.


Eisig Silberschlag, 85, Hebrew College Chief
LEAD: Dr.
Eisig Silberschlag, a former president of Hebrew College of Boston, died last Friday at St.
David's Hospital in Austin, Tex.
He was 85 years old and lived in Austin, where he was a professor of Judaic studies at the University of Texas.


Qed Exploration Inc reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Qed Exploration Inc (OTC)
Year to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,969,651
2,331,351
Net loss
b1,145,274
c169,324
Share earns
-
.07
b-Included a $2,682,241 non-cash writedown of its oil and gas properties.
c-Net income


U.S. Sees No Sign of New Hostage Release
LEAD: As an Indian freed by his Lebanese captors arrived at an American military hospital here, State Department officials said today that they had no indication that any American hostages might be released soon.


Briefs
LEAD:  Debt


Metro Datelines; Regan Aide Invokes Fifth Amendment
LEAD: Joseph Palumbo, whose fund-raising memorandums to State Comptroller Edward V. Regan and others were the subject of State Government Integrity Commission hearings last month, invoked the Fifth Amendment yesterday rather than testify today to the commission.


Fire at Merv Griffin's House
LEAD: Fire damaged a $1.75 million house under construction for the producer-entrepreneur Merv Griffin, and fire officials estimated damage at $1 million.
The fire occurred Tuesday in the P.G.A.
West Country Club development near Palm Springs, said Tim Spann, a spokesman for the Riverside County Fire Department.


Epsilon Data Management Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Epsilon Data Management Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,315,000
9,391,000
Net inc
250,000
b101,000
Share earns
.08
-
Shares outst
3,045,000
2,736,000
b-Net loss


Gold Prices End Above $400; Dollar Closes Little Changed
LEAD: Gold prices climbed back above $400 an ounce yesterday, while the dollar held steady as traders awaited the release of new economic figures.


Pan Am in Pact With Union
LEAD: The financially pressed Pan Am Corporation has reached a tentative contract agreement with leaders of its flight attendants' union, officials of the airline and the union said yesterday.


A PARADE IN EGYPT MARKS '73 FIGHTING
LEAD: Egypt today held its first full-scale military parade marking the 1973 war with Israel since President Anwar el-Sadat was assassinated in a similar parade seven years ago.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Banner Industries, Cleveland, a manufacturer of mechanical components and chemical products, said it had agreed to sell its Chemrex Inc. unit to SKW Trostberg A.G., a West German company, and expected to realize a gain of $40 million before taxes, or $25 million after taxes.


Atlanta Mall Rules Organ Grinder Obsolete
LEAD: Sam Ketcham seems more puzzled than hurt when he talks about being ousted from Lenox Square, the stylish Atlanta shopping mall where he had performed as an organ grinder with a monkey for three decades.


Mother Details Officer's Threat To Kill Davis
LEAD: The mother of Larry Davis testified yesterday that a police officer had threatened to kill him several weeks before a shootout in 1986 between him and the police.


Bank Board Lifts Rescue Cost to $45 Billion
LEAD: Bringing its estimate more into line with those of its critics, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board said today that it would cost $45 billion to $50 billion to shut or merge the nation's 500 insolvent savings institutions.


Designers (and Friends) Hold Gala to Help AIDS Charities
LEAD: LAST night's gala sponsored by Metropolitan Home magazine transformed the cavernous 26th Street Armory on Lexington Avenue into a designer dreamscape, complete with tented galleries, tables set with votive candles and scenes of downtown Zanzibar from an opera stage set by the artist David Hockney.


Benefit Art Show
LEAD: About 30 pieces of art, some by noted entertainers, will be on view through Oct. 30 at the 101 Wooster Gallery, 101 Wooster Street.
The exhibition is a benefit for Shelter Aid, a referral organization that helps victims of domestic violence.
Among the artists represented in the show are Gina Lollobrigida and Tony Bennett.


Review/Theater; Is Cannibalism Justified?
LEAD: Even though it features just a single actor on the stage, Barry Collins's drama ''Judgment'' calls itself a two-character play.
That is because the two-hour monologue delivered without intermission by Andrei Vukhov, a fictional Soviet Army officer describing his imprisonment in a monastery cell during World War II, is offered to the audience as testimony to be judged.


Robert C. Urban, Executive, 68
LEAD: Robert C. Urban, a former chief executive officer of the American Safety Razor Division of Philip Morris Inc., died of complications yesterday after brain surgery at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 68 years old and lived in Summit, N.J.


Events: Walking Tour and Lecture Series
LEAD:  Borderline Walk, Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, at Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights; 718-624-0890.


Queens Woman, 85, Shot Twice in Robbery
LEAD: An 85-year-old Queens woman was shot twice in the chest yesterday as she struggled with a robber outside the apartment building where she lives.


Nordstrom's Fashion Chain Will Expand to Jersey in '90
LEAD: Nordstrom Inc., the highly regarded West Coast fashion chain, will enter the metropolitan New York market in the spring of 1990 with a large store in the Menlo Park Mall in Edison, N.J.


Radon Scare - Where's the Proof?
LEAD: Before people rush to have radon levels in their homes reduced, as Federal officials advise, they might ask themselves whether such advice is premature.
Long-term exposure to high concentrations of the gas might well increase a person's chances of contracting lung cancer.
But the 4 picocurie per liter of air ''action level'' urged by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Public Health Service seems low.


U.S. Official Denies Rumors Of Secret Talks on Hostages
LEAD: The State Department's top counterterrorism official today dismissed new rumors that the United States is secretly negotiating the release of hostages in Lebanon.
He asserted that a host of private American citizens are falsely claiming to represent the Government in hostage deals overseas.


The Planetary Heat Wave Is Real
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mattingly Trade Denied
LEAD: The first of what will likely become a winter filled with trade rumors involving Don Mattingly surfaced this week but was quickly denied by the Yankees.


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 21
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Winn-Dixie Stores Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 21
1988
1987
Sales
2,029,182,000
1,997,308,000
Net inc
20,206,000
15,472,000
Share earns
.50
.38
Shares outst
40,034,778
41,229,285


Sergei A. Losev, 61, The Director of Tass And Party Delegate
LEAD: Sergei A. Losev, general director of the official Soviet press agency Tass, died suddenly on Monday, the agency announced here Tuesday.
He was 61 years old.


WQXR Commentary
LEAD: Radio station WQXR, 96.3 FM and 1560 AM, is to begin a five-week series of commentary on the Presidential election today, featuring columnists of The New York Times.
The series will include 90-second analyses and vignettes by A. M. Rosenthal, Russell Baker, Anthony Lewis, Tom Wicker and Flora Lewis, broadcast periodically every day through Nov.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; A Third Centennial
LEAD: This weekend will mark a monumental but little-heralded anniversary in the nation's capitol.


Profits Down For Brokers
LEAD: The securities industry, hit hard since the October 1987 market crash, was able to generate earnings in the second quarter that were only half as great as in the first quarter, and it may face additional staff cuts unless conditions improve, an industry group said yesterday.


Chronic Failures at Nuclear Plant Are Disclosed by the Energy Dept.
LEAD: The Department of Energy said today that chronic equipment failure and poor operating procedures caused nuclear reactors at the Savannah River Plant to shut down unexpectedly 9 to 12 times a year for nearly two decades, a rate twice that of the civilian nuclear power industry.


Transactions
LEAD:  TUESDAY  Baseball


Q-Med Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Q-Med Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,733,542
4,779,674
Net loss
75,462
b544,734
Share earns
-
.09
9mo sales
6,813,874
12,267,233
Net loss
2,845,520
b2,078,916
Share earns
-
.34
b-Net income and the 9 months included an extraordinary credit of $551,700.


Morehouse Industries Inc reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morehouse Industries Inc (OTC)
Year to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,877,300
3,896,000
Net loss
582,300
280,000


THE PLAYOFFS:
LEAD: Sports of The Times ; A Quail And a Phoenix


Studies Find Abortion Is Common In All Race and Economic Groups
LEAD: Two nationwide surveys indicate that young, poor, black unmarried women are most likely to have abortions, but that the operation is common among women of all racial and economic groups, even among women who belong to religious groups that oppose abortions.
They show that nearly 3 of every 100 American women 15 to 44 years old had an abortion last year, a figure that has remained constant for a decade.


Poll Gives Bush Rising Lead Over Dukakis
LEAD: Vice President Bush pulled further ahead of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis in a new poll released tonight by ABC News and The Washington Post.


Gretzky Show to Cut New Ice Tonight
LEAD: After leading Edmonton to four Stanley Cup championships in five years, Wayne Gretzky will move his high-scoring act to Los Angeles, where he leads the Kings against the Detroit Red Wings tonight as the National Hockey League opens its 72d season.


Hungary Liberalizes Law
LEAD: A new law to liberalize Hungary's economy in a way that the Justice Minister said might smack of capitalism to some people won unanimous assent today in Parliament.


Bridge
LEAD: The eyes of the bridge world are about to turn to Venice, where the eighth World Team Olympiad begins Saturday.
At the local level this weekend, there is activity in New Jersey and Westchester.


House Passes Bill on Disclosure of Foreign Stakes in U.S.
LEAD: Despite contentions that it was catering to election-year fears, the House passed a controversial bill today that would require major foreign investors to report their United States holdings to the Government.


Alco Seeks Ways To Increase Value
LEAD: The Alco Health Services Corporation said it was studying new ways to increase shareholder value after its agreement to be acquired by the McKesson Corporation was called off.
McKesson, the country's largest drug wholesaler, had agreed to buy Alco for $508 million, after a management-led group had offered $440 million for it.


Talking Deals; BellSouth's Move Into Eurobonds
LEAD: LIKE a growing number of American companies, BellSouth has taken its first plunge into the Eurodollar bond market, saving hundreds of thousands of dollars.
More important for its new international strategy, the company has made a splash that will help its name abroad.


REGIME CONCEDES
LEAD: Opponents of President Augusto Pinochet defeated him in the plebiscite Wednesday in which he sought the voters' approval to extend his term as President by eight years.


2 Men Attack the Daughter Of John Wayne and a Friend
LEAD: A financier and a daughter of the actor John Wayne were tied up and beaten in a daytime attack by two men on Monday, and the police said that no clear motive for the attack had been determined.


THE PLAYOFFS: American League Notebook; Canseco Bat Quiets Serenade
LEAD: In 1986, they serenaded Darryl Strawberry, the Mets' outfielder, with a persistent sing-song chant during the World Series: ''Dar-ryl, Dar-ryl.'' Today, the fans at Fenway Park made Jose Canseco their target.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; No Debate Abroad
LEAD: In addition to the American audience for the televised exchange last night between the Republicans' Dan Quayle and the Democrats' Lloyd Bentsen, there might have been a global audience of 10 million or more for the debate.


Jobless Dip in Germany
LEAD: The number of jobless West Germans dropped by 70,000, to 2.1 million, in September, and the Government said today that the 3.2 percent decline proved the success of its efforts to promote economic growth.
The Federal Statistics Office said that seasonally unadjusted unemployment fell to 8.1 percent of the work force in September from 8.5 percent in August.


Key Soviet Aide Recommending Freer Economy
LEAD: The Kremlin's new chief ideologist, moving quickly to set the tone for the restructured Soviet leadership, has called for more radical experiments with market economics and rejected the idea of a world struggle against the West.


Notes and Bonds Little Changed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes were little changed yesterday, despite another big drop in oil prices.
Dealers said that trading remained very sluggish.


Milan's Muted Palette Has Flashes of Color
LEAD: With two days of showings to go, the parade of pleasant spring and summer fashions continues inexorably here.
Every designer has his or her own vision of how women will want to look for warm weather, but there are common themes.


S.E.C. Seeks To Stay With Drexel Judge
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday that a Federal district judge presiding over the broad securities fraud action against Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. should continue to hear the case because no conflict of interest exists.


Man Held as Priest's Killer, and Freed
LEAD: Hours after the police arrested a suspect in the slaying of a Bronx priest, the 28-year-old man was released late Tuesday night after the Bronx District Attorney declined to prosecute him.


Haitians' Suit Alleges Bias In U.S. Immigration Policy
LEAD: A suit filed last week in Federal court asserts that thousands of Haitian refugees seeking asylum here have been denied residency because of discrimination by the Immigration and Naturalization Service in the last decade.


Banco Popular de Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banco Popular de Puerto Rico (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
12,698,326
9,862,156
Per share
1.27
.99
9mo net inc
34,646,527
28,093,453
Per share
3.47
2.81


HEALTH: Nutrition; Diet Higher in Fat May Help Adult Diabetics, Study Shows
LEAD: A new study suggests that the diet usually recommended for patients with the most common form of adult diabetes may be less effective in protecting health than a diet that allows greater consumption of unsaturated fats.


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hovnanian Enterprises Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
57,301,000
56,806,000
Net inc
1,695,000
4,180,000
Share earns
.08
.19
6mo rev
116,693,000
128,335,000
Net inc
b8,954,000
9,844,000
Share earns
.43
.46


New York Obstetricians Report a Crisis
LEAD: Burdened by frequent lawsuits and heavy insurance costs, obstetricians in New York State are increasingly abandoning their practices, leading to overcrowding in public maternity clinics and reducing specialized care in rural areas, according to obstetricians and a recent study of their specialty.


Sports People; Canadian Inquiry
LEAD: The Canadian Government yesterday appointed a senior judge to head a judicial inquiry into the use of drugs in Canadian sports, with the focus on the events leading to the disqualification of Ben Johnson after his victory in the 100-meter run at the Seoul Olympic Games.
In appointing Charles W. Dubin, associate chief justice of the Supreme Court of Ontario, the Government chose one of the widest forms of inquiry available under Canada's parliamentary system.


Review/Theater; A Religious Gamble
LEAD: An unworldly monk from a Puerto Rican monastery gets a fast big-city education in ''Padre Gomez y Santa Cecilia'' by Gloria Gonzalez at the Repertorio Espanol theater and, when his superiors threaten to punish him for what he has learned, he has a few things to teach them.


Film Festival; The 'Butcher of Lyons' Is Himself Picked Apart
LEAD: Marcel Ophuls's ''Hotel Terminus: The Life and Times of Klaus Barbie'' begins with a deceptive sense of restraint and calm.
In the opening sequence, a friend of Mr.
Barbie's recalls a New Year's Eve party at which the former Gestapo officer took offense at some disrespectful remarks made about Hitler.


Rubicon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rubicon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
459,000
935,000
Net loss
917,000
167,000
Yr rev
2,855,000
4,245,000
Net loss
2,366,000
1,273,000


Carnival Cruise Lines Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carnival Cruise Lines Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
157,600,000
160,100,000
Net inc
56,300,000
50,000,000
Share earns
.42
.42
Shares outst
134,613,116
118,153,210
9mo rev
469,300,000
438,200,000
Net inc
154,300,000
118,300,000
Share earns
1.15
1.06
Shares outst
134,618,822
112,122,099


Amsterdam Journal; Welcome Mat Gone, Flower Children Go Straight
LEAD: In the 1970's, this capital of canals, bicycles and quaintly tinkling streetcars was also a mecca for Western Europe's unruly, irreverent and off-beat - an oasis of drug-laced social experimentation that thrived in a mellow aura of Dutch tolerance.


Tyco Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyco Laboratories Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
432,580,000
304,782,000
Net inc
21,286,000
13,074,000
Share earns
.59
.37
The results of Atcor Inc. have been included since the date of its acquisition on Aug.


Nussbaum Hearing Nov. 23
LEAD: A hearing on the murder charge against Hedda Nussbaum in the death of Lisa Steinberg was adjourned yesterday until Nov. 23.
Ms.
Nussbaum's lawyer, Barry Scheck, said, ''The District Attorney is conducting an exhaustive investigation to determine if my client is criminally responsible'' for the death of Lisa, who was 6 years old.


BENTSEN AND QUAYLE ATTACK ON QUESTION OF COMPETENCE TO SERVE IN THE PRESIDENCY
LEAD: Senators Dan Quayle of Indiana and Lloyd Bentsen of Texas clashed angrily last night during a Vice-Presidential debate in which each insisted that he could handle the burdens of the Presidency.


Fighting Apathy, The Chicago Way
LEAD: So they're bored in Chicago with the Presidential race.


Olympic Ratings May Be Ill Omen for Networks
LEAD: The NBC network's poor ratings for the Summer Olympic Games may signal long-term misery for the television industry, say advertising executives who analyze viewer habits and buy commercial time.


Israel Bans Kahane Party From Election
LEAD: The Central Election Commission today banned Rabbi Meir Kahane's party from parliamentary elections next month on the grounds that it is racist and undemocratic.


IPM Technology Inc reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IPM Technology Inc
(
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
53,937,000
41,839,000
Net inc
b265,000
c246,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-After a loss of $58,000 from discontinued operations.
c-Net loss and after a loss from discontinued operations of $710,000.


Quayle as President?
LEAD: A man I know, a deeply committed Republican, has just been seriously ill with Legionnaire's disease.
At one point he was near death.
As he began to recover, he told his brother that he was going to vote for Michael Dukakis.


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Ken Donahue yesterday resigned as defensive coach at Tennessee (0-5).
The Volunteers have given up more 36.6 points and 491.6 yards a game during their worst start ever.
Donahue, 63, has been an assistant coach for 37 seasons, including 21 at Alabama with Paul (Bear) Bryant. . . .
A day after he completed his 30-day suspension for violation of the National Football League's substance-abuse policy, Calvin Thomas of the Chicago Bears was traded yesterday to the Denver Broncos for an undisclosed, conditional 1989 draft choice.


Review/Music; An Evening of Drums
LEAD: Art and commerce met in a quirky way on Monday evening at Marymount Manhattan Theater when members of Gageego, an avant-garde ensemble, joined forces with the Percussion Group and several independent drummers to present a collection of 17 snare drum pieces published under the title ''The Noble Snare.


Whistle-Blower Bill Planned
LEAD: Governor Cuomo said today that he would propose legislation next year to extend ''whistle blower'' job protection to those government employees who go to news organizations with their information.


Review/Piano; Haefliger Plays Copland
LEAD: Andreas Haefliger began his debut recital at the 92d Street Y on Saturday night with a bold and uncompromising statement of Aaron Copland's hard-hitting ''Piano Variations'' and followed it with thoughtful Beethoven and Schumann that placed him firmly in the Germanic tradition of committed intellectual interpretation of the classics.


New Owners in N.F.L.
LEAD: The sales of the New England Patriots and Seattle Seahawks were approved unanimously today at a special meeting of National Football League owners.
The transactions were approved pending the reception of documents by the league office within 10 days.
N.F.L. officials said they anticipated no problems with either sale.


Learning to See Beyond the Guilt
LEAD: THE first step toward resolving feelings of competitiveness with parents involves wading through complex emotions.
These feelings are particularly acute when the child succeeds at something the parents would like to have accomplished themselves.


Chase Expects Loan Losses
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation said today that it expected nonperforming loans in Argentina to reduce its third-quarter after-tax earnings by about $18 million.


Bush and Dukakis Praise Running Mates
LEAD: Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis expressed pride tonight in their running mates' performances, and each asserted that his party's candidate had won the Omaha debate.


35 Years of Innovative L.I. Houses
LEAD: PEOPLE who missed ''Long Island Modern:


Koch Blocked On Shelters, 3 Officials Say
LEAD: Three borough presidents said yesterday that a lawsuit they had filed challenging the Koch administration's plan to build 11 shelters for the homeless had succeeded, but the law secretary for the judge hearing the case said the decision had not yet been signed.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Agency's Job: Explaining Californians
LEAD: BOZELL, JACOBS, KENYON &amp; ECKHARDT'S branch office here has been working with the Chrysler Corporation for several years to study that most fascinating and perplexing of creatures, the Californian.
Chrysler and the agency wanted to know what makes Californians tick in order to sell more cars within the state and eventually elsewhere, since what is hot in La Jolla will one day find its way to


Reviews/Music; Estonian's Christian Mass
LEAD: Trinity College has discovered for American ears Vitaly Gewicksmann, a 64-year-old Estonian composer whose Christian Mass ''Duodecim Cantica'' was sung by the Citysingers of Hartford at Trinity's chapel Sunday afternoon.
It is not surprising that Mr.
Gewicksmann's liturgical format has found no favor in a country where atheism is national policy.


How It Happened; Balk Began Cone's Downfall
LEAD: In his last 14 starts of the season, David Cone gave up a total of five runs in the first two innings.
Hitting against Cone in the second game of the National League pennant playoff tonight, the Los Angeles Dodgers battered him for five runs in the first two innings.


New York State Returns to National Tests for Scholarships
LEAD: A new formula for using high-school grades as a basis for awarding $40 million in college scholarships has been abandoned because it encouraged schools to inflate students' grades, New York State officials said yesterday.


Farm Credit Bank Delays Bond Sale
LEAD: The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation said yesterday that it would not be offering bonds for Oct. 20 delivery because of the limited need of the farm credit system and its borrowers for medium- and long-term type financing.


Woodland Hills Journal; Where Bingo Itself Is a Hot Number
LEAD: Debbie Tate celebrated her 18th birthday in this Los Angeles community Saturday night.
She played bingo.


Ohio Pollution Control Bonds
LEAD: The Ohio Water Development Authority and the Ohio Air Quality Development Authority are tentatively offering a total of $50.7 million in tax-exempt collateralized pollution control revenue bonds through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Riesenberg Is Filling the Gaps
LEAD: Less than six days into training camp this summer, Doug Riesenberg, the Giants' second-year offensive tackle, decided that his watchwords for the season would be ''low key.''


'Star Wars' Was Rejected in the 1960's; MX Increases the Risk
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: WITH the onset of cool weather, drafts around windows, doors and other openings in buildings become more noticeable.
Besides being uncomfortable, drafts indicate that household air is passing to the outside, taking with it expensive heat.


Cambodian Rejects Vietnam Plea
LEAD: A leader of the coalition fighting the Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia today rejected Vietnamese demands that the Khmer Rouge be ejected from the coalition before Vietnam withdraws its troops from the country.


Southern Co reports earnings for 12mo Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Co (NYSE)
12mo Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,236,951,000
7,183,187,000
Net inc
755,902,000
702,358,000
Share earns
2.45
2.36


Review/Concert; Carnegie Still Seeks Old Sound
LEAD: In the words of the legendary aphorist Yogi Berra, it looks like deja vu all over again.
With its efforts to rectify the acoustical imbalances that resulted from an extensive remodeling, Carnegie Hall would appear to be headed down the same rocky road as Avery Fisher (originally Philharmonic) Hall.


Kenyan Said to Order End to Church Dispute
LEAD: President Daniel arap Moi has ordered officials of the governing party and clergymen to end a dispute, and he promised that the Government will not curtail freedom of worship, newspapers reported today.


Public Clinics Crowded and Short on Staff
LEAD: Like many of the women waiting to be seen by an obstetrician at the maternity clinic at 21 Old Broadway, Belen Ramirez has learned patience.


Pennzoil's Plans For Takeovers
LEAD: The Pennzoil Company, which has $3 billion to spend from its legal settlement with Texaco Inc., will not rule out making a hostile takeover bid for an oil company, Pennzoil's chief executive, Randal McDonald, said.
But he also said any takeover offer by Pennzoil would probably be friendly.


A Suspect Is Seized In a Reported Rape Inside Bus Terminal
LEAD: Less than a half-hour after a woman was reportedly raped and robbed yesterday at knifepoint in a stairwell at the Port Authority Bus Terminal in midtown, the police arrested a suspect.


Save RICO From 'Reform'
LEAD: RICO, the 1970 Racketeer Influenced Corrupt Organizations law, gave organized crime's victims a way to sue for civil redress.
The idea was to motivate an army of victims to bring individual lawsuits, with the promise of triple damages.
The law has turned out to work better for people with complaints about consumer and conventional business fraud.


State by State; To Win in Illinois, Avoid Backyard Fights in Chicago
LEAD: They do it their own way in the Windy City.


In Indochina, New Appeals For Missing
LEAD: The two predominant American responses to the emotionally charged issue of the 2,393 American servicemen still unaccounted for in the Vietnam War were on display this week, creating a drama of the living and the dead.


Metro Datelines; Executive Is Accused Of Embezzlement
LEAD: A New York insurance executive was indicted by a Manhattan grand jury on charges of embezzling $1.8 million over four years, the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, announced yesterday.


Landmark Status for a Lost Cause?
LEAD: New York City's Landmarks Preservation Commission meets today to consider whether it ought to landmark good intentions.
That's all that might justify landmark status for the buildings (see photo) known as City and Suburban homes.


C.I.A. Near Settlement of Lawsuit By Subjects of Mind-Control Tests
LEAD: The Central Intelligence Agency appears to be close to settling a lawsuit filed by nine Canadians who sought compensation after discovering they had been unwitting subjects in mind-control experiments, some involving LSD.


Film Festival; A Dickens Tale in Modern Portugal
LEAD: Of all the films in this year's New York Film Festival, surely ''Hard Times'' is the most peculiar.
Joao Botelho's version of the 1854 Charles Dickens novel has been translated into Portuguese and filmed in contemporary settings, but these are actually the least eccentric things about it.
Mr.
Botelho's other modifications of his material are much more puzzling, and more self-defeating as well.


Hometown Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hometown Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
175,000
59,000
Share earns
.09
.05
Shares outst
1,833,030
1,221,000
9mo net inc
180,000
92,000
Share earns
.10
.12
Shares outst
1,833,030
775,072


Nissan Expects Flat U.S. Sales
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Corporation said it expected American sales of its cars and trucks to be flat in the 1989 model year, despite its plans to introduce four new or restyled models.
Company executives acknowledged that Nissan's name recognition among buyers is still lower than recognition of the automaker's old


Royal Admiral Sold To a Big Stockholder
LEAD: A bid to merge two of the nation's largest cruise lines was thwarted today when a Norwegian partner in Royal Admiral Cruises Ltd. bought 70 percent of the company's stock for $561 million, heading off a similar offer by Carnival Cruise Lines Inc.


American Airlines
LEAD: The AMR Corporation said it would spend about $50 million to develop San Jose, Calif., as an important West Coast hub for American Airlines.
The company said the first phase of the hub would open on Dec. 2, with 86 jet and commuter flights a day to 19 cities.
When the hub is fully developed by 1991, American and the American Eagle commuter airline will operate 175 flights a day to 52 cities from San Jose.


A Professor Is the First Witness in Myerson's Trial
LEAD: Testimony in the Bess Myerson trial began yesterday with the prosecution presenting a law professor who told the jury about divorce procedures in New York State.


Lois Burnham Wilson, a Founder Of Al-Anon Groups, Is Dead at 97
LEAD: Lois Burnham Wilson, a founder of the Al-Anon Family Groups, whose members are relatives and friends of alcoholics, died yesterday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Mrs.
Wilson, widely known as Lois W., was 97 years old and was a longtime resident of Bedford Hills, N.Y.


Petition Filed Opposing Offer to Buy Gold Fields
LEAD: A petition was filed today to block the acquisition of strategic American minerals by a giant South African company, under legislation that authorizes the President to block foreign takeovers that endanger national security.


U.S. Order on Anti-Terror Strikes Is Disclosed
LEAD: President Reagan signed an intelligence order in 1985 that gave the Central Intelligence Agency broader legal protections when it makes pre-emptive strikes against terrorists, according to former Government officials.


2 Put on Leave At Sunstrand
LEAD: The Sundstrand Corporation placed two officers on administrative leave and reassigned a third today, as Government investigations continued into reported company overcharges on military contracts.


Books of The Times; Football as Show Business, Football as Statistics
LEAD:  Monday Night Mayhem  The Inside Story of ABC's Monday Night Football  By Marc Gunther and Bill Carter  Illustrated. 384 pages.
Beech Tree Books/William Morrow. $18.95.
The Hidden Game of Football  By Bob Carroll, Pete Palmer and John Thorn  415 pages.
Warner Books. $18.95.


Dodgers Batter Cone Early and Tie Mets in Playoff
LEAD: David Cone started the evening with a red face and the feeling that ''the Dodgers are out to get me,'' and he was right.


Review/City Opera; Debuts in 'Magic Flute'
LEAD: There were four newcomers in the New York City Opera's production of Mozart's ''Magic Flute'' at the New York State Theater on Tuesday evening.
One of them, Sandra Moon, made her company debut as Pamina, and as it turned out, she was by far the best singer in the cast.


Hipotronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hipotronics Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Sales
5,268,400
4,677,745
Net inc
555,972
490,102
Share earns
.27
.24
9mo sales
15,800,695
13,531,387
Net inc
1,611,291
1,385,221
Share earns
.79
.67


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Friday listing United Nations peacekeeping forces around the world omitted two members of the Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group.
Peru and Uruguay are also members.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. My 18-year-old house has aluminum siding that I would like to paint.
I know the siding should be washed first, but is power-washing by machine required, or can I just scrub by hand?
Also, what kind of paint should I use, and is a special undercoat required?
A.As long as you get most of the dust and dirt off, it does not matter what method is used to clean the siding.


Japanese Airline To Buy Boeing Jets
LEAD: All Nippon Airways, Japan's second-largest airline, said it would buy six of the Boeing Company's 747-400 jumbo jets at a total cost of $720 million.
The airline said the 370-seat aircraft had been chosen because it was fuel efficient and could fly farther than current models.
All Nippon said the planes would be used on its Tokyo-Washington and Tokyo


Results Plus
LEAD:  Golf  New Yorkers win: An eight-member team of New York Professional Golf Association players won bragging rights in the metropolitan area yesterday when it defeated its New Jersey counterpart, 18-15, in the fifth annual Dodge Challenge Cup at the Rockaway River Country Club in Denville, N.J.


Digital-Tandy Venture Seen
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation is expected to announce Thursday that it will resell personal computers made by the Tandy Corporation, industry officials said.


Review/Television; Will Power vs. Disease
LEAD: The television movie ''Leap of Faith,'' on NBC at 9 o'clock tonight, sets out to tackle a subject of some controversy: fighting disease with what the medical establishment generally considers questionable therapies.
But then, in typical prime-time fashion, the movie hesitates and waffles, ending up with a postscript telling viewers there is little or no evidence that these ''adjunct'' techniques are effective.


The Yearning Of Refugees: Angola Unity
LEAD: Seated in a traditional thatched-roof palaver hut, Bravo da Rosa and other Angolan refugees talked recently about Angola's civil war with a frankness rarely heard on the other side of Angola's border, 15 miles from here.


Harry R. Mancher, 70, U.J.A. Treasurer, Dies
LEAD: Harry R. Mancher, the president of the Federation of Jewish Philanthropies from 1977 to 1980 and a longtime treasurer of the United Jewish Appeal-Federation, died of a brain tumor yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 70 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Test Vaccine Prevents Pregnancy in Guinea Pigs
LEAD: Scientists have produced an experimental contraceptive vaccine that prevents pregnancy in guinea pigs.


Esiason Provides Test for Gastineau
LEAD: The Jets reassembled at their training site today and turned their attention to the Cincinnati Bengals and Boomer Esiason, the National Football League's top-ranked passer.


Will We Understand Haiti at Last?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Free at Last: a Haven for Horses in the Black Hills
LEAD: Born free, then captured by lasso and caged in pens, some 150 wild horses have been released to gallop along the rocky ridges and steep canyons of the Black Hills, safe from the rope and the rifle.


A Bush Man Slips Behind Enemy Lines
LEAD: Into this enemy heartland rode Ron Kaufman, Northeast political director of the Bush campaign, early yesterday morning.
He looked up and saw hundreds of potential voters standing, shivering, in line at the Boston Garden waiting to buy Celtics tickets.
It was the first day tickets for individual games were on sale.


Sports People; Pacers, Smits Agree
LEAD: Rik Smits, the second player selected in the draft last June, has agreed in principle to a four-year contract with the Indiana Pacers that will reportedly pay the 7-4 former Marist College center $1.3 million a year.'' . . .
Ron Grinker, the agent for Danny Manning of Kansas, the first player selected in the draft, said his client would not report to the Los Angeles Clipper camp tomorrow because both sides are far apart in their contract negotiations.


Dukakis Sees Campaign Progress
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis, bullish from the latest round of polls, asserted today that his campaign had made ''substantial progress'' in recent days and predicted ''five long, tough and aggressive weeks'' before Election Day.


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: WALKING alone at night last week in the city.
I know the drill.
My eyes meet the eyes of passing men only for a moment, then move into some empty middle distance that is meant to convey the message: not approachable.
I have been doing this for many years, since I finally became grown up enough to understand that even in one glance, even between strangers, even on the street, something passes between men and women over which you must maintain control.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Biotherapeutics Inc., Franklin, Tenn., a medical laboratory, appointed three executives to fill jointly the new office of chairman until a permanent management structure is formed.
Named were Dr.
Robert Oldham, scientific director; Dr.
William West, medical director, and Paul T. Agee, chief operating officer.


The Deficit Dodgers
LEAD: Michael Dukakis and George Bush both must campaign in the shadow of the gigantic Reagan budget deficits.
Each has plenty of ideas for new priorities or programs; each knows how hard it will be to find money for them; each has shrunk from proposals that would raise taxes or increase Federal spending.


WASHINGTON TALK: Lobbies; Homosexual Groups and the Politics of AIDS
LEAD: The issue of homosexuality remains distasteful to many in Congress, as demonstrated by the overwhelming vote in the House on Tuesday permitting members to refuse to hire anyone whose life style they decide is unacceptable, a framework interpreted as including men and women who are gay.


A's Win With a Little Power and a Lot of Pitching
LEAD: The afternoon was like a series of snapshots, each of them frozen within the walls of Fenway Park: the home run that Jose Canseco lifted over the Green Monster; the run-scoring single that Dave Henderson, a former Red Sox hero, lined in the eighth; the diving grab at short by Walt Weiss to save a run.


Lack of Federal Rules Cited In Growing Medical Wastes
LEAD: A lack of Federal regulation and inconsistent practices in handling medical wastes bear a major responsibility for the syringes, surgical byproducts and other potentially infectious medical garbage that have surfaced on beaches and at dump sites around the country, a Congressional study group reported today.


Lucien Ballard, Cinematographer
LEAD: Lucien Ballard, a cinematographer whose sensuous images contributed to the heyday of the black-and-white film as well as the era of the three-dimensional color spectacular, died Saturday at Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
He was 84 years old and had been injured in an auto accident.


'Star Wars' Was Rejected in the 1960's
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tablets Found in Baby Food
LEAD: Two white tablets, turned in by a Long Island woman who said they had been found in a jar of baby food, were being tested today at a police laboratory, but investigators said there was no evidence of widespread tampering.


Review/Theater; Chicago's Steppenwolf Group Adapts 'The Grapes of Wrath'
LEAD: The question raised at first by the Steppenwolf Theater Company's epic-sized stage adaptation of ''The Grapes of Wrath'' is a simple one.
Why?


Price War Fears Send Oil Tumbling
LEAD: Oil prices fell sharply again yesterday, as the lack of an agreement among leading exporters to curtail production increased fears of a price war.


TV Notes
LEAD:  News at Noon


After Yearlong Battle, Irving Yields to Bank of New York
LEAD: After a year of fierce resistance and skirmishing, the management of the Irving Bank Corporation said yesterday that it would recommend that its board agree to merge with the Bank of New York Company.


Memo Tells of Near Disaster
LEAD: An accident in 1965 at the Savannah River reactor in South Carolina was a near catastrophe, according to an engineer's memorandum.
Page A23.


Yields Post A Slight Rise
LEAD: Yields for certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds rose only slightly in the week that ended yesterday.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: THE young man was about to graduate first in his class in medical school.
He rushed over to his father, who had worked all his life in the garment district in Manhattan.


Lillian Vernon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lillian Vernon Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 28
1988
1987
Revenue
19,679,000
20,804,000
Net loss
761,000
b356,000
Share earns
-
.07
6mo rev
45,287,000
46,566,000
Net inc
253,000
1,589,000
Share earns
.04
.31
Shares outst
6,156,000
5,063,000


Anatomy of a Takeover
LEAD: Tracking the Bank of New York's hostile takeover bid for control of Irving Bank Corp.:  Sept. 25, 1987: Bank of New York makes an unsolicited $1.4 billion cash-stock bid for Irving.
Oct. 9: Irving's board rejects the bid, and activates the company's ''poison pill'' anti-takeover defense.


Cherry Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cherry Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
53,750,000
46,170,000
Net inc
1,894,000
1,090,000
Share earns
.42
.24
6mo sales
109,779,000
94,483,000
Net inc
4,313,000
2,709,000
Share earns
.95
.60


Flash of Lightning Ignites A Long-Becalmed Debate
LEAD: The debate had been under way for the better part of an hour, swaying back and forth with nothing in particular standing out.


The Dukakis Inaugural
LEAD: My countrymen:


Copyright Bill Advances
LEAD: The Senate today took a major step toward United States participation in the Bern Treaty to expand copyright protection to Americans who create artistic works and intellectual property.


Salant Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salant Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 3
1988
1987
Sales
138,958,000
45,719,000
Net inc
b2,175,000
d3,715,000
Share earns
.60
1.03
9mo sales
212,999,000
96,085,000
Net loss
b1,763,000
cd4,465,000
Share earns
-
1.31


Trump Deal For Shuttle Called Near
LEAD: Donald J. Trump, the Manhattan real estate developer, said yesterday that he was close to an agreement to buy the Eastern Airlines shuttle between New York, Boston and Washington.
An executive close to the negotiations said he would pay more than $300 million in cash.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL A3-17  Augusto Pinochet lost a referendum in Chile called to extend his term as President by eight years, the Interior Ministry announced.
Page A1


Metro Matters; For Welfare, A Chance to Fix A Bruised Image
LEAD: At 8:15 yesterday morning, fully 15 minutes before the building opened to the public, more than two dozen people were squeezed into the outer lobby of 12 West 14th Street.
Another dozen or so had spilled onto the sidewalk.


Cornerstone to Holocaust Museum Is Unveiled in Washington The museum is being built on a site overlooking the Washington and Jefferson memorials. Page A25. (The New York Times/Paul Hosefros)


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
8.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.75
8.10
7.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.23
7.23
6.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.50
7.50
6.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.76
8.76
9.45
30-YR.


Helen of Troy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helen of Troy Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
24,084,000
18,377,000
Net inc
2,440,000
1,494,000
Share earns
.69
.44
Shares outst
3,512,989
3,396,959
6mo sales
42,852,000
28,892,000
Net inc
3,734,000
2,171,000
Share earns
1.06
.64
Shares outst
3,508,424
3,417,236


Sports People; Plunkett Honored
LEAD: Jim Plunkett, the 1970 Heisman Trophy winner and the Most Valuable Player in the Super Bowl of 1981 when he led the Oakland Raiders to a victory, was named yesterday as winner of the first Ernie Davis Award.
The award honors the all-America running back from Syracuse who died of leukemia 16 months after winning the 1961 Heisman


New York City Inspectors Have Plenty of Pride
LEAD: To the Editor:


Digital Communications Asociates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Communications Asociates (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
51,717,000
50,160,000
Net inc
7,069,000
8,912,000
Share earns
.47
.59
Shares outst
15,088,000
15,174,000
Shares outstanding are fully diluted.


U.S. Visit by Mali Leader Reflects Better Ties
LEAD: When the President of Mali goes to dinner at the White House on Thursday night, he will be only the second leader of a black African nation honored by the Reagan Administration with the pomp and glitter of a state visit.


Review/Dance; Graham, Troupe and Friends
LEAD: There is Martha Graham the dramatist and there is Martha Graham the poet.
There is, of course, only one Martha Graham but among her various aspects, these were the two that came to the fore when the Martha Graham Dance Company opened a three-week season on Tuesday night.


Bethlehem Steel Bid
LEAD: United States Bankruptcy Judge Warren Bentz on Tuesday signed an order accepting the Bethlehem Steel Corporation's $20 million cash bid for a modern, idled rail mill that Federal lenders seized from the financially troubled Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corporation.
Bethlehem officials have said they will operate the Westmoreland County mill in conjunction with Bethlehem's rail mill in Steelton.


Robert Buchakian, Retailer, 52
LEAD: Robert Buchakian, a retailer who founded the Treasure Island stores, died of a brain tumor Tuesday at his home in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 52 years old.


Fatal Ignorance
LEAD: To be ignorant about AIDS prevention is to court death.
But while countless television ads tell how to dull a headache and sweeten bad breath, those counseling how to avoid this tragic disease are rare.
NBC and ABC have run a few ads advocating condom use; CBS hasn't run any.


SL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SL Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,563,000
15,711,000
Net loss
3,398,000
b1,179,000
Share earns
-
.21
Yr sales
63,225,000
63,321,000
Net loss
1,358,000
b4,433,000
Share earns
-
.78


Henry V. Leonard Jr., Executive, 64
LEAD: Henry V. Leonard Jr., executive vice president of the General Motors Overseas Corporation and general manager of its Japanese branch, died of a heart attack Friday in Norwich, England, while on a business trip.
He was 64 years old and lived in Tokyo.


Europe-China Pact Seen
LEAD: A top European Community official said today that China and Europe were likely to reach an accord on Chinese textile exports at talks next month.
Willy de Clercq, the community's Commissioner for External Relations and Trade, said he expected an agreement to be reached in Brussels on replacing a four-year textile pact that will expire at the end of this year.


Ford Credit Notes To Yield 8.981%
LEAD: The Ford Motor Credit Company, a unit of the Ford Motor Company, is offering $200 million of 8 7/8 percent notes due in 1991 at a price of 99.725, to yield 8.981 percent, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Boxing Notebook; Tyson's Mother-in-Law: Compassionate or Overly Ambitious?
LEAD: Olga Rosario, who has worked for Ruth Roper's New York-based computers systems business for the last eight years, thinks that Roper is being miscast as the villain in the troubles of Mike Tyson, the heavyweight champion.


2 Charged in Medicaid Fraud
LEAD: Two Brooklyn podiatrists have been charged with stealing more than $1.3 million from Medicaid since 1984, when they were ''fresh out of podiatry school,'' Edward J. Kuriansky, a deputy attorney general, announced yesterday.


How Emergency Aid Goes Astray in Burma
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chase Offering Preferred Stock
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation yesterday offered 5.6 million shares of $25-a-share perpetual preferred stock through an underwriting group led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


For Children
LEAD:  Shows, Nature, Museums  ''THE MAGIC FISHBONE,'' a musical based on a Charles Dickens story, performed by On Stage, Children, directed by Alice Elliott, 1 and 3:30 P.M. tomorrow, at Hartley House Theater, 413 West 46th Street.
Tickets: $5.
Information: 666-1716.
TURN-OF-THE-CENTURY DAY, old-time pastimes for the whole family, with music, a magic show, hay rides, a puppet show, lawn games, a tea shop with a fortune teller, and the opening of three exhibitions: ''Going to Blazes,'' ''Music Mania'' and ''American Artists,'' noon to 4 P.M.


Psychiatrist's View of Tyson
LEAD: Dr.
Abraham L. Halpern, the psychiatrist who said Mike Tyson was not a manic-depressive after examining him Tuesday, said yesterday that he had based his opinion on a 30-minute clinical interview and an hour of observing Tyson with his boxing manager and friends.


Protection for U.S. Workers With AIDS Is Widened
LEAD: The Justice Department today issued a legal opinion supporting Federal policies that bar discrimination against AIDS victims who work for the Government or for employers who receive Federal funds.


Dissident Victory At R. P. Scherer
LEAD: Dissident shareholders won a disputed seat on the board of the R. P. Scherer Corporation when a Delaware court ruled that some pro-management votes had been cast improperly in a proxy vote in August.
The court found that Manufacturers National Bank of Detroit's business relations with Scherer had involved it in a conflict of interest and thus invalidated the 235,200 votes the bank cast on behalf of a trust fund it administers.


United Stationers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Stationers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
216,390,000
185,347,000
Net inc
6,083,000
3,655,000
Share earns
.39
.24
Yr sales
855,961,000
729,880,000
Net inc
23,147,000
15,118,000
Share earns
1.50
.99


In Losing, a Boxer Won
LEAD: Roy Jones, an American boxer, fought his way to a decisive victory over Park Si Hun, a South Korean, in the final round of the Olympics.
He was then robbed of his gold medal by corrupt and partisan judges.
Jones had outboxed, outfought and outshone the other man in the ring.


Lady Macbeth a Celt
LEAD: To the Editor:


Oce-van der Grinten NV reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oce-van der Grinten NV (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
209,600,000
209,400,000
Net inc
8,100,000
7,800,000
Share earns
2.77
2.69
9mo rev
639,900,000
628,300,000
Net inc
25,900,000
26,400,000
Share earns
8.85
9.08
Shares outst
2,923,935
2,911,387


Tokyo Stocks Off for 5th Day
LEAD: Stock prices fell today as mounting concern over Emperor Hirohito's health sent investors to the sidelines.
The Nikkei index dropped by 233.15 points, or 0.85 percent, to 27,172.34.
It declined by 95.53 points on Wednesday.


Metro-Puck Comics Has Wider Audience
LEAD: The recently merged Metro-Puck Comic Network has stretched its audience reach in comics sections of Sunday newspapers across the country by combining the Metro Comics and Puck-the-Comic weekly networks.


Chrysler to Distribute Alfa Romeos in U.S.
LEAD: A joint venture to distribute Alfa Romeo cars in the United States and Canada was announced today by the Chrysler Corporation and the Italian auto maker Fiat S.p.A., which owns Alfa Romeo.


Murder in the Cathedral Reflects Failed Policy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Insurer to Seek A Conversion
LEAD: The Maccabees Mutual Life Insurance Company said today that it would apply to be converted into a stock company and sold for $110 million to Royal Financial Services Inc., an American subsidiary of Royal Insurance Holdings P.L.C. of England.


Covering the Debates Is Network-Size News
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pitching and Bench Deliver for Dodgers
LEAD: Deep in the Dodger psyche, in a place that is not shared with the dozens of people asking questions about the National League Championship Series against the Mets, an important question had to be answered in the affirmative Wednesday night.


Clerks Rule the Roost in Room 10
LEAD: People from all walks of life sit scattered around the room, waiting for a number to be called.
Others line up at a nearby window to get some help, impatiently looking at a watch as time slips by.
Occasionally, there is an outburst of anger.


Steinberg Loses Motion To Exclude Statements
LEAD: Joel B. Steinberg lost his attempt yesterday to exclude from his trial statements he gave to the police before his arrest in the death of Lisa Steinberg.


Pentagon Plans Cut in Weapons In Missile Shield
LEAD: The Pentagon said today that it intended to halve the number of space-based weapons in the initial phase of its system to defend against attacking missiles, while greatly increasing the number of ground-based weapons.


Harvard Knitwear Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harvard Knitwear Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
18,688,899
14,573,107
Net inc
1,122,898
330,070
Share earns
.51
.15
Shares outst
2,222,190
2,200,000


Spraying Begins for Fruit Fly
LEAD: Three helicopters sprayed pesticide tonight over the city's west side and parts of Beverly Hills in an attempt to destroy an infestation of the Mediterranean fruit fly.
Forty-seven flies have been found in yards since Sept. 26, a serious infestation that if allowed to spread could threaten fruits and vegetables that are a major part of California's $15.5 billion-a-year farm economy.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 453 money market mutual funds increased by $182 million, to $267.15 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 126 institutional funds rose by $652.5 million, to $69.56 billion.
Assets of the 224 general purpose funds were up $445.7 million, to $85.12 billion.


Inquiry Ordered at Nuclear Arms Site
LEAD: The Energy Department said today that it would conduct a comprehensive investigation of conditions at two plutonium-processing facilities at the Savannah River nuclear weapons plant in South Carolina.


Cay M. Andersen, 75, Episcopal Lay Figure
LEAD: Cay M. Andersen, a faith healer and co-founder of the Community of Jesus, a residential religious community based in Orleans, Mass., died of heart failure in her sleep on Wednesday at her home in Orleans.
She was 75 years old.


LEBANESE AT U.N. ON 2-EDGED SWORD
LEAD: With rival governments both claiming power in Beirut, Lebanese diplomats at the United Nations say they are trying to pursue business as usual ''in the name of the Lebanese state.''


Abrams Calls for Inquiries On Brawley Lawyers' Role
LEAD: Attorney General Robert Abrams yesterday asked judicial disciplinary panels to investigate the ''conduct and statements'' of the two lawyers who represented Tawana Brawley, the 16-year-old black girl who a grand jury said falsely contended she was the victim of a racially motivated attack.


George Bush's Candidate
LEAD: When he asked Senator Dan Quayle what Mr.
Quayle would do if he suddenly became President, Tom Brokaw observed that the question could not simply be brushed aside as hypothetical. ''It is, sir, after all, the reason why we are here tonight.'' Mr.
Brokaw got it right.
Wednesday night's debate between the two Vice-Presidential candidates was not a debate.


First American Health Conepts Inc reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Health Conepts Inc
Year to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,700,000
770,715
Net inc
465,000
b362,001
Share earns
.17
-
b-Net loss


Topics of The Times; Children in Politics: II
LEAD: An adviser to the Vice President calls Mr.
Bush's new children's plan ''holistic.'' ''Opportunistic'' might be more like it.
This is not to say that the Bush proposal doesn't have good things in it -only that it seems more like a hastily cobbled-together attempt to steal some thunder from the Democrats than a well-made plan to give poor children a fair chance.


Concept 90 Marketing Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concept 90 Marketing Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,496,911
766,982
Net loss
435,031
416,838
6mo rev
3,395,823
1,749,753
Net loss
798,842
724,861


Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals (Holdings) SA(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals (Holdings) SA(O)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
112,300,000
95,100,000
Net inc
10,300,000
1,100,000
Share earns
.39
.05
Shares outst
26,586,032
21,600,000
9mo rev
322,000,000
299,600,000
Net inc
b52,700,000
c4,700,000
Share earns
2.27
.23
Shares outst
23,271,909
20,554,744


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Trust Amer Service Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trust Amer Service Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Net inc
269,757
318,760
Share earns
.07
.09
Yr net inc
2,006,660
2,081,464
Share earns
.55
.69
Shares outst
3,635,526
2,997,957


Abrams and Grand Jury Propose Changes in Laws
LEAD: Attorney General Robert Abrams proposed changes in state law yesterday that he said would make it possible to prosecute people who harbor such fugitives as Glenda Brawley.


Employee Rights Bill Introduced in Senate
LEAD: Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, has introduced a bill that would extend to Senate employees protection against job discrimination based on race, sex, age or handicaps.
A similar bill was approved this week in the House of Representatives.


BRAWLEY MADE UP STORY OF ASSAULT, GRAND JURY FINDS
LEAD: Concluding a seven-month investigation, a New York State grand jury reported an avalanche of evidence yesterday that Tawana Brawley had fabricated her tale of abduction and sexual assault in the hands of a gang of racist white men last year.


20th Century-Fox Indicted
LEAD: The Department of Justice said yesterday that a Federal grand jury in New York had returned an indictment charging the 20th Century-Fox Film Corporation and a branch manager with criminal contempt for ''block booking'' several motion pictures in violation of a 1951 court order prohibiting the practice.


Retail Sales Up Modestly In September
LEAD: September sales figures released yesterday showed modest gains at the nation's general retailers.


Concerts Organized On Themes
LEAD: Anyone checking out the musical Zeitgeist of New York City has three major clues from which to form an opinion this weekend.
The World Music Institute and Hunter College are presenting a symposium, including concerts, titled ''Immigrant Music in New York City.'' The Caribbean Cultural Center is starting its 10th anniversary season with ''Drumscussion,'' the first of a month's worth of concerts, featuring three of the greatest New Orleans drummers - Vernel Fournier, Earl Palmer and Ed Blackwell - along with Daniel Ponce of Cuba and Babatunde Olatunji of Nigeria.


Addenda
LEAD: *
Alzed Communications, a division of Alzed Enterprises Ltd., Pittsburgh, a communications industry executive search and placement firm whose specialty is advertising positions, has opened a New York office.


Mercedes Forecast
LEAD: Mercedes-Benz of North America Inc. projected slower United States sales growth over the next several years, noting greater competition from Japanese and European companies.
The company also said it had raised prices for 1989 models an average of 1.7 percent over 1988 prices.
The subsidiary of the West German-based Daimler-Benz A.G., said Mercedes-Benz forecasts American sales of 80,000 to 83,000 cars in the 1989, compared with 80,000 in 1988.


Economic Scene; Buying America 'On the Cheap'
LEAD: THIS week's takeover bid of $5.23 billion by Grand Metropolitan, the food, drink and retailing group based in Britain, for Pillsbury, the American company that sells Burger King hamburgers, Haagen-Dazs ice cream and Green Giant and other food brands, dramatizes the drive of foreign investors to acquire a bigger stake in the


Champion Enterprises Inc reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion Enterprises Inc (AMEX)
13wks to Aug 26
1988
1987
Revenue
94,410,000
85,260,000
Net loss
b357,000
d484,000
26wk rev
184,692,000
170,834,000
Net loss
b547,000
cd606,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-After equity in losses of unconsolidated finance subsidiaries of $39,000 for the quarter and $2,000 for the 26 weeks.


Victors' 'First Among Equals' Seeks a Peaceful Transition
LEAD: The political groups that united to campaign for President Augusto Pinochet's defeat in Wednesday's plebiscite had a number of erudite spokesmen but no overwhelming personality.
To the extent that there was a visible leader, it was Patricio Aylwin, the smiling, genial president of the Christian Democratic Party, the country's largest party.


Siemens Layoffs in U.S.
LEAD: The Microwave Semiconductor Corporation unit of Siemens A.G. announced a reorganization today that would focus on traditional microwave semiconductors, resulting in the layoffs of 135, or 27 percent, of its 500 employees.
The unit said it would scale back its gallium arsenide research efforts and regroup into two units that emphasize traditional silicon-based semiconductors for microwave applications.


Wisconsin Toy Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wisconsin Toy Co Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,846,000
6,390,000
Net inc
632,000
379,000
Share earns
.14
.09
6mo sales
21,279,000
13,553,000
Net inc
1,141,000
788,000
Share earns
.25
.19


Market Place; Maxicare Faces Tough Comeback
LEAD: INVESTORS and bondholders counting on a miracle cure from the new management of the troubled Maxicare Health Plans Inc. will have to settle for a more old-fashioned remedy.


On Stage
LEAD:  Baryshnikov as a Bug


Checkpoint Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Checkpoint Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 25
1988
1987
Revenue
12,267,000
8,907,000
Net inc
1,052,000
453,000
Share earns
.12
.05
9mo rev
30,677,000
24,628,000
Net loss
502,000
b1,154,000
Share earns
-
.12


FOES URGING RECONCILIATION
LEAD: Gen.
Augusto Pinochet spoke to the nation tonight and accepted his defeat in Wednesday's plebiscite on an extension of his term in office.


BUSH AND DUKAKIS TRY TO CAPITALIZE ON LATEST DEBATE
LEAD: On the morning after the Vice-Presidential debate, the campaign of Michael S. Dukakis unveiled two new television advertisements intended to drive home the idea that Vice President Bush had picked the wrong running mate.


Jell-O Again! 65 Years' Worth of Ads
LEAD: Thirty years before Frank Bartles and Ed Jaymes, there were Bert and Harry Piel.
Distant cousins to the hayseed wine cooler hucksters, the bickering brothers - cartoon characters with the voices of the comedians Bob and Ray - spent the late 1950's and early 60's scheming to sell their beer to a public that proved receptive enough to keep them on television for five years.


Film Festival; In a City Where Life Is Just Barely Possible
LEAD: Krishna, a small, spindly legged 10-year-old country boy, is kicked out of the house by his mother and told not to return until he has 500 rupees to pay for a bicycle he has ruined.
Krishna drifts to the nearest big city where, without effort, he is absorbed into Bombay's proliferating population of homeless street kids.


Shuler Turns to Videotapes
LEAD: Mickey Shuler's take-home video tonight will be all about Bengals.
The Cincinnati Bengals.
And it will be for home study rather than entertainment.


Campaign Trail; Dukakis Passes The Rib Test
LEAD: Nervousness seized the Dukakis staff: what to do about - ribs.


Mid-Hudson Conference on the Homeless Ends on Note of Urgency


A Widower Meets the Neighbors in 'Empty Nest'
LEAD: Let's hear it for the widowers living in Florida.
The Paul Junger Witt-Tony Thomas-Susan Harris production team, which brought forth ''The Golden Girls,'' is now giving the very successful quartet of women a new neighbor.
The neighbor, a widower named Harry Weston, is played by Richard Mulligan, once a star of the Witt-Thomas-Harris series ''Soap.


Panel Ends Its Seven-Month Quest
LEAD: They met twice a week in an old mess hall with a brick fireplace and painted-over windows, 12 men and 11 women charged with investigating one of the most enigmatic cases ever to bedevil the New York State criminal-justice authorities.


Spotlight on Jazz At Americana Festival
LEAD: Jazz will be the centerpiece of the 13th annual 52d Street Americana Festival, to be held Sunday from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., between Broadway and Lexington Avenue.
In addition to antiques, crafts, general merchandise and one-of-a-kind items, there will be continuous free entertainment, with mimes, magicians and ventriloquists along the street and several jazz bands taking turns on two stages.


Madras Journal; Add This to the Annals: The Advent of the Disco
LEAD: When India's new political opposition front recently chose this old port on the Bay of Bengal for its coming out party, it added a chapter to the history of a city that has quietly filed away a lot of firsts.


Algiers Imposes Emergency After Protest
LEAD: The Government imposed a state of emergency and a curfew today after three days of violent protests against high prices and unemployment.


Hardman-Cook Quintet
LEAD: Bill Hardman on trumpet and Junior Cook on saxophone will lead a quintet tonight and tomorrow at Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street (749-2228).
Music begins at 9 P.M.; there is a $5 cover and a two-drink minimum.


Lincoln Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,255,100
592,470
Per share
.41
.23
Shares outst
3,033,132
2,468,625
9mo net inc
2,753,626
1,308,864
Per share
.87
.62
Shares outst
3,025,756
2,013,637


Layoffs at Kroger In Defensive Move
LEAD: The Kroger Company said that it was laying off about 300 employees at its headquarters here in a corporate restructuring it is undertaking while fighting two takeover offers.
Most of those being laid off have been notified and will leave their jobs Friday, a company spokesman, Paul Bernish, said.
Kroger, the nation's largest supermarket operator, said the job reductions would save the company at least $13 million a year.


Highest-Paid Piston
LEAD: The Detroit Pistons made Isiah Thomas the highest-paid player in club history yesterday, agreeing to a contract that will pay the 6-foot-1-inch guard a reported $16 million over the next eight years.
Thomas had been trying for months to restructure a contract that called for him to make $750,000 this season.


Luther Medical Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Luther Medical Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
449,336
353,797
Net loss
502,226
674,202
Yr sales
1,846,753
640,964
Net loss
1,098,708
1,074,037


New TV Spots For Pizza Chain
LEAD: A loudmouthed, wildly dressed radio announcer called Spooner Wiggins has become the fast-talking spokesman for Godfather's Pizza.
The figure was created by Buckley/ DeCerchio, the fledgling agency run by Tom DeCerchio, 28 years old, and Bryan Buckley, 25.
The total ad budget is $6 million.


U.S. Says 'Butt Out' To Those Tampering With Hostage Talks
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that private American citizens were misrepresenting themselves as official spokesmen for the United States Government in trying to arrange hostage deals with Iran, and he said they should ''just butt out.''


The Girl Who Cried 'Wolf'
LEAD: A Dutchess County grand jury finally utters the last word on the Tawana Brawley case: There is no case.
But there remains the Tawana Brawley affair, the political-racial controversy provoked by the black teen-ager's false cry of ''wolf.''


Columbia Pictures Entertainent Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia Pictures Entertainent Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
373,114,000
-
Net inc
b6,173,000
-
Share earns
.04
-
6mo rev
783,625,000
-
Net inc
b10,501,000
-
Share earns
.07
-
b-Includes tax credits of $4,629,000 and $7,875,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Review/Art; Works by Robert Ryman In Redone Dia Galleries
LEAD: In its second season, the Dia Art Foundation continues to give new weight and meaning to the term ''favorable viewing conditions.'' The foundation's exhibition of work by the American abstract painter Robert Ryman, which opens today, may well be the most beautiful and conscientious presentation of contemporary art that we will see all year.


Continental Health Chief Is Positioned in 3 Fields
LEAD: Jack Rosen had lunch yesterday at the Plaza with Hazel Bishop.


Wheat Up on China Rumor And Europe Price Rise Talk
LEAD: Rumors of a plan by China to buy American wheat and information that the European Community plans to raise its wheat export prices initiated a rally in the prices of wheat futures today on the Chicago Board of Trade.


State by State; Quayle and Debate Rate Low on Illinois Campus
LEAD: At the Republican National Convention, Vice President Bush said he had chosen Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana as his running mate because he would appeal to young people and to Midwesterners.


Sun Coast Plastics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Coast Plastics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
14,644,000
2,809,000
Net inc
b160,000
c110,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
14,925,309
14,423,200
Yr rev
35,575,000
11,129,000
Net inc
b133,000
d91,000
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
14,660,930
14,411,071


Arabs Kill Two More Palestinians, Including Village Religious Chief
LEAD: Two Palestinians, including the religious leader of a small Arab village not far from Tel Aviv, were shot and killed today by masked assailants.
Witnesses and officials said the assailants were Arab.


Sculpture Exhibition to Open in Long Island City


Topics of The Times; Children in Politics: I
LEAD: Both parties orate about family issues this fall; today, the Senate can also act.
Three bills, on child care, parental leave and child pornography, were packaged together by Democrats after Republicans began a filibuster.
Each bill should be debated separately on its merits.
But senators who want to help working parents and their children will vote today at least to end the filibuster.


Goldtex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldtex Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 24
1988
1987
Sales
4,422,616
3,888,272
Net inc
44,849
c17,860
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
2,293,100
1,601,100
Yr sales
19,566,116
20,309,985
Net inc
b494,055
c1,192,921
Share earns
.22
.75
Shares outst
2,241,116
1,601,100


Bolstering Clean Air Act: Fingers Point in All Directions After Latest Failure
LEAD: Efforts to strengthen the Clean Air Act died this week, the victim of too little time, too little compromise and, by most accounts, too little Presidential leadership.


HHB Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HHB Systems (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,877,000
4,468,000
Net loss
1,705,000
b1,218,000
Share earns
-
.36
Yr sales
19,727,000
13,010,000
Net inc
1,390,000
2,805,000
Share earns
.30
.87


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Bob Probert, the forward who was suspended by the Detroit Red Wings during training camp for disciplinary reasons, has checked into a drug-alcohol rehabilitation center in California, according to his agent, Pat Duscharme. ''I think it is an accumulative effect,'' Duscharme said. ''We've been working on this since the beginning of last season.


CATHERINE E. ROSS WED TO DAVID ALAN GLASER
LEAD: Catherine Elizabeth Ross and David Alan Glaser were married last evening at Temple Emanu-El in New York by Rabbi Ronald Sobel.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold S. Ross of New York and Bondville, Vt.
Her husband is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Glaser of Freehold, N.J.


Public School Students To Receive Uniforms
LEAD: In the belief that dressing the city's public school children in uniforms might improve discipline, Mayor Koch said yesterday that he had persuaded a manufacturer to donate enough clothes for a pilot project in a city school.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Recruiting Season: When Firms Meet the Future
LEAD: David Melman, a third-year law student, recalls with a certain fascination how one young associate described the ritual at her law firm's recruitment lunches.


2 Lawyers Say Police Searched The Davis Home
LEAD: The trial of Larry Davis was disrupted yesterday when the defense said that police officers had entered Mary Davis's home with guns drawn shortly after she had finished testifying Wednesday as a witness for her son.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Big Lead for Rizzo: Patti Rizzo started with three straight birdies and finished with three more on the way to a seven-under-par 65 and a four-stroke lead yesterday after the first round of the Takara Invitational in Hinocho, Japan. ''I had my best putting in my life today,'' Rizzo said.


Let's Undo the Mistake on Savings and Loans; Depositor Bailout
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Oscar, No Knockout
LEAD: George Bush's speech writer, Peggy Noonan, turned to a colleague after the Bentsen-Quayle ''debate'' and gleefully declared: ''It's over.
We won the election!'' She's a political professional and may well have been right.


Let's Undo the Mistake on Savings and Loans; Try Series EE Bonds
LEAD: To the Editor:


Icahn Talks On Eastern Reported
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn, the chairman of Trans World Airlines, has held some general talks about a possible takeover of Eastern Airlines with the head of the machinists' union at Eastern, people familiar with the talks said yesterday.


Show Your A.C.L.U. Card With Pride, Governor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: Columbus Day is observed on Monday and closings vary.
Following are holiday schedules.


Escapee Caught in a Closet
LEAD: A prisoner who escaped from a courthouse holding cell was arrested Wednesday hiding in a closet in the apartment of friends, the police said.
The escapee, Alton Woods, 25 years old, was arrested after the police received a tip, Sgt.
Patrick Carozza said.
Four others in the apartment were charged with harboring a fugitive, Sergeant Carozza added.


TV Week Network
LEAD: NBC has agreed to commit more than $1 million in advertising to TV Week Network, a joint venture that began recently between Tribune Media Services and Western States Associates.
As a result, NBC has become the charter account for the new clearinghouse, which gives advertisers the chance to reach TV Sunday newspaper supplements in 28 markets.


Penobscot Shoe Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penobscot Shoe Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 26
1988
1987
Sales
5,521,814
5,885,406
Net inc
430,006
659,245
Share earns
.29
.43
9mo sales
14,161,619
13,012,485
Net inc
925,141
1,108,405
Share earns
.61
.72


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.39
8.38
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.32
7.23
6.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.53
7.50
6.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.75
8.76
9.49
30-YR.


What to Hear, Where
LEAD: Here are the times and prices for the music and opera performances this weekend.  ''ROMANCE OF THE ROSE,'' Mannes Camerata, the Mannes College of Music (150 West 85th Street), tonight, tomorrow and Sunday at 8.
Tickets are $15.
Information: 595-1747.
MUSICIANS OF SWANNE ALLEY, the Frick Collection (1 East 70th Street), Sunday at 5 P.M.


Quayle Is Rated on Environment
LEAD: Senator Dan Quayle, who claimed ''a very strong environmental record'' in the Vice-Presidential debate Wednesday night, received 20 percent out of a possible 100 percent on a ''scorecard'' on Congressional action on environmental issues issued today by the League of Conservation Voters.


N.F.L. Matchups; Broncos Hoping To Get Untracked
LEAD: Dan Reeves was mulling over his game plan yesterday for Sunday's contest against San Francisco and was reminded that his Denver Broncos had three consecutive victories against the 49ers.


De Laurentiis Gets 3 Offers for Stake
LEAD: The De Laurentiis Entertainment Group, which filed for bankruptcy court protection in August, said it had received three preliminary offers to buy a controlling stake in the company for an unspecified amount of cash and securities.


Wolf Financial Group Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wolf Financial Group Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,346,482
10,794,076
Net loss
2,490,614
b2,882,483
Share earns
-
.68
b-Net income


Robinson Wants Ball
LEAD: David Robinson would like to get out of the Navy and begin earning some of the $26 million he will be paid by the San Antonio Spurs.
According to his father, Ambrose, the 7-1 Robinson will seek an early release from the two years he has left on his Navy commitment.
Robinson, who was on leave to play for the United States Olympic team, has returned to his civil engineering job at Kings Bay, Ga.


Met-Coil Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Met-Coil Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,207,000
8,005,000
Net inc
111,000
b291,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Allen O. Felix, 72, Ex-Stock Exchange Aide
LEAD: Dr.
Allen O. Felix, retired director of educational services for the New York Stock Exchange, died of myeloma on Tuesday at his home in Paramus, N.J.
He was 72 years old.
Dr.
Felix held a bachelor's degree in mathematics from the University of Colorado and a doctorate in education from Teachers College of Columbia University, where he taught for five years before joining the Stock Exchange in 1955.


Happy With Result, Quayle Says
LEAD: Senator Dan Quayle, the Republican Vice-Presidential nominee, took his campaign back on the road today, asserting that he had ''showed 'em'' in Wednesday night's debate with Senator Lloyd Bentsen.
He charged that Mr.
Bentsen had taken a ''cheap shot'' at him.


Horse Racing Notebook; Alysheba Goes Long Distance
LEAD: Alysheba does not have much left to prove as a race horse, but tomorrow he gets a chance at one of the few things that has eluded him: winning a race at the classic distance of one and a half miles.


Drexel Bid To Remove Judge Fails
LEAD: A Federal appeals court yesterday denied a motion by several defendants to disqualify the judge hearing the securities fraud case against Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., four executives and others.


Gospel at the Gate
LEAD: The Mighty Brooklyn Skyways will sing gospel music Sunday at 3:30 P.M. at the Village Gate, Bleecker and Thompson Streets (475-51230).
Tickets are $10.


Intervoice Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intervoice Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,616,762
1,331,757
Net inc
457,532
191,584
Share earns
.13
.06
6mo rev
4,680,248
2,485,742
Net inc
799,665
315,095
Share earns
.24
.10


Dow Up by 1.24 in Dull Day As Investors Await Job Data
LEAD: Stocks gained a bit yesterday but many investors stayed away from the market, awaiting the nation's September unemployment figures, which will be released today.


Increasingly, Bad Habits Are Labeled Addicitons
LEAD: These days almost anyone might have an addiction.
If it isn't to drugs or alcohol, it's to food, cigarettes, exercise, relationships, sex, shopping, work or even video games.
Habits that were once called neuroses, compulsions - or just plain weaknesses - are now described as addictions.


Precision Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Precision Resources Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,597,235
2,868,803
Net loss
1,485,790
209,660
Yr rev
11,783,948
10,467,243
Net loss
1,709,536
89,720
The latest quarter and year included charges of $1,026,000 to cover restructuring costs and projected losses on completion of certain contracts and inventory components.


Excerpt From Abrams Statement on Brawley Lawyers: Questions of Ethics
LEAD: Following is an excerpt of a statement on the Tawana Brawley case released yesterday by Attorney General Roberts Abrams:  Ethical Complaints Against Attorneys Maddox and Mason


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Unlikely Pairing at Ritz


Restaurants
LEAD:  Eze


Campaign Trail; West Coast Tour For Hollywood Stars
LEAD: So you want to talk with Morgan Fairchild about disarmament?
Or Jim Belushi about the trade deficit?
Or Donna Mills about the balance of payments?


Campaign Trail; Tsongas Cites Views On Capital Gains Tax
LEAD: Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas says he does not miss politics, Presidential or local.
But the 47-year-old Boston lawyer, who decided not to seek re-election to the Senate after being told in October 1983 that that he had nodular lymphoma, a mild cancer of the lymph nodes, remains involved in the Dukakis campaign.


Weis Markets Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weis Markets Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
290,868,000
276,953,000
Net inc
20,405,000
18,339,000
Share earns
.45
.40
9mo sales
861,757,000
837,397,000
Net inc
59,365,000
54,988,000
Share earns
1.31
1.20


Wolverine World Wide Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wolverine World Wide Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 10
1988
1987
Sales
83,498,000
79,285,000
Net inc
1,743,000
1,202,000
Share earns
.26
.16
9mo sales
221,439,000
215,203,000
Net inc
3,065,000
2,252,000
Share earns
.45
.31


E. Christine Secor, 54, Educator in Day Care
LEAD: E. Christine Secor, an educator long active in day care, died of cancer Tuesday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 54 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Officials Salute Jury And Assail Advisers
LEAD: New York State and City officials yesterday applauded a state grand jury for persistence in investigating the Tawana Brawley case and assailed her family and advisers.


New Round of Talks Planned On Disputed Radar in Siberia
LEAD: After unpublicized discussions between senior Soviet and American officials, the United States and the Soviet Union are planning a new round of talks on the disputed Soviet radar at Krasnoyarsk, Administration officials said today.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  CLEVELAND (AL) - Named Dom Chiti roving minor league pitching coach.


photo of John LennonReview/Film; 'Imagine: John Lennon,' Portrait of a Generation
LEAD: There's a scene in the documentary ''Imagine: John Lennon'' that finds Lennon face to face with one of his most persistent fans.
This dazed-looking young man has been caught trespassing on the grounds of the Lennons' estate in Ascot, England, and is now awestruck to be in the presence of his hero.


Chapman Energy Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chapman Energy Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
11,199,259
-
Net loss
b1,109,627
-
Results for fiscal 1988 and fiscal 1987 are not directly comparable because the company changed its fiscal year-end to June 30 from Dec.


Israeli Arms Office Is Given Immunity
LEAD: The Reagan Administration announced today that it had extended limited diplomatic immunity to 45 representatives of Israel's military purchasing office in New York, despite concerns that the office might have been involved in efforts to export American military technology to Israel illegally.


Reform Effort In Hungary
LEAD: Hungary's lawmakers resumed debate today on tax laws that are among reforms intended to move the country toward a market-oriented economy.
On Wednesday, members of


Summit Health Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit Health Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
90,300,000
92,700,000
Net loss
10,200,000
2,300,000
Yr rev
358,900,000
375,300,000
Net loss
6,600,000
b7,900,000
Share earns
-
.25
b-Net income


Boston Acoustics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Acoustics Inc
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
4,933,269
3,834,540
Net inc
524,518
376,595
Share earns
.26
.19
6mo sales
9,275,906
7,343,644
Net inc
959,580
690,298
Share earns
.48
.35


Gretzky Gets Royal Welcome
LEAD: For one emotional night, unthinkable until the shocking trade of Wayne Gretzky from Edmonton to Los Angeles, the hockey fans of southern California -both loyal and recently converted -conducted a boisterous coronation of a King.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  A New Fusion Steve Coleman and Five Elements, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street (219-3055).
Whether it's jazz or funk or pop - or all of the above in a choppy, shifty amalgam of odd-meter riffs and sidelong solos - Steve Coleman's music is searching for a new kind of fusion that gives musicians something to explore while they lay down a groove.


Islanders Tie After 4-1 Lead
LEAD: Goals by Gary Suter, Colin Patterson and Joe Nieuwendyk in a 3-minute-34-second span of the third period overcame a 4-1 Islander lead and gained a 4-4 tie for the Calgary Flames in their season opener tonight.


Oil Price Is Little Changed: Stability Is Seen as Tenuous
LEAD: Oil prices were little changed yesterday, although analysts said the stability was tenuous.


Bush Boasts of Turnaround From 'Easy Rider' Society
LEAD: Vice President Bush boasted today that the Reagan Administration had turned around ''the permissive philosophy'' of the 1960's and 1970's, helping to change a society that savored movies like ''Easy Rider'' into one preferring ''Dirty Harry'' films.


Auctions
LEAD:  Outsized Gems


Total Research Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total Research Corp (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,973,000
5,074,686
Net inc
221,538
18,463
Share earns
.03
-


House Backs Bailout Study
LEAD: The House of Representatives today overwhelmingly approved a bill that would create a National Commission on the Thrift Industry to formulate a plan on rescuing the troubled industry and its insurance fund.


Review/Dance; The Gamut From The Trisler
LEAD: The accent was on variety when the Joyce Trisler Danscompany opened its weeklong winter season at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street on Tuesday.
There was a homage to four American modern dance pioneers by the late Miss Trisler.
Benjamin Harkarvy contributed a visionary new work dedicated to William Carter, an American Ballet Theater dancer who died this year.


International Capital Equipent reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Capital Equipent
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
532,000
549,000
Net inc
139,000
b260,000
Share earns
.06
-
Yr rev
1,831,000
2,440,000
Net inc
46,000
b662,000
Share earns
.02
-
b


Six-Race Regatta In New York Harbor
LEAD: The first annual International Yacht Club Challenge will be held in New York Harbor today through Sunday, presented by the Manhattan Yacht Club, 207 Front Street.
The six-race regatta will feature 20 international yacht clubs sailing identical J-24's.


Micro Bio-Medics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micro Bio-Medics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,188,637
10,336,615
Net inc
351,827
237,484
Share earns
.07
.05
9mo sales
27,003,189
24,099,825
Net inc
418,518
167,762
Share earns
.08
.03


Let's Undo the Mistake on Savings and Loans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Washington Talk: Foreign Affairs; Voice of America Has Some Wondrous Plans
LEAD: First there was the telephone call from Minsk, followed by a telephone call from Pinsk.
It was a Tuesday morning call-in show from the Soviet Union, just another day at the Voice of America.


Valley Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
25,434,000
22,801,000
Net inc
605,000
765,000
Share earns
.07
.08
9mo sales
73,502,000
56,941,000
Net inc
513,000
b818,000
Share earns
.06
-


Bert and Harry Star In TV Tribute


On-Time Flying Put at 83%
LEAD: The nation's leading airlines report that 83 percent of their flights arrived on time in August, the fifth straight month in which their on-time performance was at least 80 percent, the Transportation Department said Wednesday.


Morgan's Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan's Foods Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 16
1988
1987
Sales
14,054,000
7,239,000
Net loss
300,000
b509,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo sales
25,006,000
12,764,000
Net loss
433,000
b727,000
Share earns
-
.07


Coniston Seeks Link With TW Services
LEAD: Coniston Partners disclosed yesterday that it had proposed a friendly merger with TW Services, the operator of Hardee's fast-food stores and Denny's family-style restaurants, for $28 a share.


Percussion and Brass
LEAD: Warren Smith and Thurman Barker, percussionists, and Al Patterson and Joe Daley, on trumpet and tubas, will perform new jazz compositions Sunday at 3 P.M. at Prospect Park Picnic House, near Third Street and Prospect Park West in Brooklyn.
Admission is $5; information, (718) 788-0055.


Dining Out Guide: Late-Night Places
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
Cafe Luxembourg


Advocates Share Strategies And Support for Homeless
LEAD: For Sara Ehmer and other members of her Unitarian church in Rockland County, helping the homeless has always seemed a lonely job.
Today Ms.
Ehmer, who is a member of her church's social concerns committee, discovered she had company.
Lots of company.


Boston Curator Named
LEAD: Kathy Halbreich has been named to head the new department of contemporary art at the Museum of Fine Arts here, the museum's director, Alan Shestack, announced last week.
Ms.
Halbreich, whose appointment is effective Nov. 28, is currently curator of an international exhibition on art of the 1980's for the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington, scheduled to open in January 1990.


Review/Film; When Aliens Meet Angelenos
LEAD: ''Alien Nation'' has the best science-fiction idea this side of ''The Terminator'': it presents a race of extraterrestrials that has already arrived and been absorbed into the population of Los Angeles.
How, you may wonder, can anyone tell?
In fact the spacelings, called Newcomers, are pretty easy to spot.


Executive Indicted in Sodomy
LEAD: A millionaire businessman and foundation president has been indicted on charges of sodomizing five boys in Harlem.


Drug Company Tells of Sales To Olympic Runner's Doctor
LEAD: Dr.
George M. Astaphan, the personal physician of Ben Johnson, was the subject today of more allegations, including a report from a major drug company that it had repeatedly sold the doctor ''quantities'' of the anabolic steroid stanozolol.


Teams Setting Sail In Hudson Regatta
LEAD: It isn't the America's Cup, but it's as close as anyone can come to an international regatta without spending a lot of money.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
AM International Inc., Chicago, said it had completed the sale of its Harris Graphics Web Press group to Heidelberg Drickmaschinen A.G. of Germany for $300 million.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I can't remember a day when people seemed as happy as they are today.
People voted for democracy and won.''  - Francisco Marambio, a taxi driver in Santiago, Chile.  [ A12:1. ]


Shultz Diary: U.N. Visitors All Day Long
LEAD: When Secretary of State George P. Shultz meets foreign ministers in his suite at the United Nations Plaza Hotel, he often greets them by saying, ''Welcome to my dentist's office.''


Cooper to Sell Part of Business
LEAD: The Cooper Companies said today that it had signed a letter of intent to sell its surgical ophthalmic products business to Alcon Laboratories Inc., a subsidiary of Nestle S.A., for about $325 million.
Cooper's surgical group develops, manufactures and markets instruments, equipment and intraocular lenses used in eye surgery.


American List Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American List Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,412,784
1,512,004
Net inc
b574,989
c461,559
Share earns
.20
.17
6mo rev
2,971,547
3,141,383
Net inc
b1,151,072
c1,011,448
Share earns
.41
.36


Gretzky Gets and Gives Royal Treatment


New at Sears: Specialty Retailing
LEAD: Struggling to revitalize its lackluster general merchandise business, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company is taking a lesson from the specialty retailer.
It hopes to repeat the success of such specialty stores as the Gap, Circuit City, Toys ''R'' Us and the Limited.


Growing Yugoslav Ethnic Protests Lead Province Officials to Resign
LEAD: A wave of Serbian nationalism that has caused concern throughout Yugoslavia led today to the resignation of the head of government and the entire Politburo of an autonomous province of Serbia.


Celebration on the Great White Way


Zenith Relinquishes Stockholders List
LEAD: The Zenith Electronics Corporation agreed to hand over a list of its stockholders to a group of dissidents and said the group's attempt to wage a proxy fight against Zenith management would not trigger the company's takeover defense.


About Real Estate; Suburbs Reach Hudson Valley Town
LEAD: As suburban sprawl reaches farther and farther into the Hudson Valley, it is beginning to affect some of the smallest farming towns in Orange, Ulster and Dutchess Counties, traditionally known for apple orchards, vineyards and wooded hillsides.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Datakey Inc., Minneapolis, a producer of microelectronic devices for electronic security and process control systems, appointed James E. Donaghy a director.


Our Towns; On a Tightrope: Doctor Teeters In Two Worlds
LEAD: Dr.
Romie Roland is in his second year of anesthesiology training at Nassau County Medical Center, the hospital that serves the area's poor.
The 29-year-old doctor grew up in a black neighborhood near the hospital, went away to college, spent four more years at Meharry Medical School in Nashville, then moved back here last year for his residency.


Result in Chile Brings Joy in the Streets
LEAD: After a night that was long, tense and eerily quiet until the Pinochet regime finally conceded its defeat in a crucial plebiscite on its future, Chileans took to the streets today to celebrate the beginning of the end of the 15-year-old dictatorship.


Blasius Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Blasius Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,758,000
11,977,000
Net inc
b2,338,000
c476,000
Share earns
.58
.11
Shares outst
3,956,000
3,968,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $325,000.
c-Includes a gain of $87,000 from the repurchase of notes.


Troubled Cone Stops the Press
LEAD: David Cone, distraught over the controversy that flared over his remarks as a newspaper commentator on the National League playoff, has relinquished his literary career to focus on his baseball career.


Review/Dance; A Solo Work From a Tragic Time
LEAD: ''The art of the dance exists in the instant of execution,'' Martha Graham has said, adding, for good measure, William Blake's remark that ''Execution is the chariot of genius.''


Village Super Market Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Village Super Market Inc
Qtr to July 30
1988
1987
Sales
184,022,000
159,004,000
Net inc
2,090,000
1,501,000
Share earns
.63
.59
Yr sales
621,468,000
567,395,000
Net inc
6,140,000
4,173,000
Share earns
1.84
1.73
Shares outst
3,343,376
2,411,869


The Bentsen-Quayle Whatever
LEAD: It was not a debate.
It was not even a good news conference.
It was a staged, manipulated, choreographed performance, stilted and artificial.
At the end the most important question remained unanswered.


Corrections
LEAD: A list of Olympic medal winners in SportsMonday this week misidentified a silver medalist in women's tennis doubles and gave her home country incorrectly.
She is Jana Novotna; she and her partner, Helena Sukova, are from Czechoslovakia, not the Soviet Union.


Dense-Pac Microsystems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dense-Pac Microsystems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Sales
1,487,000
1,621,000
Net inc
b110,000
128,000
Share earns
.02
.03
Shares outst
5,278,000
4,653,000
6mo sales
3,317,000
2,915,000
Net inc
351,000
26,000
Share earns
.07
.01
Shares outst
5,196,000
4,612,000


6 Savings Executives Held Liable in Maryland
LEAD: A Maryland jury yesterday found that six officers and directors of a now-bankrupt savings institution had breached their fiduciary duties and awarded the Maryland Deposit Insurance Fund $112 million in damages.


Votrax Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Votrax Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,834,000
2,730,000
Net inc
b215,000
200,000
Share earns
.07
.07
Yr sales
8,571,000
8,031,000
Net inc
b322,000
262,000
Share earns
.10
.08
b-After an extraordinary gain of $80,000 from an accounting change for the quarter and year.


In Chile: Positively No
LEAD: By voting Wednesday against eight more years of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, Chileans have resoundingly affirmed their democratic traditions.
Fifteen years ago a near-war between the two largest democratic forces, Christian Democrats and Socialists, opened the way to rule by General Pinochet and an era of terror.


Data Translation Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Translation Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,952,000
8,111,000
Net inc
661,000
780,000
Share earns
.22
.24
Shares outst
3,066,000
3,212,000
9mo sales
27,665,000
23,118,000
Net inc
1,636,000
2,202,000
Share earns
.54
.69
Shares outst
3,091,000
3,190,000


Armani's Streamlined Look: All but Weightless
LEAD: When do tailored clothes look airborne?
When they are from the hands of Giorgio Armani, of course.
Fashion's most prestigious tailor has been pursuing the idea of weightlessness with relentless passion for some years.


House Approves Controls for Medical Waste
LEAD: The House today approved legislation to regulate the disposal of medical waste.


Laborites: The Ideals Still Divide
LEAD: The British Labor Party goes to war with itself every fall at its annual conference in Blackpool, but this year its leader, Neil Kinnock, hardly managed to fight his way to a draw with his own left wing and the big labor unions.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Try and Try Again
LEAD: It's ''wait till next year'' time on Capitol Hill.
With only a few days left in the current session of Congress, members are still introducing bills, but with the realization that they are unlikely to attract the full attention of the lawmakers, who are intent on leaving town.
The object of the exercise, they say, is to get a jump on the next session, which begins in January.


Review/Film; A Superior Servant
LEAD: ''Oh Bill,'' says Leona (Kathleen Quinlan), an attractive and very well-heeled white woman on vacation in Jamaica, ''come meet the most wonderful person!'' The wonderful person is Clara (Whoopi Goldberg), a black maid working in the hotel where Leona and her husband are staying, on a vacation meant to help them recover from the death of their infant daughter.


Devils Lose, Rangers Tie in Openers; Flyers 4, Devils 1
LEAD: The National Hockey League's new rule on high-sticking and an inspired performance by Ron Hextall in goal were the chief elements in the Devils' 4-1 loss to the Flyers in their opener tonight.


Quayle Reflects Badly on Bush, Dukakis Asserts
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis had the air of a man scenting political vulnerability today, asserting that the Vice-Presidential debate raised serious questions about Senator Dan Quayle and about Vice President Bush's judgment in placing him on the ticket.


British Steel To Be Sold
LEAD: The British Government said today that it would sell the state-owned British Steel Company to the public next month at a price to be disclosed later.


Dollar Is Narrowly Higher And Gold Continues to Rise
LEAD: The dollar moved narrowly higher yesterday as traders awaited today's release of unemployment figures for September.


KIM SEIBEL WEDS RANDALL WALTUCH
LEAD: Kim J. Seibel, the daughter of Monroe Seibel and Joy Grayson, both of New York, and Randall E. Waltuch, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norton D. Waltuch of Englewood, N.J., and Boca Raton, Fla., were married last evening in New York.
The ceremony at the Helmsley Palace Hotel was performed by Rabbi Jack Bemporad, assisted by Cantor Nathan


Devils Lose, Rangers Tie in Openers; Rangers 2, Blackhawks 2
LEAD: The Rangers played an essentially solid defensive game tonight, but their fears about an inability to score goals were largely realized as they scrapped to a 2-2 draw with the Chicago Blackhawks in the season opener for both teams.


SENATE BARS FUND FOR WAR ON DRUGS
LEAD: The Senate today soundly rejected efforts to raise money to pay for a major anti-drug bill by increasing Federal taxes on cigarettes and alcohol or by cutting spending for other programs.


Baker Is Ready To Answer Call
LEAD: Something about filling in seems to appeal to Stephen Baker.


Museum Show In Brooklyn Explores Age Of Cleopatra
LEAD: BEGINNING shortly after a bloodless takeover by Alexander the Great and ending with the suicides of Marc Antony and Cleopatra almost three centuries later, the Ptolemaic period constituted the final flowering of ancient Egyptian civilization.
Along the Nile, Hellenism prospered beside an indigenous culture whose traditions stretched back more than 2,000 years.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  Touched by War


Washington Talk: Briefing; Ukrainians Celebrate
LEAD: One thousand years ago a prince named Volodymyr, whose home was in Kiev, the present-day capital of the Ukraine, agreed to be baptized a Christian, following the example of his grandmother, who had adopted the faith.


Ripley Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ripley Co
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,604,187
1,421,903
Net inc
48,251
76,081
Share earns
.08
.13
6mo sales
3,209,981
3,011,949
Net inc
136,564
189,626
Share earns
.23
.32


Video Display Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Video Display Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,683,000
6,558,000
Net inc
679,000
b363,000
Share earns
.17
.08
6mo sales
18,624,000
13,348,000
Net inc
1,259,000
b678,000
Share earns
.31
.16


Mariners Drop Snyder
LEAD: Jim Snyder, who took over as manager of the Seattle Mariners when Dick Williams was dismissed June 6, will not be retained.
Instead, a statement issued by the Mariners yesterday said a new manager for the team would be sought from outside the club. ''Jim came in under difficult circumstances and did a job for us,'' said Woody Woodward, vice president of baseball operations.


U.N. Talks on Cyprus Peace Settlement Hit Snags
LEAD: A new round of peace talks aimed at ending the division of Cyprus into Greek and Turkish areas by June has run into serious difficulties, according to diplomats and officials involved in the talks.


Pillsbury Head Gives Sign Of Fighting Grand Met Bid
LEAD: Surprised and embittered by a sudden takeover offer, the chairman and chief executive of the Pillsbury Company gave a strong indication today that the Minneapolis-based food-and-restaurant giant would fight, even though analysts are calling the bid more than generous.


Classical Music Meets Pop Culture In New Renditions and Revivals
LEAD: A FEW years ago, when Philip Glass was composing his third opera, ''Akhnaten,'' an associate read him a review of his ''Photographer'' recording.
The review pointed out a similarity between one of that work's prominent chordal hooks, and that of a late-1960's rock hit, ''96 Tears,'' by Question Mark and the Mysterians.


At the Bar
LEAD: As 6-year-old Lisa Steinberg was beaten and subsequently died last year, her West 10th St. neighbors were too powerless or too indifferent to act.
Nor had most of them ever spoken up on the many previous occasions when violence rocked the apartment of her purported parents, Joel Steinberg and Hedda


Editors' Note
LEAD: The Bridge column on Sept. 6 discussed South Africa's political acceptability in international competitions.
The column noted a World Bridge Federation agreement to encourage multiracial play in South Africa and added, ''The organization there is multiracial, with most of the players either Indian or Jewish.


P. B. Wald, 57, Official Of Liberty Foundation
LEAD: Palmer Bernard Wald, the vice president of the Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island Foundation, died Wednesday in St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old and lived on the Upper West Side.


Data Med Clinical Support Servics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Med Clinical Support Servics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
384,502
265,868
Net loss
101,145
156,500
Shares outst
6,247,760
5,855,923
6mo rev
633,696
376,390
Net loss
486,105
462,906
Shares outst
6,228,641
5,847,558


Sports of The Times; Return From The Mixed Zone
LEAD: AT the Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea, we had to do our interviews in the Mixed Zone, a halfway house between security fences, beseeching athletes to stop and talk to us.
We never got to meet the thwarted table-tennis lovers, Ahn Jae Hyung of South Korea and Jiao Zhimin of China, to question them about their discreet four-year courtship whose flame burns even after the Olympic flame has been extinguished.


Tyson Seeks Site Change
LEAD: Mike Tyson doesn't want to fight Frank Bruno in London, and said as much yesterday to Donald Trump.


Judge Critical of Prosecution Over Iran-Contra Indictment
LEAD: A Federal district judge today rebuked the prosecution in the Iran-contra affair for having a suspect indicted in Washington for crimes that are alleged to have taken place in another jurisdiction.


Bank of Redlands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Redlands
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
510,000
443,000
Per share
.21
.19
9mo net inc
1,562,000
1,280,000
Per share
.66
.54


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  Drexel Burnham Lambert was denied its motion to disqualify the judge hearing the securities fraud case against the firm, four executives and others.
The decision does not end the legal struggle over Federal District Judge Milton Pollack but was nonetheless seen as a victory for the Government.


Bridge Oil Agrees To Acquire Petrus
LEAD: The computer entrepreneur Ross Perot has agreed to sell the Petrus Oil and Gas L.P., which he founded, to the United States subsidiary of Bridge Oil Ltd. of Australia for $112 million cash.
Petrus has proven reserves estimated at 13.7 million barrels of oil and 81.47 billion cubic feet of natural gas as well as 61,267 lease acres company spokesman said.


A.&amp;P. Tender Offer For Delchamps
LEAD: The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, spurned by the management of Delchamps Inc., has taken its $210 million offer for the supermarket company directly to its shareholders.
Michael J. Rourke, A.&amp;P.'s vice president of communications, said A.&amp;P. decided Wednesday to begin a $30-a-share tender offer after three unsuccessful attempts in three years to convince Delchamps executives that a merger was in the best interest of shareholders.


Boston Can't Get Relief in 9th Inning
LEAD: The ninth inning is when Lee Smith blows away the opposition with a fastball that zooms down from his massive frame.


Digital and Tandy To Develop Line
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation announced an agreement with the Tandy Corporaiton to develop a new line of personal computers to be sold under the Digital label.


Geoffrey Household, 87, Novelist Who Wrote Suspense Works, Dies
LEAD: Geoffrey Household, one of the British authors who helped to develop the suspense story into an art form, died Tuesday.
He was 87 years old and lived near Banbury, 65 miles from London.


Wary Jerusalem Arabs Back in School
LEAD: At the sound of a recess bell, 1,300 Palestinian girls spilled into the halls and courtyards of Mamuniya High School in East Jerusalem this morning.


New York's Fall Foliage: Where It Is and How to Go
LEAD: Getting there - anywhere north of New York City - is more than half the pleasure these October weekends when the spectacular display of fall foliage is reaching its colorful peak.


People
LEAD: *
John F. Trzuskowski has joined Zwiren &amp; Partners, Chicago, as managing partner/creative director.


Arcadia Journal; AIDS Issue Lingers in Florida Town
LEAD: This is the kind of town where, when the rodeo is on, a ranch hand can ride his horse right into Barb's Lounge on Magnolia Street and buy a beer without getting off the horse.


'We, the Grand Jury:' Text of Its Conclusions in the Tawana Brawley Case
LEAD: Following is the text of the conclusions of the special New York State grand jury report in the Tawana Brawley case:


Indictments In Postal Fraud Case
LEAD: Recognition Equipment Inc., an information processing company in Irving, Tex., and two top executives were indicted today by a Federal grand jury in Washington on charges of conspiring to defraud the United States Postal Service.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in some editions yesterday about the Vice-Presidential debate misstated the number of times Senator Dan Quayle was asked what he would do if forced to assume Presidential responsibility.
The question was asked twice, not three times, before he responded that it was hypothetical.


San Francisco Museum Chooses Swiss Architect
LEAD: The San Francisco Museum of Modern Art has announced that the Swiss architect Mario Botta will design its new building.
The $70 million, 175,000-square-foot structure, which is to be built in the Yerba Buena Gardens complex, a development in downtown San Francisco, will double the museum's current exhibition space.


Nellcor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nellcor Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 25
1988
1987
Revenue
29,024,000
23,908,000
Net inc
3,000,000
3,377,000
Share earns
.21
.23


Review/Art; The Cosmopolitanism of 19th-Century Poland
LEAD: ''Nineteenth-Century Polish Painting'' at the National Academy of Design is a great deal of fun, even if some of the best things in it are not by Poles and do not date from the 19th century.
Neither of these facts need inconvenience the visitor.
The exhibition as a whole is animated by the cosmopolitan spirit that was very much alive in Poland during the reign of King Stanislaus Augustus and continued unabated when Poland was wiped off the map of Europe in 1795.


Tunes and Talks on Immigrants
LEAD: Here is the schedule for the symposium on ''Immigrant Music in New York City'' at Hunter College, 695 Park Avenue, at 68th Street.
Round-table discussions and music demonstrations are free and open to the public.
Information: 772-5020.
TODAY  PANEL AND DISCUSSION: ''Transformations: New Settings and Meanings for Immigrant Music in New York.


Review/Music; Russian Pianist Returns
LEAD: Of all the winners of the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition since its inception in 1962, none showed more early promise than Vladimir Viardo.
The Soviet pianist, who captured the first prize in 1973, followed up that victory with several American recitals that deepened the impression he made as a contest winner.


Erring Official Quits
LEAD: The National Football League instant-replay official who was suspended for two games by Commissioner Pete Rozelle after making a crucial mistake in a game between the Giants and the Dallas Cowboys Sept. 18 has resigned. ''No one forced me to retire,'' said Armen Terzian, a field judge for 21 years.


Telco Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telco Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 28
1988
1987
Sales
17,339,000
15,904,000
Net inc
332,000
285,000
Share earns
.04
.03
Yr sales
58,620,000
61,219,000
Net loss
1,384,000
8,400,000


William P. Connors, Photographer, 59
LEAD: William P. Connors, a fashion photographer, died of cancer Sept. 29 at his home in the Coconut Grove area of Miami.
He was 59 years old.


Latest Twist In Children's Toothpaste
LEAD: THE toothpaste companies keep coming up with new ways to sell their products.
First it was fluoride.
Then came breath fresheners, gels, pumps and anti-plaque formulas.
Next were toothpastes made especially for children.


Hunting Only Increases Deer Population
LEAD: To the Editor:


Staff Builders Inc (NY)(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Staff Builders Inc (NY)(O)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
41,722,567
34,711,774
Net inc
924,583
510,368
Share earns
.13
.07
6mo rev
78,841,824
48,276,341
Net inc
1,771,232
783,381
Share earns
.24
.15
Shares outst
6,490,027
4,357,509


Washington Talk: Briefing; Fulbright on Yakovlev
LEAD: J. W. Fulbright, the former Senator from Arkansas who more than 40 years ago proposed legislation that established the Fulbright Program of exchanges between foreign and American scholars, was in fine fettle at a recent Washington luncheon party.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a report on Tuesday in the Briefing column of the Washington Talk page misidentified Gunter Diehl.
He is the former West German Ambassador to India and to Japan, not to the United States.


Environmental Study Urges Limiting Rise in Cabs to 400
LEAD: New York City's already bad air and traffic can withstand only a small fraction of the 1,800 new taxicabs authorized by the city last year, an environmental study has concluded.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-12  Gen.
Pinochet will accept rejection of an extension of his term as President, after 15 years of tough military rule in Chile.
Virtually complete unofficial returns showed that the general lost his bid for a new eight-year term.
Page A1


Bank Losses Up in Texas
LEAD: Texas banks lost $2.9 billion in the first six months of 1988, more than three times what they lost in the first half of 1987, according to a report released today by Texas Banking Commissioner Kenneth Littlefield.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  ANTIQUES AT THE ARMORY


National Data Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Data Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
48,640,000
43,410,000
Net inc
4,339,000
3,722,000
Share earns
.38
.33


Senate Panel Faults Aide on Role in Bork Hearings
LEAD: The Senate Judiciary Committee has found that a committee aide acted inappropriately when she discouraged a witness from testifying last year in behalf of the nomination of Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court, which was ultimately rejected by the Senate.


Marine Midland Auto Certificates
LEAD: Marine Midland 1988-2 Trust is offering $226.5 million of securities backed by auto loan receivables through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


Call Those Theaters Anything but Populist
LEAD: To the Editor:


Paine Webber Settles Charges
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission has reached a settlement with Paine Webber Inc. over complaints that the investment company had mishandled the account of a Roman Catholic charity that lost millions of dollars.


Review/Theater; Nostalgic Updating Of 'Romeo' In Chicago
LEAD: It's not until next week that this city's Lyric Opera will unveil Peter Sellars's ''Tannhauser,'' in which Wagner will at last meet up with the world of television evangelism.
But in the flourishing industry of rejiggering the classics, the Goodman Theater has upstaged Mr.
Sellars with its new ''Romeo and Juliet'' set in Chicago's Little Italy, circa World War I.


A's Grab 2-0 Lead by Edging Red Sox in the Ninth
LEAD: They have played two games and beaten Boston's two best pitchers, and now they are going home.
The Oakland Athletics, who won 104 games during the regular season and sailed into the post-season with extraordinary momentum, crushed the hearts of the faithful at Fenway Park tonight.
And now, they are heading west.


Provident Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,233,000
2,719,000
Per share
.81
.52
9mo net inc
10,327,000
b9,636,000
Per share
1.98
1.85
b-After a gain of $2,024,000 from an accounting change.


Photronic Labs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photronic Labs Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,642,011
3,587,031
Net loss
350,299
b199,365
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
3,201,500
3,280,000
9mo sales
13,097,153
10,171,448
Net loss
903,244
b808,393
Share earns
-
.28
Shares outst
3,246,836
2,923,636


Nu Horizons Electronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nu Horizons Electronics Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,754,438
7,577,992
Net inc
234,777
169,465
Share earns
.05
.04
Shares outst
4,816,692
4,655,907
6mo sales
18,838,156
14,086,015
Net inc
455,863
377,536
Share earns
.10
.08
Shares outst
4,796,159
4,655,346


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Mosaico


The Debates: Revival for Democrats
LEAD: The two debates so far in the 1988 campaign appear to have done exactly what the Republicans feared: They have helped revive a badly wounded Democratic ticket.


Darling and Tudor Meet in a Tie Breaker
LEAD: The National League playoff, tied at one game apiece, switches venues to New York tonight from Los Angeles, the land of fantasy where Kareem Abdul-Jabbar does TV interviews on the grass as Magic Johnson watches from the box seats and the first balls are thrown out by left-handed legends named Sandy Koufax and Fernando


Books of The Times; Master Critic on a Master Storyteller
LEAD:  Chekhov  A Spirit Set Free  By V. S. Pritchett  235 pages. Random House. $17.95.


U.S. Applauds 'Power of Ballot Box'
LEAD: The United States congratulated Chile today for carrying out a peaceful and impartial plebiscite on the presidency of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet and expressed hope that he would honor the result.


Scientist Assails a U.S. Nuclear Verification Plan
LEAD: A senior scientist at a Federal weapons laboratory told Congress today that the Reagan Administration's plan for verifying limits on nuclear testing was too stringent and could interfere with the program to develop new nuclear devices.


Timetable for Succession
LEAD: The constitutional provisions under which Gen.
Augusto Pinochet unsuccessfully sought voter support for a new term as President set forth a 17-month timetable for the election and installation of his successor and a Congress.


Jacqueline Friend, 72, Psychology Professor
LEAD: Jacqueline Friend, a psychology professor and the New York State coordinator of pre-retirement planning for the American Association of Retired Persons, died of cancer Wednesday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Note and Bond Prices Sluggish
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved sluggishly in a very narrow range for the fourth consecutive session yesterday, as market participants nervously awaited this morning's report on September employment.


Arsenal of Stolen Guns Seized in Manhattan


UNA Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UNA Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,097,000
4,129,000
Net inc
404,000
b531,000
Share earns
.07
-
Yr rev
22,060,000
16,598,000
Net loss
76,000
2,450,000
Shares outst
5,877,812
807,322


An Officer Is Indicted In Shooting of Youth
LEAD: A 28-year-old New York City police officer was indicted yesterday on charges that he shot a 15-year-old Brooklyn boy in the leg after the youth surrendered.


New Space Shuttle Is Taking Shape
LEAD: In a cavernous assembly hangar here, the pieces of a new space shuttle - wings, body flaps, engine pods and the main fuselage - are being put together and slowly covered with tiles to serve as a heat shield.
The craft will replace the Challenger, which was lost 32 months ago in an explosion that killed all seven astronauts.


Square Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,926,000
12,307,000
Net inc
1,000
166,000
Share earns
-
.14
6mo rev
27,320,000
24,852,000
Net inc
421,000
525,000
Share earns
.36
.45


All Plaintiffs in Suit Against Klan To Be Polled on Staying in Case
LEAD: A Federal judge here said today that he would not unseal a verdict against 10 present and former members of the Ku Klux Klan until more than 50 people who filed the lawsuit had been asked if they wished to remain plaintiffs.


Rules Altered For Halting Welfare Aid
LEAD: New York City, acknowledging that many welfare recipients have unfairly been stripped of benefits, will no longer cut off those who fail to answer questionnaires they receive as often as nine times a year.


Muller Jordan Weiss Buys Kelley-Swofford
LEAD: Muller Jordan Weiss has acquired Kelley-Swofford, a $3 million agency in Coral Gables, Fla., whose specialty is travel and tourism.
The amount was not disclosed.


American President Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American President Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 16
1988
1987
Revenue
538,500,000
454,100,000
Net inc
30,100,000
24,900,000
Share earns
1.30
1.09
9mo rev
1,529,800,000
1,337,400,000
Net inc
65,800,000
64,900,000
Share earns
2.82
2.83


Renewal of Wetlands Begins at Queens Bay
LEAD: A city-owned wetland at the edge of Jamaica Bay in Queens - which has attracted abandoned cars and dumped garbage as well as hundreds of species of migrating birds - will be cleaned up and maintained as part of a renewed city effort to preserve ecologically significant sites, according to New York City officials.


Bridge
LEAD: Modern technology will make one more impact on some bridge players during the next two weeks.
Hands from the World Team Olympiad starting Sunday in Venice will be transmitted electronically to six clubs in North America, fed by computer into duplicate boards and then played by the members.
One of these clubs, staging seven sessions of play, some afternoon and some evening, is the Vanderbilt at 1362 Northern Boulevard in Manhasset, L.I.


Salvador Leftist to Run For President in March
LEAD: Guillermo Ungo, the elder statesman of El Salvador's political left, will run for President in March, the first leftist to run in an election since civil war broke out nearly a decade ago, his coalition party said today.


L.S.U. to Test Auburn Passer
LEAD: After playing two years as the backup quarterback to Jeff Burger at Auburn, Reggie Slack has blossomed into one of the nation's leading passers as the Tigers have gone undefeated through four games.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Oakland Takes 2-0 Lead  A run-scoring single by Walt Weiss in the ninth gave the Athletics a 4-3 victory over Boston and a 2-0 lead in the American League playoff.
Page D19.
Voice of America in Moscow  The Voice of America, once listened to clandestinely in the Soviet Union, will soon open a bureau in Moscow.


The 'Bonebreaker' Vultures of Spain
LEAD: The star of the season's opening edition of ''Nature'' is a rare carrion-eating combination of the vulture and the eagle called the lammergeier.
Its distinctive trick is to carry the bones of dead animals up 500 feet and drop them crashing onto the rocks below, thereby providing bite-sized portions for the scavenger as well as a taste of marrow.


Miller Herman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miller Herman Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 3
1988
1987
Sales
190,498,000
160,636,000
Net inc
b12,776,000
10,059,000
Share earns
.52
.41
b-After a gain of $3.3 million from an accounting change.


Horizon Healthcare Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Healthcare Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
25,819,000
17,676,000
Net inc
21,000
b528,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Includes a loss from discontinued operations of $68,000 and a tax credit of $199,000.


H.C.A. Said It Would Reject $3.3 Billion Buyout Proposal
LEAD: The Hospital Corporation of America, the nation's largest hospital operator, said yesterday that it would reject a leveraged buyout proposal valued at about $47 a share, or $3.3 billion.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Lobbying for Nurses
LEAD: Partly because of a letter written to every member of the House of Representatives by last year's Miss America, Kaye Lani Rae Rafko of Michigan, the House has approved a measure intended to ease the shortage of nurses by allowing foreign nurses to stay in the United States even though their visas have expired or are about to.


Ex-Secretary Tells of Judge Handling Capasso Motion
LEAD: A former law secretary testified yesterday that Justice Hortense W. Gabel took the unusual step of personally handling a divorce motion by Bess Myerson's companion, Carl A. Capasso, in 1983.


Electro Rent Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro Rent Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
29,383,000
27,357,000
Net inc
2,173,000
2,030,000
Share earns
.43
.31
Shares outst
5,102,000
6,614,000


Radio City Without Radio: WNBC Is Gone
LEAD: With voices from its past - Jack Benny, Bob Hope, Lowell Thomas, George Burns and Gracie Allen, among others - and a hectic sort of wake at its offices at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, WNBC-AM broadcast for the last time yesterday, ending 66 years of history.


2 Chip Makers Report Disappointing Earnings
LEAD: Two major semiconductor makers reported disappointing results today, confirming some analysts' suspicions that the industry's boom is nearly over.


Ruling on Challenger Tape to be Reconsidered
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has agreed to reconsider its decision ordering the space agency to release the audio tape recording of seven astronauts' last moments before they died in the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger in 1986.


Review/Theater; 'Dinner at 8,' 30's Fare, Is Served Up Anew
LEAD: George Cukor's movie adaptation of ''Dinner at Eight'' was a paradigm of the all-star films that tumbled out of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in the 1930's.
Top studio stars (including John and Lionel Barrymore, Marie Dressler and Jean Harlow) turned it into one of the glossiest and most popular of Hollywood movies.


On a Campaign Swing, President Praises Quayle
LEAD: In a campaign swing to Detroit and its ethnic suburbs, President Reagan today joined Republican efforts to speak up for Senator Dan Quayle, the Vice-Presidential nominee.


Slipping Through the Cracks: The Filter That Contaminated
LEAD: In a ruling last month on a filter that contaminated water instead of purifying it, the Federal Trade Commission cast light on how Government regulatory agencies with overlapping jursidiction failed to prevent Norelco from marketing a product containing a probable carcinogen.


Tyson's Wife Seeks Divorce
LEAD: Saying her marriage to Mike Tyson, the heavyweight champion of the world, had been a ''continuous horror story'' of ''unprovoked rages and destruction,'' the actress Robin Givens today filed for divorce and obtained restraining orders to keep her husband away from her.


Harlem Man Killed By a Subway Train
LEAD: A man was killed by a subway train and a bicycle became wedged between the third rail and the running rail in separate incidents yesterday that severely disrupted subway service during the morning rush hour.


Judge Allows Seven Shelters; Surprises Foes
LEAD: Less than 48 hours after three borough presidents claimed they had won a lawsuit to block the Koch administration's plan to build 11 shelters for the homeless, a Brooklyn judge ruled yesterday that the city could proceed with seven of them and rejected the borough leaders' most sweeping legal argument.


Prokofiev's Piano Sonatas
LEAD: Barbara Nissman will play the nine piano sonatas of Sergei Prokofiev and several of the composer's short works in three Wednesday concerts this season at Alice Tully Hall.
The first program will be at 8 P.M.
Oct. 19; the others will be on Nov. 16 and Feb. 1, both at 8 P.M.
The nine sonatas, composed between 1907 and 1947, provide a chronicle of artistic growth.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Bernie Kosar of the Cleveland Browns, who suffered a severe sprain of his right elbow Sept. 4 when he was hit on a blitz by Lloyd Burruss of the Kansas City Chiefs, is throwing a football without discomfort amd could resume practice with his teammates in about two weeks, Coach Marty Schottenheimer said.


2 in Detroit Acquitted of Arson in Fires at House Tied to Drug Deals
LEAD: Two men have been acquitted of charges that they set fire to a house in their neighborhood that was suspected of being used by drug dealers, even though the men admitted starting the fires.


Pledge of Allegiance Should Be Streamlined
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rummaging in Broadcasting's Attic
LEAD: Nostalgia reigns at the Smithsonian's National Portrait Gallery where a new exhibition, ''On the Air: Pioneers of American Broadcasting,'' opened today.


A PRODUCT UNDER FIRE
LEAD: Here is a chronology of events concerning methylene chloride in the Norelco Clean Water Machine, based primarily on documents from the Federal Trade Commission.
JUNE 1980: The Environmental Protection Agency lists methylene chloride as a suspected carcinogen.
JULY 1982: Norelco's Clean Water Machine with methylene chloride in the filter goes on the market.


Dean Witter Settles Case
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission said today that Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. had agreed to settle charges that it had failed to supervise adequately a branch office manager and one of his subordinates who has been accused of fraud.


U.S. RELIEF SOUGHT FOR LAST BIG BANK OWNED BY TEXANS
LEAD: The last major bank in Texas that is controlled by Texans said for the first time today that it needed Federal assistance to survive.


To Millions of Haitians, Voodoo Is a Religion
LEAD: To the Editor:


Palestinians Report 4 Killed By Israeli Troops in Nablus
LEAD: Four Palestinians were shot and killed today by Israeli soldiers trying to quash rioting that broke out during the funeral of an Arab killed in the West Bank city of Nablus, Palestinians said.


Mercedes-Benz to Offer Used-Car Warranties
LEAD: Mercedes-Benz of North America is testing a program to guarantee the quality of its used cars in an effort to increase their resale prices.


Shoreham License Recommendation Is Overturned
LEAD: A Federal licensing board's recommendation that the Shoreham nuclear plant receive a full-power operating license was overturned yesterday by an appeals panel of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.


Regular Size Lighters Being Recalled by Bic
LEAD: Bic is recalling its new, regular size fixed-flame cigarette lighters because some of them may fail to extinguish, the Consumer Product Safety Commission said today.


5 Nuns in New Jersey Break Away Over Break With Tradition
LEAD: Five cloistered nuns are protesting at their monastery here over the relaxation of rigid monastic lifestyles rooted in the 16th century.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 3-5  Early resignation of Chile's leader, Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, was demanded by a jubilant crowd in Santiago.
But the general showed no sign of resigning before the Constitution requires.
Page 1  News analysis: After Chile's vote to end Gen.
Augusto Pinochet's rule, it may face a more difficult task: sorting through many political options and at least two dozen political parties to find the next President.


Dollar Retreats Slightly On Unemployment Report
LEAD: The dollar closed narrowly lower yesterday after it first skidded and then regained some ground after the Labor Department released September's unemployment figures.


Woman Is Sterilized in Hope Of Leniency in Child's Death
LEAD: A woman who gave her 4-year-old son a fatal dose of prescription drugs has undergone sterilization in hope of receiving a lenient sentence, her attorney says.


American Mercenary Files Iran-Contra Suit
LEAD: Eugene V. Hasenfus, the mercenary who spent three months in a Nicaraguan jail after his contra supply plane was shot down, has filed a $135 million damage suit against two men and two companies linked to the Iran-contra arms deals.


Interest on U.S. Debt to Top Budget's $150 Billion Deficit
LEAD: Any moment now, the Government's bookkeepers will record a noteworthy passage in the Federal accounts: The interest the Treasury pays on the $2 trillion national debt is itself about to exceed the huge Federal budget deficit of $150 billion.
And from here on, most calculations show, the interest bill will continue to grow.


Albany Club Closes Its Own Gender Gap &gt;
LEAD: The front desk still sells nothing but cigars, and a stuffed elk head still watches over the entrance.


Patents; Severed Nerves Attached By Electric Current
LEAD: A group of scientists received patent approval this week for a method of using electric current to repair severed nerves.
The method has been tested in small animals, and the inventors hope to obtain Federal approval for human tests within a year.


Steeplechase Winner


NEAR 14-YEAR LOW
LEAD: The nation's unemployment rate fell two-tenths of a point in September, to 5.3 percent, the Labor Department reported today.
At the same time the slowdown in creating new jobs continued, easing fear that the economy would expand too rapidly.


Life Sentence in Hostage Case
LEAD: Clutching a Bible and wiping his eyes, James L. Harvey was sentenced Friday to life in prison plus 20 years for taking 110 people hostage at a church school in Tuscaloosa for 12 hours on Feb. 2.
Mr.
Harvey, 43 years old, had pleaded guilty at the encouragement of his sisters, cutting short a trial in which he had maintained that, in his actions at the school, he was exercising his right to bear arms and was making a statement for the nation's homeless, poor and illiterate.


Next 1-2-3 Not So Easy for Lotus
LEAD: Since introducing its popular 1-2-3 spreadsheet program five years ago, the Lotus Development Corporation has proved virtually invincible in the $585 million market for the programs.
Personal computer spreadsheets have become indispensable planning tools for businesses large and small.


Arts Leaders Hear Candidates' Views
LEAD: Spokesmen for Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis clashed sharply here today over which Presidential candidate would do more for the arts.


Lack of Hitting Undermines Red Sox
LEAD: The New England autumn has arrived and the Red Sox batters have already gone into hibernation.


Prison Marijuana Crop Seized
LEAD: Nine inmates who were supposed to be planting trees on a work detail had been cultivating marijuana and were arrested trying to smuggle 31 pounds of their crop into prison, the state police said today.


Day Care and Parental Leave Bills Die
LEAD: The Senate today killed a package of bills described by its Democratic proponents as ''pro-family,'' and the Democrats immediately served notice that they would use the defeat against the Republicans in the remaining days of the election campaign.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD:  Questions appear on page 10.


Appeal by Interco
LEAD: Interco Inc. asked a Federal appeals court to order a judge to hear its claim that an investor group was improperly pursuing a $2.66 billion takeover attempt.
Interco maintains the hostile buyout attempt by a group led by the Rales brothers of Washington, D.C., violates Security and Exchange Commission regulations by being too highly leveraged.


China to Cut Investment
LEAD: Chinese officials have announced tough new measures to halt certain construction projects in a nationwide crackdown on what the Government considers excessive capital investment.


Campaign Finance; Parties Ask Outside Groups To Stop Raising Ad Money
LEAD: Democratic and Republican officials have been pressuring independent political action committees to stop seeking money for campaign advertising, even ads in behalf of their party's Presidential candidates.


A Nude on the Wall Remains Unsettling
LEAD: To the Editor:


College Football Notebook; At Syracuse, Makings of a Title Game
LEAD: Rutgers and Syracuse, both with 3-1 records, will play in a noon game today that will sell out the 50,000-seat Carrier Dome at Syracuse, but Dick MacPherson, the Orangemen's coach, is not satisfied.


Irving Signs Merger Deal, Ending Fight
LEAD: The Irving Bank Corporation's board yesteday signed an agreement to merge with the Bank of New York, ending a yearlong struggle to avoid the unwanted takeover.
The merger agreement raises the curtain on a new, more private struggle within Bank of New York to wring more profits from the enlarged company.


Minnesotans Want Parents Notified in Abortions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yale University Buys Renaissance Archive
LEAD: An enormous trove of Italian Renaissance and later manuscripts and documents, forming the archive of the prominent Spinelli banking family of Florence over a period of 500 years, has been bought for an undisclosed sum by Yale University, its officials have announced.


Texas's Most Troubled Banks
LEAD:  Texas Commerce Bancshares Inc., Houston: Acquired by Chemical Banking Corp. of New York in May 1987 without Federal aid for $1.1 billion.
First Republicbank Corp., Dallas: Created in June 1987 by merger of Republicbank and Interfirst.
The new bank failed in July 1988.
The F.D.I.C. provided $4 billion in aid and sold a 20 percent stake to NCNB Corp.


Dorsett Arrested
LEAD: Tony Dorsett, the Denver Broncos running back who recently passed the yardage figures of Jim Brown to move into second place among National Football League ground gainers, was arrested by the State Patrol Thursday night in Aurora, Colo., and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol.
Arraignment was set for Nov.


State by State; Henry Wallace's Iowa Leans Toward Dukakis
LEAD: Henry Agard Wallace, one of the great apostles of prairie discontent, was born on a farm not far from here 100 years ago today, and the spirit of revolt seems to be coming back to life on the drought-stricken farms of Iowa.


Bush Portrays His Opponent As Sympathetic to Criminals
LEAD: Portraying himself as more compassionate than Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, Vice President Bush met with crime victims in Ohio today and charged afterward that his rival has shown more sympathy for criminals than for their victims.


'Thup Thup Thup'
LEAD: The fears, follies and fads of growing up in the nuclear age are the subject of a one-man show by Jim Calder, ''Thup Thup Thup,'' which opens tonight at Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street.
Mr.
Calder, a writer and performer, chose the title to suggest the sound of helicopter blades in motion.


The Next President's Choices in Space
LEAD: NASA deserves all the plaudits it received this week for the nearly flawless Discovery mission; even so, the space agency is proceeding with a dangerous delusion.


Rangers Start Off Slow, Then Pull Even
LEAD: Again and again, a dull thud echoed at one end of Chicago Stadium Thursday night as Phil Esposito, the general manager of the Rangers, repeatedly slammed his fist in frustration as his team continually failed to score.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Europe Sweeps Second Round: Sandy Lyle of Scotland and Seve Ballesteros of Spain made comebacks yesterday to give Europe a sweep in the second round of the $450,000 world match play championship in Wentworth, England.
Lyle was five down with 15 holes to play against Nick Price of Zimbabwe but won 8 of the next 12 holes to win, 3 and 2.


Budget Rental Studies Sale
LEAD: The Budget Rent a Car Corporation, the nation's third-largest car rental concern, said today that it had hired financial advisers to explore ways of raising the value of the company, which might include its possible sale.


Game 3 Ticket Is for Today
LEAD: Weather permitting, the National League playoff will be resumed at 12:20 this afternoon in Shea Stadium, and the only tickets honored will be those sold for Game 3, which was rained out last night.


Phantom No More, an Opera House Comes to Life
LEAD: With a whiff of scandal, a new opera house is to open in Cairo next week.
The event has been preceded by much digging and scrubbing within its grounds, and much debate over where Egypt is heading with a cultural heritage that dates to the Pharaohs.


Consumer Credit Increased By $5.44 Billion in August
LEAD: American consumers borrowed $5.44 billion more than they paid off in August, as auto loans and credit card debt grew rapidly, the Federal Reserve reported today.


Andrew L. Murphy, 74, a Retired Executive
LEAD: Andrew Lawrence Murphy, a retired realtor and business executive, died of a brain tumor Thursday at New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 74 years old and lived in Manhattan.


It's Harvest Time Again in the Jersey Bogs


Allegheny Seeks Revamping Plans
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc. is calling on its investors to submit by Monday any plans they may have for reorganizing the financially troubled consumer products company.
Among those interested in controlling the company is Victor Kiam, president and chief executive of the shaver manufacturer Remington Products Inc.


Couple Sue in 1985 Hijacking
LEAD: A New Jersey couple, caught in the 1985 terrorist hijacking of the cruise ship, Achille Lauro in the Mediterranean Sea, sued the Palestine Liberation Organization yesterday for more than $11 million.
The lawsuit, filed at Federal District Court in Manhattan, accused the P.L.O. of false imprisonment, assault and battery and intentionally inflicting emotional distress on Frank R.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 52.


U.S. Disclaims Link to Private Hostage Efforts
LEAD: The United States has sent a message to Iran disavowing any connection to private intermediaries who may be trying to negotiate on behalf of American hostages held in Lebanon, a senior Administration official said today.


Rowan Asserts Officials Offered Deal on Charge
LEAD: The syndicated columnist Carl T. Rowan has accused the District of Columbia Mayor and other city officials of ''attempted extortion'' in connection with weapon charges against him.


New York and New Jersey Jobless Rates Decline
LEAD: Unemployment rates in New York and New Jersey declined slightly in September, and New York's average unemployment rate for the first nine months of this year was lower than the rate in the same period last year, the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday.


Review/Dance; In 'State of Darkness,' a Dancer's Rite of Passage
LEAD: Molissa Fenley's use of Stravinsky's ''Sacre du Printemps'' as music for a new dance solo succeeds beyond expectation.
A dancer who has been unmatched on the experimental scene for her explosive, even primal, energy, Miss Fenley has found her true center here.


Teen-Agers Held in Shooting; Revenge Is Said to Be Motive
LEAD: Three teen-agers were arrested in Brooklyn early yesterday and charged with breaking into the house of a 70-year-old Queens man, shooting his dog to death, shooting the man in the face twice and then stealing his car, the police said.


Corrections
LEAD: The About New York column on Tuesday, about the revival of a literary magazine at Walton High School in the Bronx, misattributed ''Lollipop Kiss,'' a poem in the magazine.
The poem was submitted by a student, Deneen Fripp, who says she was credited as the author through a misunderstanding.
It was written by Dorothy E.


Patents; Swimming Pool Alarm
LEAD: Samuel F. H. Cottrell, an inventor in Valley Center, Calif., has developed an alarm for backyard swimming pools that would be activated if a child or pet fell into the water while no one was watching.
The battery-powered device floats on the pool's surface.
A ball rests on top of a central cone, which contains a switch connected to an alarm.


Water Supplies In Ground Held Generally Safe
LEAD: The nation's vast stores of underground water are generally still of good quality, but contamination is being discovered with increasing frequency, according to a report issued today by the United States Geological Survey.


Gen. Louis Buehl, 56, No. 3 in Marine Corps
LEAD: Lieut.
Gen.
Louis H. Buehl 3d, Chief of Staff of the Marine Corps, died at Bethesda Naval Medical Center on Wednesday after suffering a stroke, the Pentagon said Thursday.
He was 56 years old, General Buehl had held the No. 3 post in the Marine Corps since October 1987.
He was outranked by the the Commandant and the Assistant


Steroid Use In the N.F.L.
LEAD: Commissioner Pete Rozelle told National Football League owners that 6 percent of the league's 1,600 players tested positive for steroids during pre-camp physicals in 1987, Mike Lynn, the Minnesota Vikings' general manager, said today.


Hundreds Flee Gas From Fire
LEAD: A fire at a swimming pool company spewed a cloud of gas over this desert resort today, forcing several hundred people from their homes and the closing of Palm Springs Regional Airport.
One firefighter was hospitalized after breathing the gas, apparently a combination of pool cleaning and treatment chemicals, said Ann Erdman, a city spokeswoman.


Review/Music; The Philharmonic and Bruckner
LEAD: Piety is all right in its place, which usually is a church.
If it has any place in the concert hall, Thursday evening's performance by the New York Philharmonic under Zubin Mehta did not make the case.
In an all-Bruckner program, the work offered for mute reverence was the Symphony No. 9 in D minor, which Bruckner left unfinished at his death in 1896.


Accord Reached on PCB Cleanup in Major Lake Michigan Harbor
LEAD: A manufacturer of outboard motors has agreed to pay for a $20 million cleanup of toxic PCB's in Lake Michigan's Waukegan Harbor, ending years of bitter dispute over the problem.


Dr. Jane Cowles, Author, Married
LEAD: Dr.
Jane Cowles, a cancer therapist and medical journalist, and H. Hanford Smith Jr., a senior vice president at Dean Witter Reynolds in New York, were married yesterday in a nondenominational ceremony at the River Club in New York by the Rev.
Arthur Caliandro of the Reformed Church of America.


Asbestos Discovery Closes Day-Care Site
LEAD: The Bathgate Day Care Center in the Tremont section of the Bronx was closed yesterday after asbestos was found in a non-classroom area of the center near ventilation equipment, New York City Department of Health officials said.


Car Careens Onto Sidewalk And Kills 5 Wisconsin Girls
LEAD: A /peeding car struck a utility pole tonight and careened into five girls on a sidewalk, killing all of them, the authorities said.


Devils Get a Strict Lesson on New Rule
LEAD: The National Hockey League's stricter interpretation of high-sticking penalties this season hurt the Devils more than any of the other 17 teams that played opening night.


David Finkle, Investor, 86
LEAD: David Finkle, a private investor, died Tuesday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla., after a long illness.
He was 86 years old.


Knicks Sign Newman
LEAD: Eleven months ago, Johnny Newman, the shooter waived by the Cleveland Cavaliers, was wondering what to do with his career.
On Nov. 12, the Knicks, a foundering team with a new coach, Rick Pitino, and a new general manager, Al Bianchi, entered Newman's life.
They signed him to a one-year contract that paid $275,000.


Algiers Riot Toll Put at Dozens Dead and 900 Hurt
LEAD: Dozens of people have apparently been killed and more than 900 wounded here in four days of demonstrations and rioting by youths angered by economic austerity measures and rising prices.


Thornburgh Gives Talk On Justice Dept. Ethics
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, in a speech that Justice Department officials described as a thinly veiled criticism of his predecessor, announced programs today to ''aid our employees in maintaining the highest ethical standards.''


Concepcion Released
LEAD: Dave Concepcion, an All-Star shortstop nine times in a 19-year major league career with the Cincinnati Reds, was handed his unconditional release Tuesday.
The hurt has yet to wear off, though, for the 40-year-old utility infielder, who said he was given a choice by Murray Cook, the general manager, of announcing his retirement or receiving his release.


About New York; A Cat's Lament: Blue-Collar Bar Faces Last Call
LEAD: Charlie should be telling this story.
She prowled this bar for 18 years, longer than any of us, then passed on three years ago.
Talk about honors you could do without?
They cremated Charlie, then put her ashes in an urn next to a bottle of rye whisky.


Parade on Sunday
LEAD:  United Hispanic-American parade starts at 12:30 P.M. at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue, marches north to 72d Street, then east to Third Avenue.
Holiday on Monday  Columbus Day is observed on Monday.
NEW YORK  Parade: Starts at 11:30 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, moving north to 86th Street, then east to Third Avenue.


Triton Acquires 2.5% of Fuqua
LEAD: Fuqua Industries said that Triton Group Ltd. had acquired about 2.5 percent of its stock and had requested Government permission to increase that stake.
J.
B.
Fuqua, chairman and chief executive of the Atlanta-based conglomerate, said he had discussed the possibility of selling some of his 1.5 million Fuqua shares to Triton, a La Jolla,


Why American Brands is Courted
LEAD: William J. Alley, chairman of American Brands Inc., would like nothing better than to be left alone to streamline the sprawling conglomerate that started out as a tobacco company.
But no sooner does the Texas-born lawyer and former insurance salesman fend off one unsolicited takeover attempt than another lands on his doorstep.


Patents; Improving the Sound Of Concert Pianos
LEAD: William Finholm, 84, of Manhattan, has spent the last 50 years searching for ways to improve the sound of concert pianos.
Now he thinks he has discovered something.


Uniforms: Schools Like Idea
LEAD: Thomas Nardone, an assistant principal at P.S. 126 was quick to call the Board of Education yesterday to ask that his school be selected for a pilot project to put public school students in uniform.


After the Vote: A Role for Pinochet?
LEAD: After defeating Gen.
Augusto Pinochet in this week's plebiscite, Chileans may face a more difficult task: sorting through the diverse political options and finding the next President.


No Suitor Is Found In Search by Wickes
LEAD: The Wickes Companies, considering a $573.8 million plan to go private in a management-led leveraged buyout, said today that a 60-day search to find a better offer for the entire company had nearly ended without success.


42 Sightseers Are Killed In Chinese Plane Crash
LEAD: A plane carrying workers being rewarded for recent good performances crashed into a hotel in Shanxi Province on Friday, killing 42 of the 46 people on board, an official daily said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about a suit by the Maryland Deposit Insurance Corporation against former executives of the Community Savings and Loan of Montgomery County misstated the number of defendants in some editions.
A jury held six former executives liable for $112 million.
John D. Faulkner, another former official of the defunct savings institution, had previously agreed to a settlement of the claim against him.


Suspect Held in Death of a Man Set on Fire
LEAD: A Bronx man was arrested and charged yesterday in the killing of a man who was doused with a flammable liquid and set on fire near Penn Station in Manhattan, the police said.


Carol Howe, Executive, Weds John B. Maxwell
LEAD: Carol Ann Howe, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Howe of Eugene, Ore., was married yesterday at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York, to John Browning Maxwell, a son of Doris B. Maxwell of Boothbay Harbor, Me., and Charles G. Maxwell of Auburn, Me.
The Rev.
J.
Seymour Flinn performed the ceremony.


Soybeans Plunge Again; Higher Crop Yields Seen
LEAD: Prices of soybean futures plunged for the second consecutive day yesterday at the Chicago Board of Trade, under the pressures of a lack of export business, expectations of higher Government crop estimates and good harvesting weather.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Rain Reschedules Playoff


THE YANKS, CONE AND TYSON
LEAD: George Steinbrenner keeps hiring new managers when he ought to be hiring new pitchers.
But in choosing Dallas Green, the Yankees' principal owner has selected a ''team-discipline'' manager who, befitting a onetime right-handed pitcher, will react to any interference with a straight right hand.


Patents; Improving Time-Release Medication
LEAD: Hans Lowey, a pioneer in time-release drugs during the 1950's, won patent approval this week for his seventh improvement in the field. ''I have the feeling I have contributed something,'' said Mr.
Lowey, 81 years old, as he reflected on his career.


Officials Accused Of Misusing Funds
LEAD: Top officials at the University of Connecticut Health Center in Farmington were accused of ''substantial abuse of the public trust and misuse of taxpayers' dollars'' in a report released yesterday by Attorney General Joseph I. Lieberman.


Poison Found in Jersey Candy
LEAD: Traces of strychnine, a common rat poison, have been found in a box of candy sold last month at a grocery in Emerson, N.J., Bergen County law-enforcement officials asserted yesterday.


The Job Picture
LEAD:  Employed


Dining on a Discount Takes a Smaller Bite Out of the Budget
LEAD: When Cathy Hull, a New York freelance illustrator, and her husband go out to dinner, they, like most people these days, usually pay with a credit card.
But when their monthly statement arrives, there is a 25 percent reduction in the price of the meal, because the credit card they use is issued by the Transmedia


Happy Leif Ericson Day
LEAD: Much of the Western Hemisphere is about to celebrate the 496th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's landing in the New World.
In most of the United States, Monday is the legal holiday.
South of the border, next Wednesday is the traditional date.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Mauritius Banking Plan
LEAD: Mauritius will allow offshore banking starting next month, Finance Minister Vishnu Lutchmeenaraido said today.
The Indian Ocean island will join several other tax havens that offer banks the chance of handling money away from their home countries and tax collectors.


Nakamichi to Add A U.S. Company
LEAD: The Nakamichi Corporation of Tokyo, a leading producer of audio tape recorders, agreed to acquire Mountain Computer Inc., a Campbell, Calif., manufacturer of computer tape drives, for $45 million in cash.
Mountain will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Nakamichi, but will continue to operate under current management in its current location.


Navy's Strategic Victory in Gulf
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Kohlberg, Kravis Bid Is Also Rejected by Kroger
LEAD: The Kroger Company, the nation's second-largest supermarket operator, yesterday rejected the revised $5.03 billion buyout offer by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the leveraged buyout specialists.


Quayle Campaigns in Georgia    He spoke to students at the high school in a campaign swing through the South before heading back to Washington. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


Birgit Nilsson to Be Host Of Richard Tucker Gala
LEAD: Birgit Nilsson will be the host and Gian Carlo Menotti will receive a special award at this year's Richard Tucker Music Foundation gala concert, Nov. 13 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
Among the artists who will perform are Carlo Bergonzi, Ghena Dimitrova, Harry Dworchak, Dimitri Kavrakos, Giorgio Lamberti, Sherrill Milnes, Samuel Ramey, Dolora Zajick and Richard Leech.


Dr. Sidney Ingbar, 63, An Expert on Thyroid
LEAD: Dr.
Sidney Harold Ingbar, an authority on the physiology of the thyroid gland and its clinical diseases who taught at the Harvard Medical School for most of his career, died of lung cancer on Thursday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
He was 63 years old and lived in Brookline, Mass.


Court Upsets Recycled Oil's Non-Hazardous Label
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today struck down a decision by the Environmental Protection Agency not to list used oil designated for recycling as a hazardous waste.


Golfer Honored
LEAD: A former University of Texas all-American, Bob Estes of Abilene, Tex., was presented the inaugural Nicklaus Trophy yesterday as America's top male collegiate golfer for 1987-88.
Estes, 22, accepted the trophy, named after Jack Nicklaus, in a break in the Gatlin Brothers Southwest Golf Classic in Abilene, in which he is competing.(


Jaruzelski Encounters His Complaining People
LEAD: Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski took his case, Gorbachev style, directly to the Polish people this week, and was swamped with bitter complaints.


When a Bargain Fur Is No Bargain
LEAD: Fur discounts this season have started before the first frost, and advertisements promise mink coats for as little as $1,499.
What kind of mink can you get at that price?


Needles on Florida Beaches
LEAD: Hundreds of unused needles in protective plastic sheaths washed up Thursday along six miles of beach, officials said.
The disposable needles were found from Riviera Beach to Palm Beach, but no syringes were found, officials said.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about job-discrimination rules for the staff of the House of Representatives cited one provision erroneously.
There is no provision permitting a House member to refuse employment to people because of disagreement with their way of life.
On the Washington Talk page on Thursday, because of an editing error, an article about the politics of AIDS repeated that misstatement.


Tax Accord By ARCO
LEAD: The Atlantic Richfield Company said today that it had agreed to pay $172.3 million to the Alaska Department of Revenue, which will substantially resolve a 10-year tax dispute over oil and gas production income from the company's Prudhoe Bay and Cook Inlet operations.


Review/Television; Second Look at the Liberace Legend
LEAD: Last Sunday, ABC's movie biography of Liberace wound up in the charmed Top 10 circle of the week's ratings.
This Sunday, it is CBS's turn to poke around in the life of ''Mr.
Showmanship.''


G.O.P. BIAS IS SEEN IN BAPTIST LETTER
LEAD: A letter to Southern Baptists comparing the views of Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis may violate the Internal Revenue Service's ban on partisan political efforts by tax-exempt groups, the general counsel to the Baptist Joint Committee on Public Affairs says.


Centenary for Edison, Businessman and Tinkerer
LEAD: An arguably momentous milestone in the history of motion pictures is being commemorated this weekend in West Orange, N.J.
One hundred years ago today, Thomas A. Edison filed a preliminary patent for his spiral kinetograph, a device that the inventor said, ''does for the eye what the phonograph does for the ear.


Pinochet's Triumphant Opponents Urge Him to Yield Presidency Soon
LEAD: Smiling, clapping, cheering and waving Chilean flags, hundreds of thousands of people converged on a huge park here today to demand the early resignation of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet.
General Pinochet, whose bid to extend his presidential term until 1997 was rejected in a plebiscite on Wednesday, can remain in office until a successor is chosen.


In Bavaria, A Requiem For a King
LEAD: Bavarians said farewell to Premier Franz Josef Strauss today with a grand display of regal pomp and folk tradition that was a throwback to the days of the Bavarian monarchy.


At Its Final Session, Brawley Grand Jury Is Praised for Effort
LEAD: A day after the release of its exhaustive report, the grand jury in the Tawana Brawley case convened yesterday for the last time and received praise for its work from officials who supervised its seven-month investigation.


Your Money
LEAD: Most employed people will be getting new or revised benefits packages in the next few weeks, and that makes it particularly urgent for workers to know what those benefits are, as well as to learn how to use them to maximum advantage and, when necessary for long-term financial health, how to supplement pension and insurance coverage.


Treasury Issues Climb on Jobs Data
LEAD: Treasury bonds rose nearly a point and a half yesterday after the Labor Department reported that nonfarm payrolls grew by a smaller-than-expected 255,000 jobs in September.


Mets, Dodgers Resume Today
LEAD: They waited an hour and a quarter in the cold rain last night in Shea Stadium, and then decided that the Mets and Los Angeles Dodgers would have to remain tied at one game apiece for one more day in the playoff for the National League pennant.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.327
8.31
8.42
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.27
7.32
6.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.45
7.53
6.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.59
8.75
9.45
30-YR.


Burmese Regime Faulted at U.N.
LEAD: While the representative of Burma expressed the military Government's commitment to hold ''free and fair'' general elections in an address to the General Assembly, a new opposition group appealed today to the organization to withdraw recognition from the ''illegal and barbaric regime.''


Neilli A. Mullen Wed To Peter J. Walsh Jr.
LEAD: Neilli Ann Mullen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Mullen of Mantoloking, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter J. Walsh Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walsh of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Liam Minoque performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Roman Catholic Church in Point Pleasant Beach, N.J.


Jury Hears What Myerson Told Koch
LEAD: A letter that Bess Myerson wrote to Mayor Koch in 1983 - defending a city job she gave to the daughter of Justice Hortense W. Gabel - was introduced yesterday at the Myerson bribery-conspiracy trial.


Post-Gretzky Oilers Top Islanders, 5-1
LEAD: Jimmy Carson, the key player obtained by Edmonton from Los Angeles in the trade that sent Wayne Gretzky to the Kings, scored two goals, and Jari Kurri had three assists tonight as the Oilers opened their season with a 5-1 victory over the Islanders.


Confusion for Philadelphia Homeless
LEAD: At the privately owned shelter for the homeless where she lived with her two infant children, Brownzella Bell was preparing a breakfast bottle for her 3-month-old when she learned that her family would have to be out by 10 A.M.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Control Data Corp., Minneapolis, laid off 100 people in its computer products division as part of a consolidation of that business.


Never Again the Khmer Rouge
LEAD: Cambodia's paramount problem long seemed to be Vietnamese occupation.
Now, with Vietnam seemingly ready to leave, the focus shifts to what might rush into the vacuum: the same fanatical Khmer Rouge that, under Pol Pot, terrorized Cambodia from 1975 until Vietnam's 1978 invasion.
Washington has rightly moved to bolster moderate factions, while Moscow and Beijing, patrons of Cambodia's two tormentors, have begun to back off their opposing stands.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''These figures tell the real story that people can understand.
They mean paychecks and school clothes and families that can plan a brighter future.


BRIDGE
LEAD: The opening ceremonies of the eighth World Team Olympiad begin today in Venice, and there will be some controversy about the scheduling.
The political problem presented by the appearance of Israel in both series has been solved neatly in the open series: Such countries as Egypt, Morocco and Lebanon have been placed in one of the two pools, with Israel in the other.


L.I. Town Restricts Use Of Swift Water Scooters
LEAD: The Town of East Hampton today banned all motorized water scooters from town coves, harbors and the immediate waters off its 127 miles of shoreline.


Unemployment: The Biggest States
LEAD: Civilian unemployment. Figures are seasonally adjusted.
Aug.
Sept.
Calif.
5.6%
5.2%
Fla.
4.9
4.9
Ill.
7.0
6.0
Mass.
3.3
3.0
Mich.
7.4
7.3
N.J.
3.9
3.8
N.Y.
4.5
4.3
N.C.
3.1
3.7
Ohio
5.6
5.8
Pa.
4.5
5.4
Tex.
6.8
7.0
Source: Bureau of Labor


Police Clear Officers in Shooting of Sergeant
LEAD: None of the police officers involved in the accidental shooting of a sergeant last Saturday during the arrest of three suspects in a kidnapping will be disciplined, the police said yesterday.


Yugoslavs Reel Under Weight Of Their Ever-Growing Crisis
LEAD: The debate about the enduring crisis in Yugoslavia has moved into the streets, where the many strands of the nation's knotty problems are being argued by an increasingly assertive people.


Bentsen Tells Texans the Debate Was 'Turning Point in Election'
LEAD: Senator Lloyd Bentsen told a cheering crowd of fellow Texans this morning in Dallas that his debate with Senator Dan Quayle Wednesday night had been ''the turning point in the election.''


YUGOSLAVIA: At a Glance
LEAD:  People


A's Thwart Aces of Red Sox
LEAD: They were somewhere in the clouds as dawn broke today, but there was still no daylight when the wheels of their charter flight touched the ground in California.
As the Boston Red Sox flew west, they probably wondered if their season would end this weekend or continue into next week.


More Trouble for Johnson
LEAD: The police said today that they had seized a starter's pistol from a Porsche owned by Ben Johnson, the sprinter, after a motorist reported being threatened with a gun by the Porsche's driver on Thursday.


Video-Display Terminal Law Temporarily Blocked on L.I.
LEAD: A State Supreme Court judge today temporarily blocked Suffolk County from enforcing sections of its landmark law regulating the use of video-display terminals in the workplace.


In L.A., Gretzky Feels Great Relief
LEAD: From the time he was 17, not far removed from the backyard rink in Brantford, Ontario, Wayne Gretzky has been exceeding the expectations of others.
Four times his name has been engraved on the Stanley Cup.
Forty-nine lines in the National Hockey League record book belong to him.
His financial future was secured long ago.


Review/Film; The Pangs of Old Age, in 'A Promise'
LEAD: ''The Promise'' was shown as part of the 1987 New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 17, 1987.
The film opened yesterday at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, OCTOBER 8, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


U.S. to Help Train Refugees To Destroy Afghan Mines
LEAD: The United States will send bomb-disposal experts and training material to Pakistan to teach Afghan refugees how to disarm and destroy millions of mines and booby traps scattered over the Afghan countryside, a senior Reagan Administration official said today.


Review/Music; Itzhak Perlman in Recital
LEAD: For luxury of tone and visceral musicality, there is probably no more talented violinist in the world than Itzhak Perlman.
Also no violinist more successful.
Success at its worst, however, operates in inverse proportion: an ever-growing number of fans demanding to hear an ever-shrinking repertory of comforting favorites.


Tablets Found in Baby Food Appear to Be Pain Reliever
LEAD: Preliminary tests on two tablets found in a jar of baby food on Long Island this week indicate they were a common pain reliever, an official said today.


Green Replaces Piniella As Manager of Yankees
LEAD: George Steinbrenner, as expected, changed managers yesterday for the 16th time in his 16 years as the Yankees' principal owner.
Steinbrenner dismissed Lou Piniella for the second time in 355 days and replaced him with Dallas Green, a former major league pitcher, manager, general manager and club president.


Atomic Site Is Troubled But Neighbors Are Not
LEAD: Life here in the piney woods along the banks of the Savannah River, hard by the Georgia border, poses extraordinary obstacles for the diehard deer hunter.


Stoner Defends Actions
LEAD: Neale Stoner, former athletic director at Illinois, said yesterday that he had been a successful fund-raiser for the school and that he took issue with allegations of financial irregularities in the Athletic Association.
He said a report earlier this week by the auditor general was unfair.
The report criticized the association for, among other things, paying to send Vance Redfern, associate athletic director, to a weight-loss clinic in North Carolina.


Guilty Plea Entered In Threats to Witness
LEAD: The father of a Queens teen-ager who was convicted of firebombing the house of a witness in a drug case pleaded guilty yesterday to having tampered with the same witness after his son was arrested.


COPING: With Protecting an Invention; Different kinds of inspiration may require patents, trademarks or copyrights.
LEAD: If you've got a bright idea that you think is marketable, you're part of a long American tradition of kitchen-table inventors.
But many people end up keeping their ideas to themselves, for fear they will be stolen.


Steinbrenner Goes 16 for 16


Ownership of a Speech Site Catches Dukakis Unawares
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis came here today to bemoan the rise of foreign investment in the United States and to suggest that Senator Dan Quayle may be ''happy to hang a 'For Sale' sign on America'' but the Democrats are not.


Vibraphonist and Group
LEAD: Teddy Charles, a vibraphonist, will lead a group on Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Open Eye, 270 West 89th Street (769-4143).
Tickets are $8.


Serge Jaroff, 89, Head Of the Cossack Chorus
LEAD: Serge Jaroff, founder of the Don Cossack Chorus, died Wednesday at the Paul Kimball Medical Center in Lakewood, N.J.
He was 89 years old.


Israeli Children Given Vaccinations for Polio
LEAD: Hundreds of children were vaccinated against polio today in the first stage of a nationwide campaign to immunize all Israelis up to the age of 40 against the disease.


World as Seen by the Invisible Man
LEAD:  Mascara.  By Ariel Dorfman.  158 pages. Viking. $17.95.


Accept Soviet Offer Of Bases' Trade-Off
LEAD: To the Editor:


Horse Racing; Timely Encounter Wins Steeplechase
LEAD: Timely Encounter, whose only two career victories had come in bottom-level claiming races at Delaware Park, rallied from last place to score an implausible victory over Polar Pleasure and Rio Claro in the $54,100 Temple Gwathmey Steeplechase Handicap yesterday at Belmont Park.


Curry Injures Wrist
LEAD: A Charlotte Hornets shooting guard, Dell Curry, will miss at least 12 weeks with a fractured left wrist suffered in practice yesterday, the team said.
Curry broke the wrist, on his non-shooting hand, after crashing to the floor in a scrimmage.
He was considered a favorite to start at the off-guard position when the season begins Nov.


Judge Bars Test For AIDS Virus In a Rape Trial
LEAD: A Superior Court judge has rejected a woman's request that the man accused of raping her be tested for AIDS.


We Need Equal Funds for Education All Across the Country
LEAD: To the Editor:


Film Festival; Talent vs. Inhibition, in 2 1960's Russian Works
LEAD: The two short movies that make up ''The Onset of an Unknown Age'' were made in 1967 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, but it was almost the 70th anniversary before Russians were permitted to see them.
The program note for the New York Film Festival, where ''Unknown Age'' is being shown today at 2 P.M., suggests that the depiction of the early days of the Bolshevik regime may have been deemed too negative for a celebration.


AUTO WARRANTIES
LEAD:  American auto manufacturers are continuing their warranty wars by enhancing their quarantees of product quality.
A warranty may be comprehensive, including everything but routine maintenance and tires; it may be restricted to the power train, which includes only the engine, transmission, drive shaft and other parts that convey power to the wheels, or it may be for rust-resistance, insuring against the corrosion-induced perforation of sheet metal.


Age of Garage Doors Is at Issue in 2 Deaths
LEAD: Two children in suburban Minneapolis were killed by power-operated garage doors in separate accidents on the same day last week, and the authorities say the devices were probably too old to meet current safety standards.


Body of Adm. Byrd's Son, 68, Found in Empty Warehouse
LEAD: Richard E. Byrd Jr., who lived his life in the shadow of his father, the admiral and Arctic explorer, was found dead last week in the darkness of an abandoned warehouse in Baltimore, his emaciated body clad in dirt-blackened clothes and one scuffed shoe, the police there said yesterday.


Suzanne Falter Marries
LEAD: Suzanne Virginia Falter, the daughter of Mrs.
John Paul Jones of Lafayette Hill, Pa., and the late John Falter, was married yesterday in Central Park to Raymond Lawrence Barns, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George Barns.
The Rev.
Mary Alice Brown of the Unity Church of Teaneck, N.J., officiated.
The bride, a graduate of the Springside School and Wellesley College, is freelance writer.


Sisters Give Town $1 Million
LEAD: Two frugal sisters who never took part in municipal affairs and never let on how much money they had saved have surprised the city by leaving it a $1 million trust fund.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  O'NEILL CENTENNIAL


Scott Suhr Wed To Sally Bromage
LEAD: At Grace Episcopal Church in Madison, N.J., yesterday, Sally Van Dusen Bromage, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Bromage of Florham Park, N.J., and Scott Montgomery Suhr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert N. Suhr of Marietta, Ga., were married.
The Rev.
Robert W. Ihloff performed the ceremony.


Saving the Ocean: Here's What We Can Do
LEAD: FOR years, the ocean has been sending warning signals.
Yielding to disease brought on by ocean pollution, hundreds of dolphins washed ashore last spring.
Medical waste fouled beaches, warding off vacationers.
That Jersey Shore communities have suffered severe economic losses this year is only the most immediate consequence of our disrespect for the ocean.


Church Votes in Favor of Siding
LEAD: THE minister of Westminster Congregational Church in Canterbury said he was disappointed that parishioners had decided to apply vinyl siding to the 218-year-old church.


The Evolution of Eurospeak
LEAD: WHEN Albert Bloch, a character in Marcel Proust's ''Remembrance of Things Past'' dislikes the music of the gypsy band in a posh seaside hotel, he says, ''Tell the laift to make them stop.'' The novel's narrator wryly notes that his parvenu friend Bloch thinks the letter i in English is always pronounced as in life, but he omits to add that the correct


Two House Races Drawing Notice
LEAD: ALTHOUGH they are being run in the shadows of Presidential and United States Senate races, two of New Jersey's 14 Congressional contests are attracting attention outside their district borders.


The Class Reunion: I Want to Go, and Yet I Don't
LEAD: THE 50th reunion of my high school class (Rahway, 1938) is coming up this week and, although I've sent the committee in charge a check for $30, thus signifying my intentions to be on hand, I think I'm in a quandary.


Q and A
LEAD:  Williamsburg


On Capturing Nature's Gorgeous Fall Glow
LEAD: IN many parts of the country, leaves are falling, underbrush is thinning out and sunlight, when it appears, is giving nature a gorgeous glow.
You don't even have to be a photographer to enjoy it.


DODGERS TRY TO PICK UP THE PIECES
LEAD: Had the events of the past five days been just slightly different, the inhabitants of the visiting clubhouse at Shea Stadium yesterday could have been one game from a pennant with a 3-0 lead in the National League Championship Series.


Women's Hotel
LEAD: To the Editor:


Flight Delays on the Rise in Chicago
LEAD: Like other passengers on United Airlines Flight 558 from Lincoln, Neb., Keith Cook hit the ground running the other night, briefcase flapping and coat flying as he raced for the television monitors showing information on connecting flights.


BAD DAYS AT 'BIG DRY'
LEAD: I was deeply moved by John L. Moore's account of the Montana drought, ''Bad Days at 'Big Dry' '' (Aug. 14).
The drought of 1988, for some reason, has spared the desert where I live.
Here in New Mexico, we had a cool, wet summer, and the suffering of the rest of the country has not seemed real to me.


THE NATION: The Politics of Protectionism; When Running for President, It's Hard to Be Free on Trade
LEAD: WHEN Senator John F. Kennedy and Vice President Richard M. Nixon were contesting the White House in 1960, Mr.
Kennedy listened sympathetically to domestic textile producers' pleas for protection against cotton apparel from Japan.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Amsterdam
LEAD: Off-season Amsterdam returns from a summer of backpacking tourists to the place that Albert Camus called ''a dream of gold and smoke.'' Mist lies on the black water of the old canals, foghorns sound in the snowy harbor, the bars fill with gin drinkers, footfalls echo in the empty museums.
The best Amsterdam has to offer is on foot: walks along the canals to see the human-scale buildings, the museums where Rembrandt and Vermeer and Van


The Next Generation of Poison; An Issue for the No-Issue Campaign
LEAD: America's air is mostly breathable.
Its rivers don't catch fire anymore.
Raw sewage usually ends up in treatment plants, not the nearest river basin.
That much has been accomplished by the environmental laws of the early 1970's.
Yet the campaign is only half won because tighter controls have been offset by the extra pollution from economic growth.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.53
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
7.77
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.03
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.43
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
16.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
16.90
Bank of America, San Francisco
21.25


Perspectives of the Air: Jeweled Island on a Silver Sea
LEAD: AS the improbable-looking two-propped plane rattled its way toward Boston, I looked through the hazed plastic windows.
The topography below brought to mind Churchill's description that ''We are an island race.''


Winfield V. M. Henry Wed To Elizabeth Fay, Teacher
LEAD: Elizabeth Walsingham Fay, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald L. Fay of Nashville, and Winfield Vans Murray Henry, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Clement Sulivane Henry Jr. of New York and Edgartown, Mass., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
William T. Bryant Jr. and the Rev.
Dr.
Perry H. Biddle Jr.


A SISTER'S NEED
LEAD: Margaret Moorman's article does those of us with bipolar disorder no favor.
Mood disorders are treated very successfully with lithium.


Dodging Politics, a Doctor Aids the Salvadoran Poor
LEAD: Picking her way through a political minefield, Dr.
Vicky Guzman de Luna is bringing health care for the first time to thousands of impoverished peasants.


Poll Finds Lautenberg Keeps Lead Over Dawkins in Race
LEAD: With only a month left before Election Day, Senator Frank Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, is leading his Republican rival, Pete Dawkins, by 20 points, according to a poll by the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University.


Making a Living in Traveling in Style
LEAD: THE family car, the rented compact, the tour bus - those common means of trip-taking are not the means that Larry and Mary Kellough recommend.
The Kelloughs encourage traveling in style, driving with dignity, in a classic Rolls-Royce or Bentley.


CHECKS AND BALANCES
LEAD: No sooner had trend-conscious men begun replacing their white dress shirts with a slightly racier model - say a three-quarter-inch awning stripe in a jolting shade of green - than shirt makers felt pressed to come up with something more novel.
To hear manufacturers tell it, in dress shirts this season, checks are the new stripes.


Claire Altschuler Weds Cornelius Marx
LEAD: The wedding of Claire Morse Altschuler, a daughter of Mrs.
Jerome Zimmerman of Atlanta and Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Arthur Altschuler, to Cornelius Harris Marx, the son of Albert Marx of Los Angeles and the late Joan H. Blum, took place last evening at the Plaza in New York.


The Homeless for Whom Housing Is Not Enough
LEAD: THEY are a shadow people, possibly the most vexing of New York City's forgotten and lost: the growing numbers of homeless people who are addicted to drugs.


Los Angeles
LEAD: To the Editor: Robert W. Stock's article ''In Los Angeles, Lights!
Action!
Tourists!'' (Travel, July 31) was quite timely for my family, as we were departing for Los Angeles the following day.


U.S. Athletes Weren't Wrong
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Christine M. Morrissey Weds Peter S. Duncan
LEAD: Christine Marie Morrissey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles D. Morrissey of Briarcliff, N.Y., was married yesterday to Peter Stuart Duncan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Duncan of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
James Quinn, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Marymount Chapel in Tarrytown, N


Season of Liberty
LEAD: The cause of political liberty has suddenly flamed up in the world.
From Chile to Burma, people are demanding their rights: a share in their government, freedom of speech, protection against official oppression and brutality.


Tritium's Role in Powering a Bomb
LEAD: Tritium, a radioactive form of hydrogen, is a vital and perishable ingredient of nuclear bombs.
Unlike plutonium, which lasts for tens of thousands of years, tritium transforms itself into a form of helium at a rate of about 5.5 percent a year.
Therefore, it must be replaced periodically.
A few grams of tritium inside a bomb help to produce a more efficient chain reaction - the same destructive energy from less fuel.


First, We Must Recognize Problems of Children; Problem Is Global
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question of the Week; What Did You Think Of the Seoul Olympics?
LEAD: Ben Johnson's bout with performance-enhancing drugs made me suspect of the other athletes.
For me, as the wife of Cliff Bertrand, a former Olympian in the 200 meters and N.Y.U. track coach, the Olympics have always epitomized love for country, dignity, pride and Spartan proclivities.
Of course, Greg Louganis, the spunky Phoebe Mills and many others afforded me the mesmerizing spectacle that has characterized these Games.


POSTINGS: Views With Music; Ft. Lee Condo
LEAD: Yet another high-rise apartment house is coming to the Palisades, this one on the site of the old Palisades Amusement Park, in Fort Lee, N.J., south of the George Washington Bridge.


Rabbi in U.N. Delegation Seeks 'Human Dignity'
LEAD: When President Reagan addressed the opening of the United Nations General Assembly on Sept. 26, one of the seats of the United States delegation was empty.
It belonged to a new member of the delegation, its only rabbi, who was unable to attend because the President's address coincided with the first day of the Jewish harvest festival of


Pavarotti Is Finding New Horizons
LEAD: With all the superstar glitter that usually attends Luciano Pavarotti's activities - and overshadows what truly matters about him -it is reassuring to note that he takes his art seriously enough to extend the borders of his familiar repertory.
The tenor is now heard in a pair of new recordings of Bellini's ''Norma'' and Mozart's '


Prehung Interior Doors
LEAD: AMATEURS are sometimes discouraged from performing certain remodeling projects because of the prospect of having to replace or install doors.


First, We Must Recognize Problems of Children; Punish the Parents
LEAD: To the Editor:


'You Have to Believe in the Students'
LEAD: FOR many poor youths, education is their exodus from a dismal environment.
Over the last two decades, urban education has begun to deteriorate as inner-city schools nationwide are plagued by crime, low financing and parental apathy.


Headliners; Offending All Sides
LEAD: When he lived in New York and was active as the founder of the Jewish Defense League, Rabbi Meir Kahane espoused views that many found offensive.
Four years ago he emigrated to Israel, where his views have also been found repugnant.
Last week, members of the Central Elections Commission, saying Mr.


Holly Harder Has Wedding
LEAD: Holly Harris Harder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry U. Harder of Greenwich, Conn., and Saranac Inn, N.Y., was married in Saranac Inn yesterday to Bruce Catlin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Catlin of Woodstock, Vt., and Sabael, N.Y.
The Rev.
Charles W. Sheerin performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the


About Cars; Peugeot's 405 Europe's No. 1
LEAD: One thing about the Long Island Expressway: as the world's longest parking lot, it does provide time for comment.


THE FATE OF TWO NATIONS
LEAD:  AN OCEAN APART  The Relationship Between Britain and America  in the Twentieth Century.
By David Dimbleby and David Reynolds.
Illustrated. 415 pp.
New York:  Random House. $24.95.


State Lags In Permits On Waste
LEAD: MORE than 1,400 companies that make up most of the commercial solid-waste and hazardous-waste haulers in New Jersey are operating without proper state permits and some are transporting and disposing of the wastes illegally, state law-enforcement and environmental officials said last week.


THE REVOLUTION IN HEART TRANSFORMATION
LEAD: HE AWOKE SHORTLY AFTER midnight, a 60-year-old man who had always been in good health even though he smoked and was overweight.
But now he had a crushing, breath-robbing pain in his chest.
He felt nauseated and broke into a cold sweat.
Both he and his wife recognized the signs.
She called an ambulance, and 30 minutes later he was in the emergency room of Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.


FROESE HOLDS OFF THRID-PERIOD FLURRY
LEAD: Momentum, like most anything else one might lose on a frozen surface, is difficult to retrieve.
The Rangers, who had it for two periods, flopped and floundered and grasped and grappled in pursuit of it in the third period.
They never recovered it, but somehow - good fortune and fine goaltending had a lot to do with it - they managed to cling to their lead and hang on for a 4-2 victory over the


Rock, Born in the U.S.S.R.
LEAD: The Poles have an outspoken ambivalence about their Soviet big brothers even at the best of times, and it was not the best of times when the Moscow rock band Zvuki Mu played Warsaw in May.
Demonstrators were marching in the streets, and students had shut down the university in sympathy with striking miners and shipyard workers.


P.S.A.L.: Lafayette (4-0) Tops Midwood
LEAD: Responding to its toughest challenge of the season, Lafayette beat Midwood, 7-3, yesterday in the mud, and became the team to beat in the 10-school Brooklyn A Division of the Public Schools Athletic League.
The game, which matched the two undefeated teams in the division, was decided by a fumble.


Paying Patients
LEAD: To the Editor:


First, We Must Recognize Problems of Children
LEAD: To the Editor:


Flair for the Grand Gesture: Celebrating a Magazine
LEAD: In every decade there is a review of literature and art that could have come out at no other time, so neatly is it buttoned into the spirit of the age.
This was true before 1900 of The Yellow Book in London and of La Revue Blanche in Paris.
It was true of the Blue Rider Almanac in Munich in 1911 and of Blast in London in 1914-15.


Judge Bars Stating A.C.L.U.'s Role at Trial
LEAD: A judge in a freedom-of-the-press case has barred any mention of a lawyer's membership in the American Civil Liberties Union in front of the jury because of the criticism that the organization has received in the Presidential campaign.


Florida Judge Given Rare Public Reprimand for Indiscretions
LEAD: The Florida Supreme Court, for only the second time in its history, has publicly reprimanded a judge, rebuking him for 14 judicial indiscretions that included waving a gun from the bench.


Notebook; Stieb's 1-Hitters Rare Indeed
LEAD: Dave Stieb's pair of one-hitters in his last two starts of the season represented one of the more intriguing feats of the year.
They also helped mark an appropriate end to a season that belonged to the pitchers.


Permanent Olympic Site, Greece Perhaps, Would Improve Games
LEAD: To the Editor:


PERIOD PIECE
LEAD:  WITHNAIL AND I  Starring Richard E. Grant, Paul McGann, Richard Griffiths, Ralph Brown, Michael Elphick, Daragh O'Mallery, Michael Wardle, Una Brandon-Jones, Noel Johnson, Irene Sutcliffe.
Directed by Bruce Robinson. 1987.
Media Home Entertainment.  107 minutes. $79.95.
Rated R.


Question of the Week: Next Week; Once and For All, What About The D.H. in The Series?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


FORGET ANGST, CRIME IS ENOUGH
LEAD:  THE VEILED ONE  By Ruth Rendell.  278 pp. New York:
Pantheon Books. $17.95.


Barking Teacher Captivates Class
LEAD: SHE goes to school every day, wearing a blue and yellow backpack.
But she is unlike any of her classmates at the Stanley T. Williams Elementary School in North Branford.


Bolivia Dismisses 5 Officers In a Drug Smuggling Scheme
LEAD: The armed forces has dismissed a general and four other officers for allowing cocaine worth $10 million to be smuggled out of Bolivia, the military high command said today.
The discharges came one day after officials announced the discovery and destruction of a jungle cocaine laboratory that produced tens of millions of dollars in drugs.


Review/Recital; An Organist From Italy
LEAD: Mario Duella, an organist from Italy, made his United States debut in a brief but varied recital at the Church of St.
John the Evangelist on Wednesday evening.
He is an alert and colorful player, not one to let an opportunity for a registrational change slip past him.


Special Today; Mystery Reading/Book Review, Section 7
LEAD:  A special section on mysteries, true crime and thrillers.  *
Civilized-British vs. hard-boiled-American.  *
The best and the bloodiest - reference books for the criminally inclined.


Let's Keep Our Expectations In Fair Territory
LEAD: WHY do our sports heroes disappoint us so?
Since Watergate, Vietnam, Gary Hart and Iranscam, it's hard for politicians to surprise and disappoint us with their sins.
But when the news breaks that Lawrence Taylor (or Dwight Gooden or Keith Hernandez) is messing with drugs, that Mike Tyson is terrorizing his wife, that Ben Johnson's speed has been boosted illegally, then it's a knife right into our expectations.


Athletics Bombard Red Sox
LEAD: By the sixth inning, the chant had already started.
They were calling for a sweep, and now the Oakland Athletics can give it to them.


Bass Verite: The Poetics Of Fishing
LEAD: It's not often that one sees a completely new art form develop.
There was jazz.
And now we have the fishing shows.
As has to be expected with anything truly new, the initial reaction has been muted.
Nowhere is this truer than among those attuned to the performing arts.
Perhaps in Atlanta sophisticated and urbane people discuss plastic worms and crank baits, but in New York all the talk is about Jimmy Levine's pacing of the third act of ''Siegfried'' and what the next British musical will be.


Home Care for the Elderly Cut Back
LEAD: TWO years ago, New York State officials recognized the problems faced by frail older adults squeezed between hospitals that could not keep them and nursing homes that would not take them.


WHO'S THE MOLE?
LEAD:  THE NINTH CIRCLE  By N. J. Crisp.  271 pp. New York:  Viking. $17.95.


Sheryl WuDunn Wed to Reporter
LEAD: Sheryl WuDunn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David WuDunn of New York, was married yesterday to Nicholas D. Kristof, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ladis K. D. Kristof of Yamhill, Ore.
The Rev.
David Anderson performed the ceremony at St.
Cloud Presbyterian Church in West Orange, N.J.


PRESCHOOL STAFF DEMAND PENSIONS
LEAD: Frustrated in their attempts to gain a pension and higher salaries from the Koch administration, Head Start employees have turned to street protests to press their demands.


Beware: CD's Sonic Boom Can Demolish a Speaker
LEAD: That glittering cymbal crash, that luminous orchestral burst, all caught in digital splendor - that's the thrilling payoff of digital sound.
But for loudspeakers, such climactic musical moments hold unprecedented peril.
Unless the speaker's vital parts can absorb the high signal levels encountered on CD's, these surges of energy are turned into heat that may literally cook the speaker to death.


An Answer To Jails Is Reading
LEAD: TEN years ago, I worked as an education coordinator for the New York State Division for Youth in Mount Vernon and Yonkers.
Now I find myself wondering why Westchester hasn't picked up on an obvious alternative to incarceration - the Sentenced to Read Program, which is simply teaching learning-disabled young adults to read.


HERE COMES MOTHER, LIKE THE STATUE OF LIBERTY
LEAD: When he was a boy, Robert Stone said in the Paris Review's latest volume of ''Writers at Work,'' he and his mother used to go on the road together, like Kerouac characters. ''My mother and I would take off on some migration to where things were going to be better.'' Once they spent two nights sleeping on a roof.


Strange Day On the Fields Of New York
LEAD: On the day Columbia won a football game for the first time in five years, a pitcher was ejected from a major league baseball playoff game for the first time for having a foreign substance on his glove.


IS THIS TICKET FOR GAME 3?
LEAD: It had the potential for disaster, the prospect of a violent clash involving more than 100,000 frustrated ticket-holders trying to fight their way into a baseball stadium with room for only half of them.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''There have been many managements in the past who have taken the same rationale as Pillsbury and ultimately couldn't produce on it.
It turned out to be a mistake for shareholders.''  Barry Ziegler, Tucker, Anthony &amp; R. L. Day, on Pillsbury's decision to fight Grand Met's takeover bid.


Review/Music; Contemporary Pieces By Composers League
LEAD: Little that was heard at the League of Composers/International Society of Contemporary Music program in Merkin Concert Hall on Tuesday evening served to dispel the gloom that now enshrouds academic composition.


THE MYTH ABOUT TEEN-AGERS
LEAD: A FATHER I KNOW TELLS of one unsettling moment when he was sure he would never understand the teen-age mind.
The mind in question was that of his own teen-ager, a 15-year-old blonde possessed of considerable charm and an aggressive reticence.
The pivotal moment was this effort at conversation:


HOW TO FIND A PSYCHIC OR A RIGHT BRAIN ADVISER
LEAD: Last year, Dave's Down To Earth Rock Shop moved to a new location in Evanston, Ill., nearly tripling in size to 2,000 square feet and adding a mineral museum in the basement.
One reason: an explosion in interest in the metaphysical uses of crystal - for healing and for yielding positive energy.


Why Botha and Mobutu Might Find Friendship Expedient
LEAD: THE state-controlled newspaper here has yet to publish the most startling image of southern Africa last week: Zaire's President, Mobutu Sese Seko, stepping forward to greet his guest, South Africa's President, Pieter W. Botha.


Birth of a Retail Brainchild on North Shore
LEAD: People who lived on the North Shore before World War II nostalgically recall the birth of the Miracle Mile.
It originated in the 1940's as a cluster of small shops adjacent to Lord &amp; Taylor's first branch store, situated on the south side of Northern Boulevard just east of Shelter Rock Road.


Brawley Again Denies Faking Story of Abduction and Rape
LEAD: For the second time in two weeks, Tawana Brawley yesterday denied publicly that she had made up her story of abduction and sexual abuse at the hands of a white racist gang last year.
But she again refused to give details or answer questions about the incident.


PANEL IS CRITICAL OF NUCLEAR AGENCY
LEAD: The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has come under intense Congressional fire over a proposed regulation that would mandate random drug testing for workers in atomic plants but leave safeguards against alcohol abuse to ''the prudent judgment of each utility.''


Campaign Aims at Growth on the Cape
LEAD: In handbills and posters, environmentalists are urging voters to ''just say yes'' to two resolutions on the Nov. 8 ballot to rein in development on Cape Cod.


HITTING THE AIR WAVES AND THE BEST SELLERS LIST
LEAD: Once largely the fodder of kitchen table presses and self-publishing, the New Age is being embraced as a money maker by the communications industry.


Judith Place Has a Bridal
LEAD: The wedding of Judith Gauntlett Place, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Bassett Moore Place of San Francisco and Portola Valley, Calif., to Harold Dean McMillan Jr., a son of Rachel Mitzmacher of Woodside, Queens, and Mr.
McMillan of Astoria, Ill., took place yesterday at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Lithgow, N.Y.


Question of the Week; What Did You Think Of the Seoul Olympics?
LEAD: The overemphasis on winning a gold medal is very disturbing.
Why are the spectacular athletes who qualified to be Olympians, but did not win medals, passed by?
Why do the victorious silver and bronze medalists appear to have to almost apologize for not winning the gold?


BEST SELLERS: October 9, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
10
THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan races to the rescue of America's highest-ranking secret agent in the Soviet Union.
2
2
3
BREATHING LESSONS, by Anne Tyler.


Question of the Week; What Did You Think Of the Seoul Olympics?
LEAD: The tension is over!
The Czechoslovakian women's volleyball team was an emotional drain topped only by the Costa Rican archery team.
I couldn't take watching the South Koreans in table tennis, either.
I've taped it so I can watch it after I've calmed down.
Wow!
E.
K.
MILLER  Rye, N.Y.


L.A. LAWLESS
LEAD:  FEAR OF THE DARK  By Gar Anthony Haywood.  185 pp.
New York:  St.
Martin's Press.


Zambia Detains 9 as Rumors Of Coup Plot Fill the Capital
LEAD: Zambian officials have detained nine people for subversive activities.
Western diplomats said the detentions revealed the Government's growing sensitivity to potential political opposition ahead of the parliamentary and presidential elections on Oct. 26.


THE PLAYOFFS: How It Happened; Sticky Situation for Dodger Reliever
LEAD: In an action unprecedented in post-season baseball play, Jay Howell, the Los Angeles Dodgers' No. 1 relief pitcher, was ejected from the third game of the National League pennant playoff yesterday for having pine tar on his glove.


Blue Cross to Increase Its Rates in New Jersey
LEAD: Individual subscribers of Blue Cross-Blue Shield in New Jersey will soon face a 22.2 percent increase in insurance rates, which state officials hope will reduce the company's growing deficit.


THE EXECUTIVE COMPUTER Paying More Attention to Furniture
LEAD: A lovely 100-year-old desk and a 4-year-old personal computer do not go together very well.
The desk was designed for pen and paper, blotter and inkwell, not desktop computers, keyboards, laser printers, facsimile phones and mice.
The matching chair was designed to provide support for brief periods, not for the eight hours a day that most office workers spend at their desks.


Claudia Zinnen Weds
LEAD: The wedding of Claudia Jane Zinnen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert O. Zinnen of Longmeadow, Mass., to Kurt William Roeloffs Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Roeloffs of Patchogue, L.I., took place yesterday at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Longmeadow.
Deacon David G. Caron performed the ceremony.


IT'S ART BUT IS IT PHOTOGRAPHY?
LEAD: IN APRIL 1986, THE STARN TWINS, PHOTOGRAPHY's newest and youngest celebrities, had their first show in New York, at the Stux Gallery in SoHo.
Identical twin brothers, Doug and Mike Starn were just 24 years old and completely unknown in New York.
They lived, worked and exhibited in Boston, never a city from which to launch a modern or post-modern art career.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  ONE TOUGH COP: The Bo Dietl Story.
By Bo Dietl and Ken Gross. (Pocket, $3.95.) In 15 years with the New York City Police Department, Bo Dietl made more than 1,400 felony arrests; the average officer makes 180 in the same time span.
Nicholas Pileggi, the author of ''Wiseguy,'' says in an introduction that Mr.


Review/Rock; Old and New By Jackson Browne
LEAD: In ''Anything Can Happen,'' the most memorable of several new songs Jackson Browne performed at the Beacon Theater on Wednesday evening, the Los Angeles-based singer and songwriter reflects:  Anything can happen in a world so  full of fear  Dreams are whispered in the dead  of night  And people disappear.


Sports of The Times; Mike Boddicker And His Fosh Ball
LEAD: When Wade Boggs arrived here with the Red Sox for the third game of the American League Championship Series, he was asked if he was suffering jet lag. ''Not jet lag,'' he said, ''bat lag.'' After all, the major leagues' leading hitter was batting just .143, as the A's had gone ahead by 2-0 in the four-of-seven-game series.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Courtyard Of the Louvre Debuts, Again


Kenya Moves to Stop Poaching of Elephants
LEAD: The Kenyan Wildlife Ministry has dismissed 10 game wardens and rangers and suspended 33 others in a campaign to stop elephant poaching, newspapers here reported late this week.


Boat People Beaten in Hong Kong, Report Finds
LEAD: An independent report has concluded that after a protest in a Vietnamese detention center, guards there used ''unnecessary force'' against some boat people, kicking and beating them as they squatted in the camp yard with their heads down and their hands behind their necks.


CHILE JOURNALISTS REPORT AN ATTACK
LEAD: Foreign and Chilean journalists said today that riot police intentionally attacked more than 20 of them Friday night while they were trying to cover an anti-Government demonstration.


LUSH LASHES
LEAD: When Tammy Faye Bakker faced the world with mascaraed tears sliding down her cheeks, it was humiliation by cosmetics.
Not long after that, a clear mascara appeared on the drugstore shelves.
A coincidence?
Perhaps.
But the market was ripe for a mascara that didn't leave black raccoonlike rings under the eyes, that didn't stream off in the rain or a flood of tears and that didn't need to be sandblasted off at night.


Miss George Wed To Parker Mauck
LEAD: Alexandria Pinkerton George and Parker Gilbert Mauck were married yesterday in Bedford, N.Y., at the home of Ann Pinkerton, the bride's cousin.
The Rev.
Hugh Magee performed the Episcopal ceremony.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  EYEING THE EAGLE  The American bald eagle as fine art, political symbol and collectible is to be celebrated with more than 150 items on exhibition in ''The American Eagle: Spirit and Symbol 1782-1882,'' at the Katonah Gallery today through Dec. 31.


Cynthia J. Kelly Is Bride Of Russell R. Haines 3d
LEAD: Cynthia Jean Kelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred F. Kelly of Middletown, N.J., and Russell R. Haines 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Haines of Brielle, N.J., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert E. Bell Jr. performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Red Bank, N.J.


Fears and Opportunism Aborted Shoreham
LEAD: Ross Fleisig's ''Nuclear Phobia Over Shoreham''  [ Opinion, Aug. 21 ]  is both informative and welcome, because I am convinced numerous people do favor use of the completed power station to end Nassau and Suffolk energy problems.


NOT EVERY AGE HAS ITS PLEASURES
LEAD:  THE SWIMMING-POOL LIBRARY  By Alan Hollinghurst.  288 pp.
New York:  Random House. $16.95.


Green Eyes, Red Rage, Shameful Longings
LEAD: IN the same way I invariably spell surprise suprise, never remember if commas go inside or outside quotation marks (inside!) and unconsciously make the same wrong left turn instead of right when visiting friends in New Jersey, I'm never sure of whether I'm feeling jealous or envious of Raquel Welch's body and Christie


PERSPECTIVES: The J-51 Changes; Abatements Broaden for Co-ops and Condos
LEAD: THE conversion of her rental building in Riverdale to a cooperative five years ago seemed unfair to Beatrice Strom, a retired high-school teacher. ''I objected philosophically because it was imposed,'' she said.


Head Trauma
LEAD: AS HIS ROOM FILLED WITH the clutter of a normal 17-year-old, so did his mind.
I examined him one or two weekends a month when I covered my colleagues' patients on the head-trauma and spinal-cord-injury wards at a California rehabilitation center.
That weekend his eyes were fixed downward.
Moist oxygen puffed into the tracheostomy tube in his neck, and, whenever his lungs began to fill with fluid and choke him or a nurse turned him to prevent bedsores, his spastic legs and arms shot out straight.


Susanne L. Smith Is Wed to Peter Spencer Morgan
LEAD: At Grace Episcopal Church in New York, Susanne Lois Smith, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Leslie C. Smith of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter Spencer Morgan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Perry Morgan Jr. of Princeton, N.J., and Northhaven, Me.
Bishop John S. Spong, the Episcopal Bishop of Newark, and the Rev.


Political Notes; Bid for Senate Lacks Money For Television
LEAD: After only one week of television advertising, Robert R. McMillan, the Republican who is trying to unseat Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, is so short of money that he is off the air except for some limited advertising on cable stations.


Street Fashion; When Style Knows No Season
LEAD: The coatdress, a big success last summer, has lost none of its momentum with the arrival of the cooler days of fall.


Indiana Overpowers Ohio State by 41-7
LEAD: Anthony Thompson scored four times in the first half, setting Indiana game, season and career scoring records in leading the Hoosiers to a 41-7 Big Ten Conference rout of Ohio State today.


Jamie Sue Gangel Marries Daniel Silva in Washington
LEAD: Jamie Sue Gangel, a network television correspondent for NBC News, and Daniel Silva, a writer and producer for CNN, both in Washington, were married there yesterday at the Mayflower Hotel.
Judge Stanley S. Harris of Federal District Court in Washington officiated.


Stafford's Practice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Mintz Weds Lawyer in Boston
LEAD: Naomi Mintz, a senior account executive for Ketchum Public Relations, and Daniel Abraham Lowenthal 3d, an associate in the law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts, both in New York, were married last evening in Boston.
Rabbi Irwin M. Blank, an uncle of the bride, officiated at the Lafayette


Pope, Visiting France, Calls for a United Europe
LEAD: As he began a four-day visit to France, Pope John Paul II today called for a united Europe that would bring together the people of West and East.


Review/Concert; New-Music Tribute To an Oboist
LEAD: North/South Consonance, a chamber ensemble that specializes in music by contemporary American and Latin American composers, dedicated its Thursday evening program at Merkin Concert Hall to the memory of Josef Marx, an oboist who devoted himself to new music.


2d Man Arrested In Priest Killing
LEAD: A second man was charged yesterday in the slaying of an Albanian priest three days after the police released another suspect because the Bronx District Attorney said there was not enough evidence to prosecute him.


SMALL IS DEADLY
LEAD:  AT DEATH'S DOOR  By Robert Barnard.  200 pp.
New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $15.95.
OPEN SEASON  By Archer Mayor.  319 pp.
New York:  G. P. Putnam's Sons. $18.95.


POSTINGS: How to Upgrade; Reinvesting In the Bronx
LEAD: One would be hard-pressed to name a place that has suffered more than the Bronx from the ills of urban decay.
But the wounds left by decades of decline in some neighborhoods are begining to heal with the return of private investment.


Of Quayle, Hipocrysy and Paths of Honor
LEAD: THE questions now being asked about Senator Dan Quayle's successful evasion of the draft arouse vivid memories in me of that turbulent period.


Protecting Your Eyes
LEAD: IT WAS THE TOP OF THE ninth with two outs at a Babe Ruth League regional championship near Albany.
The batter hit a line drive, which took a bounce and struck 11-year-old second baseman Justin Metacarpa in his right eye, knocking him to the ground.
By the time he arrived at the emergency room of a nearby hospital, the right side of his face had swollen to twice its normal size and his vision was blurred.


Ruth H. Bunche, 82, Widow of Statesman
LEAD: Ruth Harris Bunche, a former teacher and the widow of Ralph J. Bunche, the Nobel Peace Prize Laureate and former Under Secretary General at the United Nations, died of pancreatic cancer yesterday at her home in Kew Gardens, Queens.
She was 82 years old.


Rap Plus Reggae - A Compelling Synthesis
LEAD: The title track of Don Baron's ''Young, Gifted and Black'' (Uni 4; all three formats) starts off with a brittle rap beat.
The words ''We're talking 'bout'' are repeated like percussion licks.
Mr.
Baron enters, repeating a syllable, imitating rap's scratching technique.
He starts singing ''I'm young, gifted and black,'' in a Jamaican accent, and charges into a section of reggae toasting - the


U.S. Embassy Vehicle Is Hit By Gunfire in San Salvador
LEAD: An American Embassy security vehicle was hit by gunfire on Friday, but there were no casualties, an embassy spokesman said today.
Two Salvadoran security men were in the car at the time of the attack.
No Americans were involved, the spokesman said.


A Brash Young Quarterback Sparks the Bengals
LEAD: There are undoubtedly times when Boomer Esiason kicks back and dreams of slapping home the winning score - in a hockey game.


Compromise Can End West Bank Occupation
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Shoot to Kill  Starring Sidney Poitier, Tom Berenger, Kirstie Alley, Clancy Brown, Richard Masur, Andrew Robinson, Kevin Scannell, Frederick Coffin.
Directed by Roger Spottiswoode. 1988.
Touchstone Home Video.  109 Minutes. $89.95.
Closed captioned.
Rated R.


42 Sightseers Are Killed In Chinese Plane Crash
LEAD: A plane carrying workers being rewarded for recent good performances crashed into a hotel in Shanxi Province on Friday, killing 42 of the 46 people on board, an official daily said today.


FICTION
LEAD:  WONDERFUL YEARS, WONDERFUL YEARS.
By George V. Higgins. (Holt, $19.95.) George V. Higgins's ''Wonderful Years, Wonderful Years'' is the latest in his chronicles of low, middle and upscale criminal life in and around Boston.
Let it be said straight away that he has one of the best ears for the spoken word of any writer of fiction since Ring Lardner.


Huntington Fair Housing Before Court
LEAD: THE United States Supreme Court is expected to announce on Tuesday whether it will hear an appeal from the Town of Huntington in a case that could pressure communities across the country to revise their zoning laws to allow the construction of more low-income housing.


Sports of The Times; Pine Tar Is Not a Cheater's Tool
LEAD: Under baseball law, pine tar in a pitcher's glove is illegal because it's a ''foreign substance.'' No argument there.
But to most baseball people, pine tar is not considered to be a cheater's tool.


HEY, COACH - GO FOR IT!
LEAD:  THE HIDDEN GAME OF FOOTBALL  By Bob Carroll, Pete Palmer and John Thorn.  415 pp.
New York:  Warner Books. $18.95.


Constraints on Growth Explored
LEAD: IS New Jersey taking business away from New York?
Certainly, said the former Governor of New Jersey, Brendan T. Byrne, who saw the Meadowlands complex and the casinos of Atlantic City rise during his eight-year term.


DIETING REASSESSED
LEAD: LOSING WEIGHT HAS NEVER been easy, and recent research has helped explain why.
Two important studies have reported that the tendency to be overweight is to a large extent inherited - tied, inextricably, to one's genes, planted in the body, with no apparent compassion or sense of fairness, by one's own ancestors.


After a Long Battle, Irving Will Merge
LEAD: Irving Bank ended its yearlong struggle to avoid the grasp of the Bank of New York and agreed to a $1.5 billion merger.
The merger marks the first time a United States bank has been acquired in a hostile takeover.
The deal creates the nation's 12th-largest banking institution, with assets of $42 billion.


L.S.U. Surprises Auburn, 7-6
LEAD: Tommy Hodson capped a 75-yard drive with a fourth-down, 11-yard touchdown pass to the tailback Eddie Fuller with 1 minute 41 seconds to play tonight, and David Browndyke kicked the extra point that gave Louisiana State a stunning 7-6 victory over Auburn.


Bizarre Game Turns the Mets' Way
LEAD: It was cold.
It was rainy.
It was slippery.
It was tingling.
It was totally bizarre.


Vary the Experts
LEAD: To the Editor:


SCHOLARS DISCUSS BLACK STRUGGLES
LEAD: At the first Pan-African conference, held in London in 1900, the issues of black empowerment and South Africa led the agenda.
For the black scholars who gathered this weekend in Manhattan, little has changed.


LIABILITY LITIGATOR: Michael Ciresi; WINNING WITH HARD WORK AND HISTRIONICS
LEAD: It was a classic performance by Michael Ciresi.
Armed with stacks of previously undisclosed company documents, a sharp instinct for the holes in his opponent's case, and an even sharper tongue for opposing witnesses, the 42-year-old attorney persuaded a St.
Paul jury last month that G. D. Searle &amp; Company had intentionally misled his client about the safety of its


The Race for Congress; 'Almost Incumbent' in Vermont Is Favorite in Senate Contest
LEAD: Representative James M. Jeffords, a Republican running for the Senate in Vermont, voted against legislation restricting smoking on commercial airline flights.


Prehung Interior Doors
LEAD: AMATEURS are sometimes discouraged from performing certain remodeling projects because of the prospect of having to replace or install doors.


Workshop on Selling Abroad
LEAD: WHEN it comes to doing business abroad, many small- and medium-size-business owners do not know how to negotiate in a different, sometimes difficult foreign environment.


Plainfield's Role In Enterprise Zone
LEAD: I noted with great interest and appreciation the Aug. 28 article regarding Plainfield's effective use of the Urban Enterprise Zone legislation (''With State's Help, Plainfield Rebounds'').
This letter is to correct some inaccuracies and contribute some historical perspective.


Daniel Polsky Is Wed To Carrie G. Fishman
LEAD: Carrie G. Fishman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Monte Fishman of Bronxville, N.Y., was married last evening to Daniel S. Polsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Polsky of Floral Park, L.I.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin officiated at the Park Lane Hotel in New York.


LIFE SENTENCE IN HOSTAGE CASE
LEAD: Clutching a Bible and wiping his eyes, James L. Harvey was sentenced Friday to life in prison plus 20 years for taking 110 people hastage at a church school in Tuscaloosa for 12 hours on Feb. 2.
Mr.
Harvey, 43 years old, had pleaded guilty at the encouragement of his sisters, cuttng short a trial in which he had maintained that, in his actions at the school, he was exercising his right to bear arms and was making a statement for the nation's homeless, poor and illiterate.


Miss Rozelle Has Wedding
LEAD: Anne Marie Rozelle, the daughter of Pete Rozelle of Harrison, N.Y., and Jane M. Coupe of San Clemente, Calif., was married yesterday to Douglas K. Bratton, the son of Iris K. Bratton of Concord, N.C., and the late Carl H. Bratton.
Judge William R. Johnston of the Town of Harrison performed the ceremony at the Mashomack Club in Pine Plains, N


A Hungarian Looks Back
LEAD: Janos Kadar is an old Communist.
For 32 years, from the time the Soviet army was putting down the Hungarian revolution in 1956 until last May, he was the leader of his party and his country.
Since he joined in 1931, at the age of 19, he has seen the system evolve, through Stalinism, war, violent upheaval, and now an effort at far-reaching reform, rejecting much that used to be articles of his faith.


AN AWARD HONORS TECHNICAL PROWESS
LEAD: The nearest thing to an Oscar or an Emmy in home electronics is the Grand Prix awarded each year to outstanding models by Audio-Video International, a leading trade journal.
In the past, these prizes were restricted to sound equipment.
This year, for the first time, video has been included, and the winners have just been announced.


Shoe Firms Taken to Task
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Headliners; Telling His Side
LEAD: Representative Pat Swindall would like to make a campaign swing through a Federal courtroom.
Mr.
Swindall, a Georgia Republican who is locked in a tight re-election battle, last week took the floor of the House to demand that Federal authorities indict him immediately so he could answer allegations of his involvement in a money-laundering scheme.


BIGOTS AND BASHERS
LEAD:  THE BIG NOWHERE  By James Ellroy.  406 pp.
New York:  The Mysterious Press. $17.95.
BLUE BELLE  By Andrew Vachss.  340 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.


Burma's Opposition Appears to Falter
LEAD: Diplomats and others familiar with events in Burma say a phase of the struggle for political change there has ended with the failure of a broad but loosely organized democratic opposition to divide the military and sweep the authorities from power.


Billy Daniels, Who Sang in Nightclubs, Dies at 73
LEAD: Billy Daniels, the veteran nightclub performer, actor and big-band singer who rose to fame with his recording of ''That Old Black Magic,'' died of stomach cancer Friday at the Kenneth Norris Jr.
Cancer Hospital and Research Institute at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles.
He was 73 years old and lived in Hollywood Hills,


A Race That Offers Some Clear Choices
LEAD: WHEN voters in Connecticut's Second District make their choices for United States Representative on Nov. 8, they will not be able to say the race was too short to get to know the candidates.


Michele Elliman Marries James J. Fee
LEAD: Michele Sperry Elliman, a daughter of Judith Beavers of Old Greenwich, Conn., and Lawrence M. Elliman of St.
Helena, Calif., was married yesterday at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York to James Joseph Fee, a son of Mrs.
James J. Fee Jr. of Garden City, L.I., and the late Mr.
Fee.
The Rev.
J.
Seymour


Revolutionary Luxury
LEAD: ONCE AN AMERICAN-OWNED REsort with expansive gardens, a luxurious pool and cabanas, the Hotel Nacional in Havana, from its construction in the 1920's until the late 50's, served a clientele of film stars like Johnny Weissmuller, gangsters like Al Capone and other self-indulgent, wealthy travelers.


Seeking the Vision to See Beyond Discovery
LEAD: THE Discovery had just landed, and Rear Adm.
Richard H. Truly was pleased with the achievement.
The former astronaut, who was brought back to NASA after the Challenger disaster 32 months ago to revive the shaken program, is widely credited with the successful return of Americans to space. ''The nation,'' he said in this moment of elation, ''is going to have the shuttle as the backbone of its space program well into the next century.


Park Passes
LEAD: To the Editor: The July 17 Practical Traveler referred to a ''Golden Eagle Passport, which is free.
It lets you and anyone in the auto with you, or your family, if you are on a bus, into any national park free.
It is available only in person from a national park.''


How the Brain Works: Meeting of the Minds Seeks New Insight
LEAD: SINCE science is a product of brains interacting with brains, understanding how a person's three pounds of gray matter perceives and theorizes about the world is perhaps the most basic question of all.
In the last few years, new methods of brain scanning, genetic manipulation, computer modeling and other techniques have led many neuroscientists to predict that they are finally on the verge of linking psychology and biology and developing theories of the mind.


Turkey
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding the advice for a woman traveling alone in Turkey (Q &amp; A, Aug. 14), may I add a couple of items from my own experience?


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Cleveland; Conglomerate Coming Back
LEAD: AFTER more than a year of talks with city and state officials, Figgie International Inc. has announced it intends to move its headquarters back to this area after six years in Richmond, Va., in exchange for the right to develop 3.5 million square feet of commercial space on 630 acres of city-owned property in the eastern suburbs.


Arabs Report 2 Killed In West Bank Protest
LEAD: Parts of the occupied West Bank were paralyzed today by a strike to protest the killing of four Palestinians by Israeli troops.
Arab and hospital reports said two more Palestinians died after clashes with soldiers.


A Jewel in a Tarnished Showcase
LEAD: CHEZ NOELLE is a great Gaullic gustatory outpost in a modest, mundane section of Port Washington better known for auto-body shops and lumberyards.
A trip to this unlikely neighborhood reveals one of Long Island's finest restaurants.


A SISTER'S NEED
LEAD: Margaret Moorman's poignant description of the devastation wreaked upon patients and their families by severe depressive disorders is compelling.


Ann Leary, a Nurse, Weds John J. Finnegan, Engineer
LEAD: At St.
Francis of Assisi Roman Catholic Church in Mount Kisco, N.Y., Ann C. Leary, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund J. Leary of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday to John J. Finnegan, a son of Theresa Finnegan of Brooklyn and the late Michael Finnegan.
Msgr.
Robert O'Connell officiated, assisted by the Rev.


Variety in Hispanic Works
LEAD: IT'S no good, this lip service to minorities by way of less than satisfactory art exhibitions.
A current example is the show that is part of a package at the Paterson Museum honoring Hispanic people - one of the city's largest and most recent infusions of new blood.
It consists of 22 artists born in North, Central and South America, the Caribbean and


Budget Deficit Estimate is Halved, to $6 Million
LEAD: WITH the estimated deficit for the state budget half what it was a month ago, Governor O'Neill has said, ''Things are looking better.''


A Scribe's Outfitters in London
LEAD: PETER WOOLF, a pen enthusiast who deals in both new and old writing implements, uncapped a handsome fountain pen and doodled with a little piece of history.
His pen, a gold-capped Parker 51, was one of the midcentury's most popular models before it was discontinued in the 1960's.
General Eisenhower used an early Parker 51 to sign documents marking the end of World War II.


Skillful Bidding In a Tournament
LEAD: A group of American bridge players found some surprises when they visited Australia and New Zealand in August and September.
Most of the clubs have large premises, owned and managed by members who believe that tea, coffee, wine and sandwiches are an indispensable part of an evening of bridge.


WAQUIOT WINS THE GOLD CUP
LEAD: Waquoit splashed to a 15-length victory in the $1,063,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup yesterday on a Belmont Park track so sloppy that two Kentucky Derby winners were scratched from the card.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Fairfield, Conn.  $171,000  371 Greenfield Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 82-year-old antique farmhouse; updated kitchen and baths, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,035.
Glastonbury, Conn.  $334,000  91 Olde Wood Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old Colonial antique reproduction; brick terrace, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,997.


Lewis, in Tokyo, Speaks on Johnson
LEAD: Carl Lewis, the Olympic 100-meter gold-medal winner, said today that the detection of Ben Johnson's use of a banned drug was a ''blessing'' for sports.
Evidence of steroid use cost Johnson, a Canadian sprinter, the gold medal in the 100.


PRAGUE WAITS FOR A THAW
LEAD: Mark A. Uhlig's article ''Prague Waits for a Thaw'' (Sept. 4) is unduly pessimistic.
It dwells excessively on the ossified leadership and ignores changes from below.


Suit Over Plumbing Won by Homeowners
LEAD: Nearly 100 owners of homes with leaky pipes have been awarded a total of some $7 million in damages from the four companies that made and installed the plumbing, ending a trial that produced a 4,465-page verdict.


Walkout at Electric Boat Ends on Its 100th Day
LEAD: Electric Boat and union negotiators reached a tentative contract agreement today on the 100th day of a walkout by 10,000 submarine-builders.


Michael Karpen Wed To Jeri Sue Bitterman
LEAD: Jeri Sue Bitterman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard M. Bitterman of Parsippany, N.J., and Michael Alan Karpen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray H. Karpen of Passaic, N.J., were married last evening at Congregation Beth Shalom in Lawrence, L.I., by Rabbi Kenneth D. Poplack.


Roadway Expansion: Highway to Debt
LEAD: Your article (Roadway Expansion Awaits Bond Issue, Sept. 25) liberally quotes proponents of this wasteful borrowing scheme, but contains nary a line about the considerable opposition it faces.


ABOUT BOOKS
LEAD: MARVIN KITMAN'S ''I Am a VCR'' (Random House, New York, $17.95) is an autobiography ''because somebody,'' the author writes, ''had to write it, and it might as well be me.''


Meredith Birdsall Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At Trinity Episcopal Church in Princeton, N.J., Meredith Kilburn Birdsall, a daughter of Virginia O. Birdsall of Waterford, Conn., and Richard D. Birdsall of New London, Conn., was married yesterday to Kevin Richard Cunningham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Cunningham of Jaffrey Center, N.H.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Westport Seminar to Study Affordability
LEAD: IN spite of Connecticut's vigorous economic health and 3.2 percent unemployment rate, its once-booming housing industry continues to languish.


Of Swallows And Martins
LEAD: Although I enjoyed reading Pete Dunne's article on Aug. 28 (''In the Natural State''), I was surprised that he didn't mention purple martins.
These birds are fabulous insecticides and are also part of the swallow family, which he so lovingly described.


Coping With the Costs
LEAD: The United States dollar, after two years of behaving like a punctured balloon, has actually gained a bit in value against the major European currencies this year.
But what should be good news for American travelers in Europe - an increase in the value of the dollar of roughly 10 percent since the beginning of 1988 - has not worked its way into lower prices for dollar spenders because of inflation in the booming European travel business.


Sarah Chazen Marries
LEAD: Sarah Ellen Chazen, an administrative assistant at Young &amp; Rubicam, the advertising agency, and Martin David Levin, a financial consultant for Shearson Lehman Hutton, were married yesterday evening at the Tammy Brook Country Club in Cresskill, N.J.
Rabbi Stephen A. Klein officiated.
The couple's parents are Mr.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  MASQUERADE: A True Story of Seduction, Compulsion, and Murder.
By Lowell Cauffiel. (Doubleday, $18.95.) W. Alan Canty, a psychologist, was a pillar of his community in suburban Detroit, quiet and circumspect in his dealings with patients, a loving husband and a devoted son.
Then Dr.
Canty turned up dead, his head crushed by blows from a Louisville Slugger, his body dismembered by a kitchen knife and the pieces scattered.


Miss Giroux Weds David A. DeNunzio
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York, Jocelyne Antoinette Giroux, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Claude Andre Giroux of New York, was married yesterday to David Ames DeNunzio, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Dwight DeNunzio of Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Kenneth France-Kelly performed the ceremony.


TALKS ON NAMIBIA STALL ON TROOPS
LEAD: More than a dozen officials from Angola, Cuba and South Africa met with an American mediator in Manhattan yesterday in a major effort to negotiate a regional peace settlement for southern Africa.
But they apparently failed to agree on a timetable for withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola.


Review/Music; Adaptation of Medieval 'Romance of the Rose'
LEAD: A pleasing and sometimes beautiful entertainment based on ''The Romance of the Rose'' opened on Friday night at the Mannes College of Music (150 West 85th Street).
It is billed as a 15th-century music drama, which is not quite right, but Paul C. Echols's instincts for imaginative dramatic presentation of pre-Renaissance music are often right indeed.


Undefeated Irish Avert an Upset
LEAD: Notre Dame, which had lost three straight times to Pitt, narrowly avoided another such upset today to keep the Irish undefeated with five victories.


THE DEFENSE PLEADED NAGGING
LEAD:  DEATH OF A ''JEWISH AMERICAN PRINCESS''  The True Story of a Victim on Trial.
By Shirley Frondorf.
Illustrated. 281 pp.
New York:  Villard Books. $18.95.


'Lion in Winter': Mid-Life Crisis
LEAD: LONG ISLAND STAGE has opened its 14th season with ''The Lion in Winter,'' James Goldman's comedy-drama of life among the Plantagenets during the Middle Ages.


POSTINGS: Carroll Gardens Conversion; The 55-Unit Mill
LEAD: Since the turn of the century, a jute factory has stood at 376 President Street, between Bond and Hoyt Streets, in a brownstone neighborhood of Brooklyn that in the last two decades has come to be known as Carroll Gardens.
The gentrifying area has a historic district, and the factory, in recent years used for furniture making, lies just outside it.


Mark Herr Wed To Miss Putman
LEAD: At the Nassau Presbyterian Church in Princeton, N.J., Rachel Clinton Putman was married yesterday to Mark Sherwood Herr.
The Rev.
Cynthia R. Jarvis performed the ceremony.


Boston Case Raises Questions on Misuse of Affirmative Action
LEAD: Philip and Paul Malone are fair-haired, fair-complexioned identical twins who worked for the Boston Fire Department for 10 years.
Last month both were dismissed when a state agency ruled that they had lied on their job applications: They had contended they were black.
The finding has sent shock waves through the city government, touching off charges that employees of other agencies may have misused plans designed to remedy past discrimination against black and


A Final Wish is Not Honored
LEAD: LAST month, my mother passed away.
She was 69 years old.
The last few years, her health had been rapidly deteriorating.
She signed a ''living will'' and her one wish was never to be put on a life support system.
Unfortunately, that wish was not granted.


U.S. Plans Electric Power to Drive New Warships
LEAD: The Chief of Naval Operations, Adm.
Carlisle A. H. Trost, has directed that all American warships designed in the future be equipped with electrical propulsion systems that will be critical elements in what the Navy is calling a revolution at sea.


Hofstra Rolls To 5-0
LEAD: Ken Bonkowski, a senior quarterback, threw three touchdown passes to lead undefeated Hofstra (5-0) to a 34-11 rout over Gettysburg (3-2) at Musselman Stadium in Gettysburg, Pa., yesterday.


POP VIEW
LEAD: Keith Richards's first solo album, ''Talk Is Cheap,'' sounds loose, sloppy, thrown-together, unfinished.
That's why I like it - it's a relief to hear a musician open the lid on canned music.


Terry A. Hastings And C. C. Powers Wed in California
LEAD: Terry Anne Hastings, a daughter of Margery Maude Hastings of Palos Verdes Estates, Calif., and the late Glenn A. Hastings, was married yesterday to Christopher Cother Powers, a son of Helen W. Powers of Oyster Bay, L.I., and Francis C. Powers of New York and Honolulu at the nondenominational Neighborhood Church in Palos Verdes Estates.


Darien Theater Offers Fresh 'Guys and Dolls'
LEAD: AT the Darien Dinner Theater, there is a spanking new musical fable about a gambler for whom the stakes are never too high (he is called Sky); Sarah Brown, the Salvation Army lass he takes to Havana (on a bet), and another gambler (Nathan Detroit) who has been engaged for 14 years to a nightclub singer (Miss


100,000 Hold Rally in Latvia
LEAD: More than 100,000 Latvians rallied in Riga, the Latvian capital, in support of the nationalist Latvian People's Front, the official Tass press agency said today.
The People's Front, which has 130,000 members, opened a conference today, and a Latvian native said speakers at the meeting criticized the management of the republic's farming and industry.


Ohio State Won't Forfeit
LEAD: Ohio State has decided not to forfeit its 26-9 victory over Syracuse after being advised that there was no existing N.C.A.A. rule requiring it to do so, Syracuse officials announced today.


Cameras Go Into Court Looking for Drama
LEAD: To the Editor:


Students, Urging Change, Mock Polish Party
LEAD: Friday was Policeman's Day in Poland, a day when the Interior Minister congratulates the forces and when the Polish leader thanks representatives of the party's finest, in sparkling uniforms, for their service in protecting Communism.


HOW WE WERE IS HOW WE REALLY ARE
LEAD:  THE PROUD DECADES  America in War and Peace, 1941-1960.
By John Patrick Diggins.
Illustrated. 381 pp.
New York:  W .W.
Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


Laura R. Walker Is Married
LEAD: Laura Ruth Walker and Albert Lewis Wells Jr. were married yesterday at the Riverside Church in New York by the Rev.
Dr.
Eugene E. Laubach, a Methodist minister.
The bride, who will retain her name, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Walker of Elmsford, N.Y.
Her husband is a son of Mrs.
Albert Lewis Wells of El Cajon, Calif., and the late Mr.


One-Inning Workout Provides Boost for Cone
LEAD: After all the pratfalls and problems in Shea Stadium yesterday, the Mets not only took the lead in the National League playoff but also restored David Cone to some of the rank he earned this season when he won 20 games and lost only 3.


Review/Rock; The Serious and the Goofy By John Hiatt and His Band
LEAD: John Hiatt, who played a brilliant set at the Bottom Line on Thursday, does everything right.
Though he can be an intensely personal songwriter, Mr.
Hiatt mitigates seriousness with a goofy, self-aware persona on stage.
And though he and his tight, all-Louisiana band - Sonny Landreth on guitar, Dave Ransom on bass and Ken Blevins on drums - effectively bang out basic rock-and-roll, he often parodies the average rock performer's rote posturing.


A 2-Year-Old Girl Is Killed While Fleeing a Fire in Bronx
LEAD: A 2-year-old girl, fleeing a three-alarm fire in her family's apartment in the South Bronx, was killed early yesterday when she accidentally walked back into the burning home, Fire Department officials said.


Hirohito Watch Goes On in Tokyo


Army to Study if Black Heroes Were Denied
LEAD: The Army will review records of black World War I heroes to determine whether any were denied high honors because of their race.


Senate Backs Infectious-Waste-Disposal Bill
LEAD: Legislation to combat midnight dumping of medical wastes has won Senate approval and now goes back to the House for further action.


Correction
LEAD: A front-page picture caption last Sunday about Mikhail S. Gorbachev's succeeding Andrei A. Gromyko as the Soviet President described a Politburo vote incorrectly in some editions.
The members were shown voting to accept Mr.
Gromyko's retirement.
In a later vote, the Politburo elected Mr.
Gorbachev President.


Pollution? Many Varieties of Fish Are Safe to Eat
LEAD: THE problems of ocean pollution were brought close to home - right to the beaches - this summer.
As a result, consumers have been asking questions about the fish and shellfish on sale in retail shops and restaurants.
Is it safe to eat?
At a time when consumption of fish is on the increase, largely for health reasons, should one stop eating it, also for health reasons?


HIGH POINT
LEAD: Traditional furniture has always been the bread and butter of the Southern Furniture Market in High Point, N.C., and this fall is no exception. ''It's going to be an especially conservative market,'' says Carl Levine, senior vice president of home furnishings at Bloomingdale's. ''Business has been poor ever since the stock crash on Oct.


Setting Sail For Discovery
LEAD: MY list was a mile long.
The cleaners, soon as it opens.
A fast trip to the grocery.
Wrap and mail the dress my college sophomore needs for a dance.
Feed the cats.
Fill the car with gas.
Catch the 9:19 and be in the office for a 10:30 A.M. meeting.


U.S. Political Mail Explained
LEAD: A staff member of the Federal Trade Commission, in trouble over some politically oriented letters he mailed, has told a House subcommittee that he was doing what he thought was expected.


Writers Honor a Long-Dead Peer
LEAD: Forty-six years after he was shot dead by a Nazi storm trooper, Bruno Schulz, a Polish Jew who left behind only two short volumes of nostalgic, sensual prose and some drawings, is being honored with tributes that include film showings, poetry readings, the awarding of a new literary prize in his name, an exhibition of his pen-and-ink sketches and the publication of his letters in


College and Career: Parental Reactions
LEAD: I was delighted to read the two articles describing parents' reaction to their children going to college and those who have just graduated from college  [ Opinion, Aug. 28 ] .
They both captured two pieces of the puzzle, with one looking on college as a preparation for life and the other as a preparation for a job.


An Inexpensive Idea for Collectors
LEAD: COLLECTORS seeking distinctive aspects of the plethora of recent United States stamps have become enamored of plate-number coils.


Gold Divides Dakotans as River Did
LEAD: Here in Deadwood Gulch, where Wild Bill Hickok drew eights and aces, along with a bullet, people still talk about the good old days, when gold mining was booming and the brothels were operating freely and openly.


Convicts Find Joy in Giving
LEAD: DENNIS STEO says he spent his youth as a ''stickup man.'' Now, Mr.
Steo, a convicted murderer who has been imprisoned for 17 years, spends his days soliciting donations and addressing cards to make life more meaningful for New Jersey's elderly and disabled.


First, We Must Recognize Problems of Children; A Staggering Bill
LEAD: To the Editor:


A War on the U.S. War on Abortion
LEAD: THE Reagan Administration's strong anti-abortion policy has produced little change in the United States, but it has given rise to an impassioned debate about its effect on the third world.


But Washington Holds the Key
LEAD: The ambitious undertaking of the European Community to remove the many internal barriers to the unimpeded movement of goods, services, people and capital has begun to seep into the public consciousness.
In the offing is a vastly different Europe, one consisting of a single market of 320 million people, the culmination of a 30-year effort to achieve a real Common Market.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Many of the double-hung windows in my house need to have the putty replaced around the outside.
Since each window has 12 panes, I thought of using a caulking gun to speed the job, but my dealer says that only glazing compound should be used.
Someone suggested using silicone caulking.
Do you know if this can be used instead of glazing compound around each pane?


Headliners; Seeing Both Sides
LEAD: Like every other artist, Michelangelo went back to the drawing board on occasion.
And so he did with ''Cleopatra,'' the conservators at the Uffizi Museum in Florence have discovered.
It had long been known that something was on the other side of the drawing Cleopatra, but nobody could tell what it was because it had been hidden behind a backing that was glued on sometime in the 19th century.


Reagan's Legions of Nominees Put His Own Stamp on the Judiciary
LEAD: ALL summer, 29 of President Reagan's nominations to the Federal bench languished in the Senate, and the Democratic majority made no secret of their motives.
They wanted to keep as many judicial slots open as possible, in the hope that a newly-elected President Dukakis would fill them with his own choices next year.


Does Piniella Still Work for Yanks?
LEAD: The announcement was a mere formality, a matter of making official what had been known for weeks.
Lou Piniella was gone, the era of Dallas Green had arrived.
Another year, another Yankee manager for George Steinbrenner.


A Vote For Graf
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


HOMEWARD BOUND
LEAD: Growing up on the destitute side of a tiny town in Arizona spoiled me.
All the neighbors were Mexican, and they knew a million ways to get the richest flavors from the poorest foods.
I learned early on that my mother's cookies could be swapped for pumpkin empanadas, and that her Spam sandwiches were better traded for spicy beef tamales.


Review/Recital; An Iconoclastic Pianist Opens Beethoven Series
LEAD: Andrew Rangell is a 40-year-old pianist who has been living quietly in New England and operating with his own chosen repertory along the fringes of the music business.
Mr.
Rangell has not had any real professional management until recently, and listening to him play the first of seven Beethoven recitals at the 92d Street Y


Dukakis Sees Heated 30 Days In Fight With a 'Bankrupt' Foe
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis begins the final month of his campaign for the White House with an icy anger against Vice President Bush and a trace of wistful longing for the more civil, relatively issue-oriented politics of the primaries.


Sri Lanka Arises as Issue in Indian State Vote
LEAD: India's deepening involvement in the politics and civil strife of Sri Lanka is developing into a major issue in Tamil Nadu state elections scheduled to be held before the end of January, politicians from all parties in southern Indian say.


Reagan Backs House Drug Bill
LEAD: President Reagan warned Congress today that ''time is fast running out'' and pressed the Senate to approve a House version of anti-drug legislation before it adjourns.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Tables Turn in Estonia


Shelby Calvert Marries Thomas Morss
LEAD: At King's Chapel in Boston yesterday evening, Shelby Lynn Calvert, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald D. Calvert of Huntsville, Ala., and Thomas Wentworth Morss, a son of Everett Morss of Beverly Farms, Mass., and Mary Shiverick Morss of Beverly, Mass., were married.
The revised Angelican wedding ceremony was performed by the Rev.


POSTINGS: Tracking the Medians; Houses Get Bigger
LEAD: What went down has come up.
The size and lavishness of single- family homes, which shrank considerably between 1978 and 1982, are on the rise, with sizes and prices having set records in 1987.


Daniel Katz Wed To Miss Marshall
LEAD: Katharine Delano Marshall, a daughter of Patricia T. Marshall of New York and Allerton D. Marshall, also of New York, and Daniel Blake Katz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Katz of Roeland Park, Kan., were married yesterday.
The ceremony was performed at Bay House, the Orient, L.I., home of Nina H. Frost and her husband, Timothy T.


Penn State Trounces Cincinnati By 35-9
LEAD: Tony Sacca, the first freshman to start at quarterback in Joe Paterno's 23 years as coach, passed for two touchdowns today and Michael Timpson returned a punt 64 yards as Penn State (4-1) trounced Cincinnati, 35-9.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  CORPORATE CRIME AND VIOLENCE: Big Business Power and the Abuse of the Public Trust.
By Russell Mokhiber. (Sierra Club, $25.) In Russell Mokhiber's compelling chronicle of corporate negligence, the criminals are white-collar executives and the victims are the rest of us.
Mr.
Mokhiber, the editor of the Washington-based newsletter Corporate Crime Reporter, points out that the largest robbery in United States history totaled $5.4 million, whereas the far larger cost to the


DATA UPDATE: October 9 1988
LEAD:
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Aug. 88
Aug. 87
Change
New York
575.8
660.2
-13%
New Jersey
470.8
424.4
11%
Connecticut
199.4
189.0
6%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Canada's Future
LEAD: 'Ours is above all an agenda of confidence for Canada.' - Brian Mulroney, Prime Minister of Canada, calling a general election in which the primary issue is a free-trade agreement that the Conservative Government has negotiated with the United States.


THE CAREFREE LIFE
LEAD:  KITTY  An Autobiography.
By Kitty Carlisle Hart.
Illustrated. 263 pp.
New York:  Doubleday. $18.95.


Apryl Miller Weds
LEAD: Apryl Nanette Miller, a fashion-design major at the Fashion Institute of Technology, and Steven Gary Schulman, an associate in the New York law firm of Milberg Weiss Bershad Specthrie &amp; Lerach, were married yesterday evening at the Carlyle in New York.
Rabbi David M. Posner officiated.
The couple's parents are Mr.


Of Debt and Dirt
LEAD: To the Editor:


Parade Today
LEAD:  The United Hispanic-American parade starts at 12:30 P.M. at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue, marches north to 72d Street, then east to Third Avenue.
Holiday Tomorrow  Columbus Day is observed tomorrow.
NEW YORK
Parade: Starts at 11:30 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, moving north to 86th Street, then east to Third Avenue.


AN EMPTINESS IN THE OVAL OFFICE
LEAD:  LANDSLIDE  The Unmaking of the President, 1984-1988.
By Jane Mayer and Doyle McManus.
Illustrated. 468 pp.
Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company. $21.95.


Watergate Figure Leads Ethics Panel
LEAD: Jeb Stuart Magruder, who pleaded guilty to conspiring to obstruct justice in a Watergate case and spent seven months in prison for his crimes, is now heading a commission on ethics and values in the capital of Ohio.


Two Nations Transformed In Aftermath Of Gulf War
LEAD: IN the new political atmosphere being shaped by the cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war, issues that appeared irrelevant only weeks ago have suddenly become urgent policy matters for Teheran and Baghdad.
Both countries are grappling with the need to reorient their economies, demobilize huge armies, forge new relationships with other countries and define new roles for themselves in the region.


Karl G. Seelaus 3d Weds Miss Bosee
LEAD: At the First Congregational Church in Old Greenwich, Conn., Barbara de Valengin Bosee, the daughter of J. Kennard Bosee of New York and Phyllis Torrey Bosee of Old Greenwich, was married yesterday to Karl Gustav Seelaus 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl G. Seelaus of Jupiter Island, Fla.
The Rev.
Dale M.


DOUBTING THE PROPHET
LEAD:  A GATHERING OF SAINTS  A True Story of Money, Murder and Deceit.
By Robert Lindsey.
Illustrated. 397 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.
THE MORMON MURDERS  A True Story of Greed, Forgery, Deceit, and Death.
By Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith.
Illustrated. 458 pp.
New York:  Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson.


Amy Engelhard Plans To Wed Glenn Firester
LEAD: Amy Engelhard and Glenn Michael Firester plan to be married March 19, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Engelhard of Woodmere, L.I., and New York have announced.
Mr.
Firester is the son of Phillip Firester of Princeton, N.J., and Phyliss Tarlow of Woodbury, L.I.


Sara E. Robertson Is Bride of Dr. Stephen Phillips
LEAD: The wedding of Sara Elizabeth Robertson, the daughter of Mrs.
Wood Lyda of Bellevue, Wash., and Earl E. Robertson Jr. of Kansas City, Mo., to Dr.
Stephen Gregory Phillips, a son of Mrs.
William J. Wallace of Seattle and the late Robert L. Phillips, took place yesterday at the Plymouth Congregational Church in Seattle.


Indian Brings U.S. Technology Back Home
LEAD: Satyen Gangrao Pitroda, a businessman who renounced his American citizenship to return to his native India and work as Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's scientific adviser, has become known as the country's Mr.
Technology.


Motherhood Should Be an Olympic Event
LEAD: AS a mother home with a newborn, I have had some time between feedings, mountains of laundry and endless bouts of burping to observe quite a bit of the spectacle call the Olympics.


Taking His Cuts
LEAD: ONE of the Mets' most promising minor league managers has decided to abandon baseball for the meat business.
Tucker Ashford, the 33-year-old manager of the club's Texas League farm club in Jackson, Miss., submitted his resignation last week.


How to Think Like a Baroque Choreographer
LEAD: Dances do not exist in isolation.
They possess a theatrical context, and they may express ideas of their time.
Anyone who doubts this should ponder the productions of Catherine Turocy.


Castle Is Inventor's Vision of the Past
LEAD: John Hays Hammond Jr. was a prolific inventor with hundreds of patents, but his most enduring creation may have been his home, a medieval-style castle and museum overlooking the Atlantic Ocean.


Big Parties, Big Causes
LEAD:  Brooklyn Expansion


Question of the Week; What Did You Think Of the Seoul Olympics?
LEAD: As athletic performance increasingly translates into greater dollars, avarice becomes a greater motivation factor.
The most blatant example surfaced when the reverse effect applied.
In the case of Ben Johnson, we saw the potential loss of millions of dollars (because of drugs) to this athlete splashed across the television screen and newspapers and very little mention of its effect on sport.


BEYOND THE BOMB: TURMOIL IN THE LABS
LEAD: THE BOOM TIMES of the Reagan era have ended for the elite scientists who practice the secret art of designing and testing new kinds of nuclear arms.
At America's rival centers for nuclear research - the 7,800-person Los Alamos National Laboratory, high in the mountains of New Mexico, and the 8,000-person Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, set amid the grassy hills of northern California - the atmosphere is of ferment and soul-searching.


Prehung Interior Doors
LEAD: AMATEURS are sometimes discouraged from performing certain remodeling projects because of the prospect of having to replace or install doors.


Angola's Army Retakes Towns Held by Rebels
LEAD: Since South Africa's troop pullout from Angola a few weeks ago, Angola's military has recaptured a string of rebel towns, including the birthplace of Jonas Savimbi, the rebel leader.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: KEYS, wallet, neat little cosmetics bag, handkerchief or tissue, and perhaps a small pen and miniature appointment book.
That's it.
Is anything else needed in a handbag?


Westchester Q&amp;A: Madeleine Gutman; Making Arts and Culture Work in Greenburgh
LEAD: WHILE a number of municipalities in the county have developed means of directly supporting community arts programs, few local government-sponsored agencies have been as active for as long as the Town of Greenburgh Arts and Culture Committee.


NO GORE, PLEASE - THEY'RE BRITISH
LEAD: The novels of P. D. James and Lawrence Block represent two of the most durable strains of crime writing.
Ms.
James, whose last book, ''A Taste for Death,'' was a best seller both in her native England and in America, is frequently compared to Agatha Christie for her mastery of the traditional British form known as the ''polite mystery,'' in observance of its gentlemanly police detectives, civilized social settings and ratiocinative plots.


Open Space Preservation Benefits Landowners Too
LEAD: THE recent article ''Housing or Space?
Dispute Ensues'' was helpful in focusing on issues that have arisen in the effort to preserve ecologically sensitive open space in the southeastern corner of Brookhaven Town.


Court Supports Housing Group on Winterizing Colonial Cottages
LEAD: A COURT decision in a zoning dispute has cleared the way for a nonprofit housing group in northern Westchester to winterize two summer cottages to provide year-round housing for eight low-income elderly residents of Cortlandt.


Producer Scouts State for TV Series
LEAD: WHEN Thomas McGowan, a moviemaker from Malibu, Calif., decided to make a television series about old New England legends, he decided to return to his boyhood roots in Connecticut.


BEHIND BARBED WIRE
LEAD: John Hersey attempts to chronicle the relocation of Japanese subjects (issei) and Japanese-American citizens (nisei) following the sneak attack by Japan on Pearl Harbor.


Of Manville, Morals and Mortality
LEAD: Last Monday, the United States Supreme Court cleared the way for the Manville Corporation to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings.


Homeless Man's Throat Cut During Argument in Subway
LEAD: An argument between two homeless men left one of them dead yesterday morning when the other man slashed his throat in an Upper East Side subway station, the Transit Police said.


THE ROMANCE OF A LOAF OF BREAD
LEAD: EVEN THE SOUND OF IT ASTONISHES.
A loaf of bread straight from the oven, when it is turned out of the pan and tapped on the bottom with a knuckle, has the ring of life to it.
Beneath the hardness of the crust lies the hollowness of a million cells.
The ear judges and strains to name what it hears.


Larry Kramer's Update on the War at Home
LEAD: ''I don't consider myself a playwright or a novelist but a writer who tries to find the best form to get the message out,'' declared Larry Kramer, who brought the boiling-hot politics of the AIDS crisis to the theatrical mainstream with his 1985 play ''The Normal Heart.'' ''I write out of anger, and of course for anyone who's gay now there's a lot to be angry about.


THE LEGACY OF DR. KOOP
LEAD: ONE FATEFUL EVENING last spring Frances Epstein, a dressmaker in Riverdale, N.Y., lit a cigarette, flicked on her TV and found herself face to face with C. Everett Koop, Surgeon General of the United States.
Dressed in a dark blue military uniform, bearded, huge, unsmiling, looking for the life of him like a vengeful biblical patriarch, the 71-year-old top doctor of the nation looked directly at Frances Epstein in Riverdale and asked, ''Why do people continue to smoke despite the known health hazards?


Stafford's Promise
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Newest Condos Try to Replicate Prewar Quality
LEAD: BUILDERS of Manhattan condominiums are rolling a new word off their tongues these days as readily as ''luxury,'' the reigning favorite.


Abigail Disney, Ph.D Candidate, Weds Pierre Norman Hauser 2d at Columbia
LEAD: Abigail Edna Disney and Pierre Norman Hauser 2d were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University.
The Rev.
Janet Fechner-Pelletier, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Wigwam Wiggler With grace and aplomb, Frank Jones, the Islip Town Supervisor, crawled into his wigwam. ''The problem may be getting him out,'' said one of the two Islip officials standing nearby.
Not to worry.


MARYLAND GUN BAN IS HOTLY DEBATED
LEAD: The campaign in Maryland over a proposal to repeal a gun law in the November elections has become so heated that each side seems to be spending almost as much energy attacking its opponent's tactics as attacking its position.


Sherilyn Adie Marries
LEAD: Sherilyn Ann Adie, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Adie of Sykesville, Md., and Ocean Beach, L.I., and David Brian Robinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald M. Robinson of Ephrata, Pa., were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Ellicott City, Md., by the Rev.
Joseph P. Burroughs.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 9, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE DARK TOWER: The Gunslinger, by Stephen King. (Plume/NAL, $10.95.) Volume One of a series about a young man's pursuit of an evil force.
2
3
MURDER IN THE CIA, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett, $4.95.) A C.I.A.


BLINDED BY IDEALISM
LEAD:  BROKEN ALLIANCE  The Turbulent Times Between  Blacks and Jews in America.
By Jonathan Kaufman.  311 pp.
New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $19.95.


Confusion on Bush Panelist
LEAD: The Rev.
Florian M. Galdau, one of six members said to have resigned from Vice President Bush's ethnic coalition last month, now says he never did so.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  ALICE IN LA-LA LAND, by Robert Campbell. (Pocket Books, $3.95.) Since Raymond Chandler wrote about the underside of Los Angeles, parts of the city have become even sleazier, and Robert Campbell has seized upon the worst of them for this sequel to ''In La-La Land We Trust.'' Last year, The Times's John Gross said this story about a loathsome talk show host with a psychopathic streak seemed excessively brutal.


MUSIC VIEW
LEAD: The question before the house - The Metropolitan Opera House, that is - sounds simple enough: does George Frideric Handel belong in this company's repertory?
Of course, but in what shape or form?
As you suspected, the answers are neither simple nor unchallengeable.
This season's production of ''Giulio Cesare,'' which turned into a personal triumph for its Cleopatra, Kathleen Battle, represented one approach, admittedly difficult to follow because there are not many Kathleen Battles around.


Liberia Finds 10 Guilty of Plot Against Doe
LEAD: A jury has found a former presidential candidate and nine other people guilty of plotting to overthrow the Government and kill President Samuel K. Doe.


African Sculptures at Yale
LEAD: THE first exposure of ''Evocative Images'' took place two years ago at the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
There, the show numbered 84 works of African art lent by the University Museum of the University of Pennsylvania and it celebrated that museum's centenary.


Underground Fire Is Put Out
LEAD: An underground coal fire discovered here last month was extinguished Friday after firefighters poured water and a synthetic foam into holes bored into the earth, Fire Chief Tim Baden said.
The fire, which threatened an area of about 30 homes in this town of 5,000 people, was discovered Sept. 30 when children playing on a hillside poked sticks into the ground and saw that the sticks were on fire when they pulled them out.


Sicilian Mafia, After Crackdown, Revives With a Wave of Killings
LEAD: The Sicilian Mafia is on the offensive again.
Having survived a judicial crackdown, resurgent criminal families are conducting a campaign of terror against the state while striking underworld rivals in a series of daylight killings.


Review/Jazz; Dick Katz and Michael Moore Pool Talents
LEAD: The pianist Dick Katz is a fixture on the New York jazz scene, playing with big bands - the American Jazz Orchestra, Loren Schoenberg's orchestra - and in small groups.
On Thursday night he played at Zinno with the bassist Michael Moore; duets allow a pianist to strech out, and Mr.
Katz took full advantage of his opportunity.


Campaigning, Very Quietly, In New York
LEAD: Somewhere out there, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts and Vice President Bush are fighting for the Presidency of the United States.
But with four weeks to go before Election Day, politicians are starting to refer to the Presidential campaign in New York State as the campaign that isn't.


Review/Dance; Love Is Pitted Against Evil in Works by Martha Graham
LEAD: The program presented by the Martha Graham Dance Company on Thursday at City Center did not include any Graham classics, though ''Clytemnestra,'' which certainly qualifies as a major work, was danced in excerpt.
What stood out was the vividly personal, strong performing of a number of Miss Graham's dancers.


Jumping Ship?
LEAD: HE got a four-year college education at the taxpayers' expense, and as part of the bargain David Robinson was expected to spend two years serving his country as a naval officer.
That's something the 7-foot-1-inch Annapolis graduate said he would be glad to do, but Robinson voiced those sentiments before he returned from temporary assignment in Seoul, South Korea, with the United States Olympic basketball team and returned to duty at his base in Kings Bay,


On Dodgers' Ex-Turf, It's Go Mets!
LEAD: Few signs of Ebbets Field remain in the neighborhood, apart from the fabled stadium's name that adorns a large public housing complex and many small shops on Bedford Avenue, but memories of the old Dodgers, our Dodgers, persist.


THE FIREBRAND GRITS HER TEETH
LEAD:  BLOOD SHOT  By Sara Paretsky.  328 pp. New York:  Delacorte Press. $17.95.


Motown Mentality
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. ORDERS HALT ON COYOTE POISON
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency says it is banning the manufacture of a compound used to kill coyotes, a move expected to anger ranchers and state officials in the West.


Question of the Week; What Did You Think Of the Seoul Olympics?
LEAD: Had I been at the Games, I would have cheered for the equestrians and the fencers.
What I saw on TV were glimpses of riders falling off their mounts, and a scrap of fencing presented as musical comedy.


Why a Stronger Gorbachev Might Not Be Strong Enough
LEAD: RUSSIA has always loved the man on horseback.
Peter westernized, Lenin revolutionized, Stalin industrialized, each moving the country from one historical stage to the next by sheer, personal and often ruthless power.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Many of the double-hung windows in my house need to have the putty replaced around the outside.
Since each window has 12 panes, I thought of using a caulking gun to speed the job, but my dealer says that only glazing compound should be used.
Someone suggested using silicone caulking.
Do you know if this can be used instead of glazing compound around each pane?


Businessmen Friendly to a Tax Rise
LEAD: Leaders of the largest American companies, who gathered here today for the semi-annual meeting of the Business Council, generally support the candidacy of Vice President Bush.
But in their support for strong measures to reduce the Federal budget deficit, they are counting on a bipartisan commission whose probable recommendations the Vice


Herbert Nass Engaged To Jodi Ann Grossman
LEAD: Jodi Ann Grossman and Herbert Evan Nass, a son of Edna K. Nass of New York and the late Samuel Nass, plan to marry in April, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Grossman of New York have announced.


Euterpe Dukakis Assails Bush
LEAD: Euterpe Dukakis, the mother of the Democratic Presidential candidate, accused George Bush and the Republican Party today of spreading false information about her brothers.


Excerpts From the Interview With Dukakis
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an interview with Michael S. Dukakis, conducted by The New York Times Friday evening in Asheville, N.C.:


Chileans Send a Warning to Latin America's Generals
LEAD: THE Chilean people's rejection of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet's bid for a further eight years in power last week brought huge sighs of relief as well as cheers of delight from the many Latin American countries that are themselves struggling to consolidate new democracies.


Amusement Park: A Casino's Gamble
LEAD: A DECADE after the first casino opened here, the casino scene has added something totally different - a two-acre, $19 million indoor amusement park with a four-story Ferris wheel, a roller coaster and a fun house.


Playing the Party Circuit
LEAD: When Hiroshi Watanabe became president of the Sanwa Bank on June 29, he thought he should meet some of his clients.
So Mr.
Watanabe's staff scheduled 29 lavish parties for more than 10,000 guests at luxury hotels across Japan.


Behind the Rosy Numbers Lurks Decline
LEAD: Current economic news creates the illusion of a healthy economy.
The unemployment rate is at a 14-year low.
The trade deficit is shrinking.
The widely anticipated recession has not materialized, and inflation remains moderate.


Israeli TV Political Ads Lowering the Low Road
LEAD: Nissim Zvilli leaned forward with chin in hand, a bemused smile across his face as he looked directly into the televison camera.


Prospects; Airlines of the World, Unite
LEAD: The Texas Air Corporation and Scandinavian Airlines Systems last week announced an alliance between the two companies that would link their schedules and flights around the world.
In the agreement, S.A.S. also has the right to purchase up to 10 percent of Texas Air within the next six months.
Texas Air, which lost $255.9 million in the second quarter of 1988 and has developed a reputation for poor service, will receive $50 million from S.A.S.


London Promoter Firm on Tyson Site
LEAD: Mike Tyson's training for his heavyweight title defense against Frank Bruno Dec. 17 is expected to be delayed as the champion meets this week with his attorney, Howard Weitzman, and prepares to respond to a divorce petition filed Friday by Tyson's wife, Robin Givens, in Los Angeles.
A hearing is scheduled for Oct.


On Those Historic Confrontations
LEAD: SHOULD there be a four-game tiebreak match to determine a champion of the Soviet Union for 1988?
The two players who tied for first place in the tournament, which ended in Moscow in mid-August, are Gary Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov.
These two have already contested -in their four title matches plus tournaments - 130 games.


THE BRIGHT SIDE OF BAD HEALTH
LEAD: THOUGHTS OF GOOD HEALTH ALMOST made me hit a jogger as I was bowling along in my pollution-driven compact, savoring the bouquet exuded by the burning leaf of my panatela as it wafted across the parkway.
I had deftly engergized the power steering to miss, narrowly, collision with a bicycle.
Joggers, cyclists, couples munching organic greenery on the sward - devotion to good health,


Belgium's Answer to Quiche: Pungent Cheese Tarts
LEAD: OLD cheese, old recipe, old Belgian town.
Fermented cheese is the pungent main ingredient used in tarte al djote, which was concocted about 950 years ago in Nivelles, in southern Brabant Wallonia.


Duck Conservation Plan Limits Hunting Season
LEAD: A sharply curtailed hunting season for ducks went into effect today in New York and the rest of the Northeast as part of a continent-wide effort to overcome a dramatic decline in the duck population of North America.


Algerian Troops Again Fire on Protesters in Capital
LEAD: Troops opened fire on a crowd outside a mosque in eastern Algiers today and used tear gas in the center of the city to disperse youths shouting slogans against President Chadli Benjedid.


Syracuse Offense Flattens Rutgers
LEAD: Scott Erney, the Rutgers quarterback, had well-earned credentials.
Todd Philcox, his Syracuse counterpart, was a role-player, a senior with promise.
But Philcox, aided by a stronger supporting cast, emerged as the hero today in a marvelous quarterbacks' game at the Carrier Dome before a capacity crowd of 48,798.


Debt and Dirt
LEAD: To the Editor:


Aikman Leads U.C.L.A., 38-21
LEAD: Troy Aikman passed for 288 yards and 4 touchdowns as U.C.L.A. struggled to a 38-21 victory over Oregon State tonight in a Pacific-10 Conference game.


Big Night Nears for Season Openers
LEAD: THE ides of October are coming, and with them a barrage of season openers.
Among the orchestras that will begin their seasons on Saturday are the Greenwich, Ridgefield, Stamford and Waterbury Symphonies.


Pollution? Many Varieties of Fish Are Safe to Eat
LEAD: THE problems of ocean pollution were brought close to home - right to the beaches - this summer.
As a result, consumers have been asking questions about the fish and shellfish on sale in retail shops and restaurants.
Is it safe to eat?
At a time when consumption of fish is on the increase, largely for health reasons, should one stop eating it, also for health reasons?


U.S. Challenges Claims on Toothpaste and Mouthwash Labels
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration has asked six toothpaste and mouthwash manufacturers to remove from labels assertions that the products prevent gum disease and plaque buildup, spokesmen for the Federal agency said today.


U.S. Is Urged to Halt Sale of Rifles to Guatemala
LEAD: A group of senators and House members responsible for overseeing foreign aid programs are urging the State Department to halt a $13.8 million sale of American arms to Guatemala, contending that the sale represents a significant and troubling shift in United States policy.


'Paul Robeson' to Close
LEAD: ''Paul Robeson,'' a drama by Phillip Hayes Dean about the life of the black actor and singer, will close after the matinee today at the John Golden Theater, 245 West 45th Street.
The play, directed by Harold Scott and starring Avery Brooks, will have run for five previews and 11 regular performances.


Jets' Defense Is Up for Review
LEAD: Pass-rushing, run-stopping, and fumble-causing: the New York Jets' defense?


BY FITNESS OBSESSED
LEAD: I ONCE MET AN ULTRAMARATHONER who said he fights boredom on his runs by overtaking anyone ahead of him, no matter how painful the task.
At the time, I thought such behavior a bit odd, perhaps more an obsession with fitness than a tactic for achieving it.
A few months later, I was working out on a rowing machine and found myself losing badly in a silent race with a man next to me.


Debris Is Cleaned From Maine Coastal Areas
LEAD: Maine's beaches are a bit cleaner today thanks to the efforts of about 1,200 people who collected 13,000 pounds of garbage that had been dumped at 60 coastal locations.


Knicks to Use Oakley as Top Rebounder
LEAD: Charles Oakley pushed several Knicks in gray shirts out of the way, bulled his way to the basket, snapped up the defensive rebound and tossed the outlet pass to Gerald Wilkins, who went flying to the basket.


The Rarest of Them All
LEAD: Autumn hues prevail in jewelry made by Kris Perry from Baiting Hollow, L.I.
She gathers fossils and sets them in silver to make pendants, bracelets and other items.


THE HARD RIDE OF WILLY T.
LEAD: IT'S A SCORCHING SATURDAY AFTERNOON IN DETROIT, the temperature in the 90's.
On the streets surrounding the city's downtown Renaissance Center, 50,000 sweltering fans strain against the fencing as only a few feet away two race cars scream by at upwards of 150 miles per hour.
Nearing the finish, the Escort Trans-Am has been a remarkable race.


Jan M. Decker Marries Christopher S. McCormick
LEAD: Jan Marie Decker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin D. Decker of West Redding, Conn., was married last evening to Christopher Sawbridge McCormick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert McCormick of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard M. Cromie performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Fort


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Many of the double-hung windows in my house need to have the putty replaced around the outside.
Since each window has 12 panes, I thought of using a caulking gun to speed the job, but my dealer says that only glazing compound should be used.
Someone suggested using silicone caulking.
Do you know if this can be used instead of glazing compound around each pane?


Top Earner in South Korea: Owner of Tear Gas Company
LEAD: A woman who heads a tear gas company earned more money than anybody else in South Korea last year, the result of a surge in violent protests, tax officials said today.


Mary Dunn Shafter Is Wed
LEAD: At St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in Darien, Conn., Mary Dunn Shafter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Shafter of New Canaan, Conn., and Peru, Vt., was married yesterday to James Thomas Sullivan.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Sullivan of Bristol and Old Saybrook, Conn.


Question of the Week; What Did You Think Of the Seoul Olympics?
LEAD: After a few days of watching the Olympics, my 7-year-old daughter said, ''I wish the games were on Channel 13 so there would be no advertising.''


Wolfe and Tolstoy
LEAD: To the Editor:


5 Girls Killed as Car Jumps Sidewalk    The police said alcohol was not involved. (AP)


Asterisk Needed
LEAD: OLYMPIC officials and international track authorities have made their decision.
But the editors of the Guinness Book of Records are their own authority and they are deciding whether to recognize Ben Johnson's 100-meter Olympic time of 9.79 seconds as a world record.


NANCY DREW GETS REAL
LEAD: Nancy Drew - the prim teen-age detective with golden curly hair and proper dresses - always got her man.
The new Nancy Drew - the modish sleuth with lush blond hair and designer jeans - still gets her man, but now she eyes high school boys as well as criminals.
Nancy Drew a flirt?
Not exactly, but since the remade Nancy appeared two years ago, she has lost her


THE DISC JOCKEYS
LEAD: ON THE PLAYING FIELDS OF St.
John's Seminary in Boston, the sounds of the softball players ''Second base, second base!'' ''Hold up!
Hold up!'' are loud and clear.
There are other sounds, equally crisp, equally urgent, but a lot quieter: ''Lead, lead,'' ''Up, up, up!'' They are the sounds of Ultimate


15 Years for Biting Guard
LEAD: A prisoner carrying the AIDS virus received a 15-year prison sentence Friday for biting a guard who later tested negative for the disease.
Judge Henry W. Blizzard of state Circuit Court also sentenced the prisoner, Adam Brock, to 10 years for assaulting guards with a padlock.
The additional sentences were added to the prisoner's 13-year sentence for robbery.


Performances at Branch of Whitney Museum
LEAD: A performance on Nov. 2 at 7:30 P.M. by Amina Claudine Myers and David Peaston, composers and musicians, will begin a free five-part series of events at the Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris, 120 Park Avenue, at 42d Street.


Breaking the Rules To Make a Corner An Urban Event
LEAD: Maybe the best test of a good architect is his or her ability to break the rules and get away with it.
The triumphant example of this right now in New York is the skyscraper nearing completion on the northwest corner of 57th Street and Lexington Avenue, known as 135 East 57th Street.
In an age when architects, planners and critics alike have been saying that the first law of urban design is Always Hold the Street Line - which means put your building right out at the sidewalk instead of behind one of those dreary concrete plazas - this new tower is set back, far back, from the corner.


FACING YOUR OWN MORTALITY
LEAD: ANNA ENGQUIST HAD JUST turned 80.
Four hundred friends and relatives gathered at a ''This Is Your Life, Anna'' party at Elim Evangelical Lutheran Church in Scandia, Minn., to celebrate her indomitable spirit and dedication to the community.
Barely a week after this glorious event Anna learned she had ovarian cancer and would need major surgery.


Wiffle Ball is Getting Serious
LEAD: STANDING on what usually is second base in a Little League game, the batter digs in while the pitcher, his back to the regular home plate, fires in his pitch from the mound, about 33 feet away.
It is a pitch that would make Phil Niekro and Hoyt Wilhelm, two of baseball's greatest knuckleball pitchers, green with envy.


A SISTER'S NEED
LEAD: Like Margaret Moorman, I needed to move 3,000 miles to escape the enormous pain and sense of responsibility that I felt growing up with a schizophrenic sister two years younger than myself (''A Sister's Need,'' Sept. 11).


Selling A Home: Hard Work If You Can Get It
LEAD: WHEN my wife and I decided to sell our home, we did not realize the time and energy involved.
It seemed simple; you list it and sell it.
The first step was to find a broker.
We decided to list with an agency near our home.


Taking a Short Break Abroad
LEAD: These days a remark about going to the country for the weekend could well prompt the question: Which country?


Season Marked By New Plays
LEAD: A WOMAN plans to create a new room in her basement, until her long-lost, apocalypse-fearing husband returns, intent on turning it into a bomb shelter.


GIJON CAPER: PICKING THE WORLD'S BEST MYSTERY
LEAD: ''Writers are the least qualified to judge literary prizes,'' the French novelist Didier Daeninck told me last June, as we sampled stuffed olives and calamares aboard Al Andaluz, the opulent Victorian flagship of the Spanish rail line. ''They are too jealous.''


Inexpensive and Intriguing Thai
LEAD: IF you are in the mood for Thai ood, head for Bangkok Jansom in Bridgeport, the latest in the upsurge of Connecticut restaurants featuring the spicy cuisine of Thailand.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I find this city the same as before, the same dead, massacred people on the streets.''  - Judge Pietro Grasso  of Palermo, Sicily,  on renewal of Mafia violence.  [ 1:4. ]


PTL Buyer Is Open to Talks About Bakkers' Use of Assets
LEAD: Stephen J. Mernick, the Canadian developer who bought the assets of the PTL ministry this week, said today that he is keeping all options open about their future use.


Anti-Semitic Letter in Suffolk Race Draws Apology
LEAD: The Conservative Party chairman of Suffolk County apologized Friday for an unsigned letter sent to some party members that urged the defeat of two candidates for judgeships because they are Jewish.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Chips May Fall, But Don't Bet on It


THE GIRL WHO STOPPED FEELING NOTHING
LEAD:  A DEADLY SILENCE  The Ordeal of Cheryl Pierson:  A Case of Incest and Murder.
By Dena Kleiman.
Illustrated. 305 pp.
New York:  The Atlantic Monthly Press. $19.95.


STREETSCAPES: The High Bridge Water Tower; Fire-Damaged Landmark To Get $900,000 Repairs
LEAD: SINCE 1872, the High Bridge Water Tower, on the Manhattan cliffs at 174th Street, has dominated the Harlem River Valley.
But the granite landmark has been a civic embarrassment - visible from several major highways - since its peaked roof caved in after a fire in 1984.


Q and A
LEAD:  Primary Residence


On Making Recycling Work in Westchester
LEAD: Back in February, Westchester County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke submitted a token comprehensive recycling plan to the state Department of Environmental Conservation in order to meet its requirements so that the county's request to increase the tons burned at the Charles Point incinerator from 657,000 tons to 740,000 tons would be considered.


Deidra D. Dain Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Deidra Depew Dain, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry P. Dain 3d of Garrison, N.Y., and Michael Scott Sottosanti, the son of Joseph Sottosanti of Luray, Va., and the late Jacqueline Clague Sottosanti, were married yesterday at St.
Philip's Episcopal Church-in-the-Highlands in Garrison.


Yale Trounced By Army, 33-18
LEAD: On a field soaked by rain, Mike Mayweather ran for 155 yards and Ben Barnett for 92 as Army rolled over Yale, 33-18, before 17,898 fans at the Yale Bowl today.


The Crime Of Losing
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Two Major Series Open This Month
LEAD: TWO major series get under way this month as the Grande Band of New York opens the Sleepy Hollow Concerts in Tarrytown and the Westchester Symphony begins its season at the State University of New York at Purchase.


Margaret Greer, Consultant, Wed To S. B. Carr Jr.
LEAD: At the Washington Episcopal Cathedral, Margaret Weyerhaeuser Greer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Greer Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday to Samuel Baldwin Carr Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carr of Milton, Mass.
Canon Charles S. Martin performed the ceremony.


Musical 'Drood' Enlists the Audience
LEAD: THE intensity and passion in the writings of Charles Dickens make his work especially suitable to the stage.


Now the Rights Groups Take On Aquino
LEAD: International human-rights groups whose criticism helped fuel opposition to Ferdinand E. Marcos three years ago are now taking to task his successor, President Corazon C. Aquino, for allowing many abuses to continue.


Debatemanship
LEAD: THE LATIN ROOT for the word &gt;debate is the same as that for &gt;battle: &gt;battuere, ''to beat,'' as in whacking your opponent over the head.


Shelagh M. McCann Weds David Saunders in Texas
LEAD: Shelagh Marian McCann, the daughter of Annes McCann-Baker of Austin, Tex., and C. Howard McCann of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, was married in Austin last evening to David Charles Saunders, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Saunders of Manhasset, L.I.
The Rev.
Armistead Powell performed the ceremony at All Saints Episcopal


BRUINS TRIUMPH, 6-2
LEAD: Boston scored on three of its first five shots, and the defensman Ray Boruque had four assists, three in the first period, as the Boston Bruins defeated the Hartfdord Whalers, 6-2 tonight.


Highlights of the Season
LEAD: The opening of a new Jewish museum in Frankfurt, a Henry Moore show at the Royal Academy of Arts in London, a month of photography in Paris and a music festival in the Austrian capital are among the cultural highlights in Europe this fall and winter.
The following roundup is based on information from New York Times bureaus in London, Paris, Rome, Bonn and Madrid and on information gathered in New York.


Question of the Week; What Did You Think Of the Seoul Olympics?
LEAD: Jingoism is a worthy sentiment but was done to death during the Olympics.
As a visitor from England I would have appreciated one chance to have been proud of my athletes, cheered on their successes and shed my own tear during the playing of our national anthem.
It was not to be.
SHIRLEY PARDON


Taking of Shellfish Is Banned In South End of Puget Sound
LEAD: Shellfishing has been banned in southern Puget Sound because of poisoning by a naturally occurring organism.
Shellfish from the area are being pulled from store shelves in Washington, Oregon, Alaska, Hawaii, Pennsylvania, Maine and New York, officials say.


Woodbury Project Opposed
LEAD: CONCERNS over traffic congestion, air quality, esthetics and safety in Woodbury have prompted various efforts during the last few years to block commercial development on the few remaining open spaces within the community.


New York Has 4 Months to Improve Sewage Plan
LEAD: New York City has been given four months to decrease the volume of sewage flowing into its Wards Island treatment plant or face a state moratorium on new sewer hookups in the Bronx and Upper East Side neighborhoods served by the plant, city and state officials said yesterday.


Food Rule Challenged By Pupils
LEAD: When he was in the third grade, Andy Gauvin decided he wanted to be President of the United States.
Now a sixth-grader, he has had his first look at how government works.


Christopher Patusky to Wed Lerzan Kizilay in September
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Dogan Kizilay of South Orange, N.J., have made known the engagement of their daughter Lerzan Suzanne Kizilay to Christopher Patusky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley J. Patusky of Stamford, Conn.
The couple plan to marry next September.


Review/Theater; 'Sharon Shashanovah,' A Play Within a Play
LEAD: The mirrors and puppets that occupy the stage of the 47th Street Theater for ''The Legend of Sharon Shashanovah'' signal the theatergoer that yet another exercise in the merging of reality and illusion and all that may be in store.
As the puppets are replaced by actors, however, hope arises that the playwright, A.


Singer Wins G.O.P.'s Assembly Contest
LEAD: IT took something of an uprising in Republican ranks last week, but Cecile Singer, who has run Assemblyman Gordon W. Burrows's Westchester office for two decades, was selected to replace him as the Republican candidate for his 84th Assembly District seat.


High Costs Cited for AIDS 'Boarder Babies'
LEAD: Children infected with the AIDS virus are running up hospital bills of more than $90,000 each, often because they have nowhere else to go, new studies in New York and Connecticut indicate.


JAMMU HAS PLANS FOR ST. LOUIS
LEAD:  THE TWENTY-SEVENTH CITY  By Jonathan Franzen.  517 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.95.


JERSEY PREPARING PLAN ON HOMELESS
LEAD: New Jersey is preparing a program intended to get all homeless families out of welfare hotels and motels within three years, says Drew Altman, the state's Commissioner of Human Services.


Reactor Shutdown Could Impede Nuclear Deterrent, Officials Say
LEAD: Nuclear reactors at the Savannah River Plant in South Carolina, shut down since August for safety reasons, may be out of service so long that the United States will be unable to maintain all its nuclear weapons in a state of readiness, Administration officials said today.


Bush Angrily Insisting He Fully Backs Quayle
LEAD: Vice President Bush was walking back up the steps of his home after receiving the endorsement of the head of a police organization when someone called out a question about Senator Dan Quayle's much-debated performance as his running mate.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD: FOODS FOR FESTIVALS There are festivals of all kinds, of course, and this is the week of the Food Festival, when particular delicacies get special treatment from fund-raising groups.
So today, to help the Greenlawn Centerport Historical Association do its good deeds, have a pickle, or two or three, straight or in relishes.


Of Cash, Crystals and Consumerism
LEAD: ''New Age'' often conjures up the unlikely - from an awareness of past lives to reinterpretation of the energy inherent in crystals.
But despite a persistent image of hucksterism, business is discovering that the New Age movement is a growing and affluent consumer market.


Tory, Tory, Hallelujah!
LEAD: There's nothing like naked, undisguised anger to get the creative juices flowing.
In this day and age, it's far more effective than love.


Zukerman and Neikrug
LEAD: The violinist and violist Pinchas Zukerman and the pianist Marc Neikrug are to perform the complete Violin and Viola Sonatas by Brahms, on Oct. 25 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The program is to include the Scherzo in C minor and the Sonata in G, both for violin and piano, and the Sonata in F minor for viola and piano.


Congress Agrees to Ban Ocean Dumping by 1991
LEAD: The House and Senate agreed Friday to ban ocean dumping of sewage sludge after 1991, concluding a 10-year legislative effort meant to stop sewage authorities in New York and New Jersey from disposing of their treated waste in the Atlantic Ocean.


DATA BANK: October 9, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'88
I Q'88
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,988.1
$3,915.4
$3,796.0
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
3.0
3.6
2.6
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'88
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
162.7
$149.4
$136.4


ROBUST FOOD FOR THE FALL
LEAD: ON A CLEAR, CRISP AUTUMN day, it's hard to resist the urge to be outdoors, whether for a bracing run along the beach, a hike in the woods or a long walk in the city.
These invigorating activities, combined with the tonic effect of brisk fall weather, are guaranteed to bring you home ravenous for a warm, robust meal.


A Commitment to Causes
LEAD: ''He was a glorious figure,'' says his biographer, Eric Gordon. ''More than anyone, he defined American words set to American music.'' As the 25th anniversary of Marc Blitzstein's untimely death approaches, renewed interest in the composer appears to be developing.
Born in 1905 and killed 59 years later in a barroom fight on Martinique, Blitzstein was an elder contemporary of the American composers Harold Shapero, David Diamond and Leonard


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Many of the double-hung windows in my house need to have the putty replaced around the outside.
Since each window has 12 panes, I thought of using a caulking gun to speed the job, but my dealer says that only glazing compound should be used.
Someone suggested using silicone caulking.
Do you know if this can be used instead of glazing compound around each pane?


Idle Ordinance On Prostitution
LEAD: IT has been called by its sponsor ''the toughest ordinance in the land'' against prostitution.


Californian With AIDS Seeks A Law for Broader Disclosure
LEAD: On the day Paul Gann learned he had AIDS, five years after a blood transfusion, he considered leaving his wife of 56 years, his children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren and isolating himself in a desert cabin.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-25


Henry Wicke 3d Wed To Brenda L. Murphy
LEAD: The marriage of Brenda Lee Murphy, a daughter of Janet Lee Murphy of Lancaster, Pa., and Martin J. Murphy of Newport, R.I., to Henry Albion Wicke 3d, the son of Mr.
Wicke Jr. of Brooklyn and Mrs.
Lawrence Hock of Clarence, N.Y., took place yesterday in Lancaster.
The Rev.
James Lyons performed the ceremony at the Sacred Heart of Jesus Roman Catholic


Is There a Doctor In the Cabin?
LEAD: ON March 27 Prof.
Ben Bagdikian was flying home to San Francisco from New York with his wife, Marlene.
The United Airlines flight was about two hours from its destination when he experienced something he said was rare for him, intense heartburn.
He attributed it to the carrot cake, but in 20 minutes the pain did not get any better.


BEHIND BARBED WIRE
LEAD: Painful as it was to be reminded again of my three-year incarceration, I am grateful to John Hersey for writing ''Behind Barbed Wire'' (Sept. 11) with such clarity and eloquence.


In Pops Uncle
LEAD:  SHADOW OF A DOUBT  Starring Joseph Cotten and Teresa Wright (in photo).
Directed byAlfred Hitchcock.
MCA Home Video.  108 minutes. $29.95.
Not rated.


Racing on Long Island Sound
LEAD: Long Island Sound has a reputation for light winds in summer.
But in the fall, the breeze picks up and provides a more kindly environment for sailboat racing.


Friendly Help On Capitol Hill
LEAD: A PORTION of United States aid to Jamaica was reported being blocked in Congress in March because of a property dispute between the Jamaican Government and a friend of Representative Charles Wilson of Texas.


Top Recruit Feels Pressure
LEAD: Peter Fortay worries about his son, Bryan.
He worries when Bryan is told by men twice his age that he's a better high school quarterback than John Elway was.
He worries when college coaches guarantee Bryan a starting position as a freshman.
He worries when Bryan is mentioned as a 1992 Heisman Trophy candidate.


Review/Recital; Violin-Piano Duet Bill
LEAD: Place often has a way of setting the musical tone of an evening.
Thus Weill Recital Hall - newly elegant and with its acoustical rough edges now smoothed over - seemed to frame and contain Friday's evening of violin and piano music to the proper scale.
The music was the Beethoven Sonata in A from Op.


TRANSACTIONS
LEAD:  FRIDAY  Baseball


Meredith Young Weds in Virginia
LEAD: At the Rock Spring Congregational Church in McLean, Va., Meredith Coe Young, the daughter of Capt.
Alfred A. Young, U.S.N., retired, and Mrs.
Young of McLean, was married yesterday to Matthew Anatole Baratz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton S. Baratz of Locust Grove, Va.
The Rev.
Richard L. Dodds performed the ceremony.


Prehung Interior Doors
LEAD: AMATEURS are sometimes discouraged from performing certain remodeling projects because of the prospect of having to replace or install doors.


State Is Consulted On Radon Program
LEAD: NEW JERSEY is at the center of a whirl of information swapping among states grappling with setting up radon control programs.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Elizabeth  $110,000  625 Meadow Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; hardwood floors, den, formal dining room; taxes $2,400.
Maplewood  $170,000  6 Rynda Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; screened porch, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,358.


Plan to Raze Chernobyl Is Criticized by Pravda
LEAD: Pravda reported today that officials are planning to demolish the town of Chernobyl, near the site of the nuclear accident in 1986, but the newspaper criticized the plan and said people should be allowed to gradually return to their homes.


THE WORLD: Western Europe; Soviet Bloc's Neighbors Seek a Grip On Unrest
LEAD: WESTERN European governments have long nourished deep sympathy for Eastern Europeans living under Communist rule.
But this feeling has often been overlaid by a guilty sense that little could be - or perhaps even should be -done to tinker with a division of the continent that has coincided with more than four decades of peace.


TALKING: Contracts; Getting Out Of a Deal On a Home
LEAD: ALTHOUGH a contract to buy a home usually lets a buyer withdraw without penalty if there is a recognized difficulty - a structural fault, say, or failure to get financing - occasions do arise when a buyer may need to back out for other reasons.


Sharon K. Faath and Michael Fremer Are Married
LEAD: Sharon Keyes Faath, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry W. Faath Jr. of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Alan Fremer, the son of Samuel Fremer of North Miami Beach, Fla., and the late Florence H. Fremer, at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis R. Coleman, friends of the couple, in Allendale, N


Rebounding From Scandal, Ex-Official Will Lead Bonn's 3d Party
LEAD: Otto Lambsdorff, the eloquent and abrasive former Economics Minister who left the Cabinet four years ago in a political-payoff scandal, concluded a triumphant comeback today by winning election as chairman of the Free Democratic Party, the small but influential liberal member of the West German governing coalition.


'Madame Sousatzka' Strikes a Chord
LEAD: Films about musicians?
Plenty, ever since Harry Baur played Beethoven in the 1930's.
Through films have paraded Chopin, Liszt, Schumann, Clara Schumann, Brahms, Berlioz, Tchaikovsky, Delius, Wagner, Mahler, you name it.
Most of those films has one thing in common.
They were awful.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  The Furious Itch of Novelty


YUGOSLAV POLICE FIGHT OFF A SIEGE IN PROVINCIAL CITY
LEAD: Riot policemen using truncheons and cattle prods today broke up a crowd that had besieged the Parliament building of the republic of Montenegro, in southern Yugoslavia, since Friday.


Eagle Rookie Tight End Not a Follower
LEAD: Keith Jackson has an irresistible penchant for going against the grain.
When someone asks why, the Philadelphia Eagles' rookie tight end just shrugs and says he's been that way for as long as he can remember.


FICTION
LEAD:  A VOID IN HEARTS.
By William G. Tapply. (Scribners, $16.95.) If you're a fan of Spenser's Boston beat and first-person narration, but your tolerance for catalogues of laps, reps, exquisite manly repasts and wardrobe details has flagged, give William G. Tapply's Brady Coyne a try.
A Copley Square lawyer who, with refreshing misgivings, occasionally deserts trusts for freelance detection, Coyne is neither knight-errant nor cool professional.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A restaurant review on Sept. 11 about the Water's Edge in Cape May gave the area code incorrectly.
The restaurant's number is (609) 884-1717.


Bringing Dormant Assets Back to Life
LEAD: Billions of dollars' worth of dormant assets lay unclaimed or are overlooked around the country, a treasure trove that experts say is growing at the rate of $1 billion a year.


Folk Art Makes Space for the Doodle
LEAD: Penmanship flourished in 19th-century America, producing thousands of disciplined doodlers.
Many who mastered the swirled lines and swept curves of Spencerian script went on to adapt their cursive skills to drawing.
Some of the florid images that resulted are among the drawings on view in ''They Worked in Ink,'' an exhibition and sale at Hirschl &amp; Adler Folk, 851 Madison Avenue, through


Question of the Week; What Did You Think Of the Seoul Olympics?
LEAD: I feel the gains of the Olympics far outweigh the bad and the ugly aspects.
The greatest benefit is the chance to see the rigors and the wonders of the lesser-known sports, to appreciate the dedication of time, energy and finances that so many athletes put into endeavors that they know will never repay them in anything but their own satisfaction.


Postal Service Bars Texas Concern From Contracts
LEAD: The Postal Service said Friday that it had suspended a Texas concern from bidding on contracts pending the outcome of a case in which the concern and two of its top executives are charged with attempting to rig postal contracts.


The Big New Pitch for Old Ads
LEAD: The year is 1931.
Millions of Americans are without work, President Hoover is powerless to stem the darkening Depression - and the country is suddenly beset by the dread specter of ''toilet tissue illness.''


Where Did All the Animals Go?
LEAD: THE lawn in our backyard resembles an unkempt head of hair.
Its owners eschew expensive styles, unpronounceable chemicals and trendy designs.
Instead, we give it a basic, no-nonsense cut once a week.
The grass is abundant and healthy, but it is far from the immaculate turf that graces the fairways of golf courses or the front yards of yuppie homes.


Film Festival; Social Realist Fable of 1930's China
LEAD: ''Red Sorghum,'' Zhang Yimou's new Chinese film, begins very prettily, and with something of the ho-ho-ho joviality exhibited by the members of the chorus in a stock production of ''The Student Prince.''


Sentiment, History Fade But a Fir Still Stands
LEAD: THE drone of a bulldozer, leveling all that once was, sounds like a mourner.
Clouds of dust rise from the rubble in seeming protest, reaching for the sun, or maybe heaven.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Master Store Leases in Co-ops; Buildings and Investors Profit in Retail-Space Deals
LEAD: IRVING SUTTON has trouble finding storefront buildings to buy in New York City these days, so, like a small but growing number of other real estate investors, he is buying control of retail space in co-op apartment buildings.


Pollution? Many Varieties of Fish Are Safe to Eat
LEAD: THE problems of ocean pollution were brought close to home - right to the beaches - this summer.
As a result, consumers have been asking questions about the fish and shellfish on sale in retail shops and restaurants.
Is it safe to eat?
At a time when consumption of fish is on the increase, largely for health reasons, should one stop eating it, also for health reasons?


Finding Love Among the Ruins
LEAD: IF HE LEAVES ONE more dirty coffee cup lying under the bed, I think I'm going to lose my mind,'' says my friend Monica.
She and Jack have been married only a couple of months, but she tells me that the honeymoon is over. ''I'm married to the slob,'' she laments.


Correction
LEAD: An obituary of Serge Jaroff was published in error yesterday.
A memorial service is to be held today at 4 P.M. at Protection of the Holy Virgin Cathedral, 59 East Second Street, for Mr.
Jaroff, who died in 1985.


Agency Fines Pool Company
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency says it has fined a pool supply company more than $100,000 for failing to notify agencies of a chlorine fire that routed 25,000 people from homes and businesses in June.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Yachting


New Jersey Q &amp; A:Robert R. Herb; Running Bergen County's Jail
LEAD: HIS is a jail repeatedly criticized by the state for its continued violence and overcrowding, where the prison population has nearly peaked at 1,000 in a facility originally designed to hold 395.


Review/Pop; Songs of Love by Vandross and Baker
LEAD: Two of pop's most luxurious voices were on display Wednesday at Madison Square Garden, where the national tour featuring Luther Vandross and Anita Baker started a four-night engagement.
It's a perfect pairing.
Mr.
Vandross and Ms.
Baker are gifted singers and love-song specialists; each has sold millions of albums of plushly produced ballads, sultry mood music for consenting adults.


The Stay-At-Home Path to Fitness
LEAD: THE flow of people to health clubs and gymnasiums in pursuit of physical fitness has developed a side stream.
More and more are staying home to train, with the help of professional instructors.
The state representative for the International Dance/Exercise Association, Mikki Williams of Westport, said at-home training was a booming industry, growing at a rate of 15 to 20 percent a year, especially in Fairfield and New Haven


Anderson Is Wrong
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


TWO CHEERS FOR $5 OIL
LEAD: As the price for crude oil slid below $10 a barrel in the spot market last week and OPEC officials warned that it could sink to $5, an uneasy sense of deja vu pervaded the world.
The sharp decline stirred memories of the price plunge that occurred in 1986, sending economic shock waves through oil-producing regions, including the American


Corrections
LEAD: The bidding is rendered incorrectly for the displayed hand in the Bridge column on page 77 today.
The correct sequence of bidding is:  [ diagram ]


Amputee Prepares for Sports Media in Seoul
LEAD: FINISHING ninth in a mini-triathlon field of 160 is an outstanding accomplishment.
For Jim Henry of Windham, that is an amazing feat.


THE REGION: After the Grand Jury; What Happened to Tawana Brawley's Case - And to Attitudes About Race and Justice
LEAD: WITH a grand jury's report that Tawana Brawley was not kidnapped, raped and abused by a gang of white men last year, the New York State authorities closed the book Thursday on a tortuous and divisive investigation.
In seven months, the grand jury said, it had found no evidence to support accusations by the teen-ager and by her family's advisers, but did find witnesses' accounts and forensic evidence that contradicted them.


A Few Common Backyard Problems Are Solved
LEAD: KEEP up with planting, especially evergreens; tamp the earth gently afterward with your feet to be sure roots contact soil; water in well.
Start leaf raking so grass is not smothered, particularly on new lawns that have been seeded or sodded.
Continue planting bulbs, especially smaller ones.
Postpone pruning of shade trees until late winter.


Miss Clendenin, Richard Kolosky Exchange Vows
LEAD: Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Chapel in Queens Village, Queens, was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Christine Ann Clendenin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael C. Clendenin of New York, to Richard John Kolosky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald R. Kolosky of Peekskill, N.Y.
The Rev.
Peter V.


Does Bottle Policy Need Revamping?
LEAD: Congratulations to Deborah O'Keefe for addressing the bottle and can recycling issue  [ ''Bottle Law: When Can Becomes Can't,'' Opinion Page, Sept. 18 ]  .
It is a subject about which I have been writing in my head for months.
Mrs.
O'Keefe has covered most of the major frustrations of the process, but I would like to expand on the subject further.


HER MISTAKES WERE BEAUTS
LEAD:  MARIE ANTOINETTE  By Joan Haslip.
Illustrated. 306 pp.
New York:  Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $19.95.


Wolfe and Tolstoy
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Evidence of Poison Is Found on Candy
LEAD: Federal officials have been unable to confirm a New Jersey prosecutor's report that white powder found on a piece of candy was the poisonous substance strychnine.


Eiffel Tower Workers on Strike
LEAD: The 70 employees at the Eiffel Tower went on strike today for higher pay, preventing tourists from entering.
The employees, who make $4.55 an hour, want a raise of about 31 cents.


Bonna L. Horovitz Is Wed To Joel Steven Finkelstein
LEAD: Bonna Lynn Horovitz and Joel Steven Finkelstein, both lawyers, were married yesterday evening at the Princeton (N.J.) Jewish Center by Rabbi Melvin J. Glazer and Cantor Robert Friedman.


On Campus, the Millenium
LEAD: Game after game, season after season, they lost.


Columbia Wins! That's Right, Wins!
LEAD: The end came for Columbia yesterday.
The 44-game losing streak and the five years of no-win situations became history in the wake of a 16-13 triumph over Princeton that spread championship-like joy throughout Lawrence A. Wien Stadium at Baker Field.


Behind Geneva's Reclusive Facade
LEAD: GENEVA, the city Voltaire called ''proud, noble, wealthy and sly,'' is difficult to get to know.
Behind a seemingly impregnable fortress of luxury hotels and international organizations, the Genevese see little reason to flaunt their accomplishments.
Under Calvin, they developed a Protestantism that spread throughout the globe and made Geneva the intellectual center of Protestant Europe.


Pollution? Many Varieties of Fish Are Safe to Eat
LEAD: THE problems of ocean pollution were brought close to home - right to the beaches - this summer.
As a result, consumers have been asking questions about the fish and shellfish on sale in retail shops and restaurants.
Is it safe to eat?
At a time when consumption of fish is on the increase, largely for health reasons, should one stop eating it, also for health reasons?


THE CONSERVATIVE WORD
LEAD:  COLUMN RIGHT  Conservative Journalists in  the Service of Nationalism.
By David Burner and  Thomas R. West.  115 pp.
New York:  New York University Press.


WHEN TO CHALLENGE THE THERAPIST -- AND WHY
LEAD: FR ANYONE UNDERGOING PSYCHOTHERAPY, the question is inevitable.
Is it working?
When symptoms linger, or problems that seemed gone reappear, or doubts arise about the therapist, it's natural to wonder.
Is it time to switch therapists?
Or is the treatment, in fact, working to the extent it can?
And is the pain that persists essentially what everyone must suffer from time to time?


Israelis Find Polio Virus in Sewage of 4 More Cities
LEAD: Active polio viruses have been discovered in sewage and a water purification plant in four more Israeli cities, bringing the total number of infected areas to nine, Israel Radio said today.


Motivate the Voters
LEAD: To the Editor:


A.N.C. Leaders Meet Indians
LEAD: Leaders of the African National Congress are meeting with representatives of South Africa's large Indian minority to discuss ways of ending apartheid, organizers said today.
Spokesmen for the Natal Indian Congress and the Transvaal Indian Congress, the two main groups meeting here, said the talks would explore the Indian minority's role in apartheid.


Estonians Find Little to Like in Russian 'Migrants'
LEAD: In the Estonian university city of Tartu, the authorities were told recently, the medical emergency service sometimes refuses to send an ambulance if the caller asks for help in Russian rather than Estonian.


Lynch Is 3d in Cross-Country
LEAD: Although she failed to defend her Eastern States Cross Country Championships in the chilly rain at Van Cortlandt Park yesterday, Nnenna Lynch did not blame the weather for her third-place finish.


Dropping Like Flies
LEAD: THERE is $700,000 up for grabs, but you had to go all the way to Australia to get a piece of it, and for some ailing top tennis professionals, the Australian Indoor Open, which started in Brisbane yesterday, was apparently not worth the trip.
First, Ivan Lendl bowed out citing injury, and joined the native son, Pat Cash, on the ailment list.


THE HAVES, THE HAVE-NOTS AND THE HAVE-SOMEWHATS
LEAD:  THE GREAT DIVIDE  Second Thoughts on the American Dream.
By Studs Terkel.  439 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $18.95.


A Surprising Chance for Democracy in Haiti
LEAD: WHEN Lieut.
Gen.
Prosper Avril assumed power in Haiti three weeks ago, American officials said there was no reason to expect him to show more respect for democratic principles than his predecessor, who came to power in a military coup in June.


A Playwright Muses on the Artist's Calling
LEAD: Richard Foreman has always been generous in discussing his work - a body of plays that, over the years since he founded the Ontological-Hysteric Theater in 1968, has moved and perplexed audiences both here and abroad.


Jennifer Weksler, Architect, Weds
LEAD: At the Philadelphia Art Alliance, Jennifer Lee Weksler, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Marc E. Weksler of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher David Keller, a son of Robert A. Keller 3d of Atlanta and Helen Praeger Young of Beijing.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  AT CENTURY'S TURN


Explosions Kill Four At Ammunition Plant
LEAD: Four workers were killed Friday when a fire and explosions destroyed an ammunition manufacturing company.


Question of the Week; What Did You Think Of the Seoul Olympics?
LEAD: As a 14-year-old viewing my first Olympics, I was very disappointed.
Sure, it had some moments but when I think of the Seoul Games, I will think of Ben Johnson's disqualification, the Alexandar Hristov bout, and the boxer Roy Jones being robbed of a gold medal in favor of a local hero.
In my opinion, these Olympics were nothing short of a disgrace.


Homicidal Passion As National Pastime
LEAD: This is the week when mystery lovers brew their tea at extra strength in pleasurable anticipation of the 34 hours of recreational murder and mischief promised by PBS for its ninth season of ''Mystery!'' Designed to have those teacups rattling in their saucers is the season opener from Anglia Television, ''Cause Celebre,'' a two-part dramatization of a sensational crime that occurred between the wars in a small resort town, but which scandalized the whole of England at the time.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  VETERANS' BENEFIT  Salute to Vietnam Veterans, a benefit concert Saturday at 7:30 P.M. in the Meadowlands Arena, will bring together seven of the top male singers of the 1960's.


Mercedes Sosa: A Voice of Hope
LEAD: When Mercedes Sosa sings of the pain of exile, the fear of political persecution or the joy of witnessing democracy restored, as she has done on five continents for more than 30 years, she is not parroting someone else's words.
Above all, she is recounting her own experience and that of millions of Latin


Why Summerfare Summers Will End So Soon
LEAD: The Pepsico Summerfare will die next summer, 10 years after it began.
The festival has been a cold shower in the July heat - asking summer dozers to wake up, think and feel, even if the feelings are uncomfortable and the thoughts a little jarring.


Sudan Halts Locust Spraying, Blaming Ethiopian Air Raids
LEAD: The Sudan says it has stopped trying to control a locust plague along the Ethiopian border because of Ethiopian air attacks.


Sills to Be Feted
LEAD: Bevery Sills, the general director of the New York City Opera, is to be honored as a ''Friend of the Arts'' by the Town Hall Foundation next Sunday at 7 P.M. at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street.
Festivities are to begin with a concert of ''Songs of the American Musical Theater'' sung by Earl Wrightson and Lois Hunt.


A 'House' Divided, Again
LEAD: The outlook in the last month of the election is that the Republicans will retain the Presidency, the Democrats will control both houses of Congress and the country will face four more years of divided Government.


Brasher Paintings of American Birds in Storrs Exhibit
LEAD: REX BRASHER was an ornothologist and an artist who combined his two passions in a collection of 874 paintings of North American birds.
Fifty paintings from the collection, which was purchased by Connecticut in 1960, are on exhibit through Oct. 24 at the Connecticut State Museum of Natural History in


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended Sept. 24  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill  $880,000  16 East 96th Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; dining room, 2 fireplaces, Central Park view; maintenance $1,250, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Chelsea


Vernon Township Journal; Questions Linger After Zoning Settlement
LEAD: FOR four years, Heidi Hyland has given her best efforts to opposing a zoning variance that permitted expansion of facilities for satellite communications at an earth station in her residential neighborhood here.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bayport  $162,000  79 Stephen Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 23-year-old ranch; breakfast room, den, patio, family room, pool; taxes $2,800.
Hauppauge  $200,000  18 Wenwood Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20- year-old ranch; basement, decks, 0.5 acre, 1-car garage; taxes $2,700.


KEEP SILLINESS LEGAL
LEAD: DAVE BARRY'S GREATEST HITS  By Dave Barry.  287 pp. New York:  Crown Publishers.


Special Today; The Good Health Magazine/Magazine, Part 2
LEAD:  Special reports today include:  *
Revolutionary heart treatment: stopping attacks before damage is done.  *
Exploding the myth about teen-age gloom.  *
Facing your own mortality.


HOW TO LOWER YOUR CHOLESTEROL
LEAD: CHOLESTEROL IS A SOFT, waxy substance made in the liver that is essential to the body, but if too much circulates in the blood it can build up as plaque on artery walls, increasing the risk of heart disease and stroke.


Syria and Iran Alerted U.S. to Hostage Release
LEAD: Administration officials said today that both Syria and Iran sent a series of messages before the release of an Indian hostage in Lebanon suggesting that American hostages would be freed.


SELLING ADVENTURES TO THE PAST: PYRAMIDS AND PERU
LEAD: As those intrigued by New Age philosophies accumulate leisure time and spending money, they are dabbling in spiritual healing, rebirthing, past-life regression therapy and traveling around the world.
This has created tourist hot spots in such places as Machu Picchu, the ancient Incan city in the mountains of Peru, and the holy city of Lhasa in Tibet.


GULF TALKS STALL OVER A WATERWAY
LEAD: Iran and Iraq remain seriously divided over the future of a strategic waterway, according to United Nations officials and diplomats close to the latest round of negotiations, which ended here earlier this week.


New York Is Seen Nearing Its Debt Limit
LEAD: Thirteen years after New York City's fiscal crisis, a new financial squeeze is developing: the city, raising billions of dollars to repair its deteriorating public works, is in danger of borrowing more than it can afford to repay, the Koch administration says.


W.G. Roche Wed To Lisa Connors
LEAD: Lisa Mary Connors, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Joseph Connors of Plandome, L.I., was married yesterday to William Gilbert Roche, a son of Maurice William Roche of Stamford, Conn., and the late Dolores Roche.
The Rev.
Ronald G. Connors, Bishop Coadjutor of San Juan de la Maguana in the Dominican Republic, and a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.


A City Reclaims Its Celebrated Son n
LEAD: DURING this week and next weekend, the playwright Eugene O'Neill is being honored in New London - a city where he was known for much of his life (1888-1953), but not always honored.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about an agreement by President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire to visit South Africa misstated the history of such visits by black African national leaders.
Mr.
Mobutu's would not be the first; President Hastings Kamuzu Banda of


FICTION
LEAD:  THE TELLING OF LIES.
By Timothy Findley. (Delta, Paper, $7.95.) As he demonstrated some 20 years ago in ''The Last of the Crazy People,'' the Canadian novelist Timothy Findley is an expert at using a crime story as the nucleus of a serious book.
In ''The Telling of Lies,'' the initial crime involves the murder of an odious pharmaceutical magnate.


BENTSEN KEEPS UP ATTACK ON QUAYLE
LEAD: Charging that the Republicans were trying to ''run away'' from Senator Dan Quayle since last week's Vice-Presidential debate, Senator Lloyd Bentsen predicted today that the Democratic campaign would focused on him ''more and more'' in coming weeks.


WHAT FATHER SAID
LEAD:  THE LETTER LEFT TO ME  By Joseph McElroy.  152 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.


IF YOU'RE THINKING OF LIVING IN: Deer Park
LEAD: WHEN Gerald and Rosaline Dunn went house hunting on Long Island 19 years ago, they looked for a neighborhood that was affordable, that had low taxes and that was a good place to raise a family.


A Valley for All Seasons
LEAD: THE VALTELLINA, a ribbon of green between two Alpine ranges, stretches about 60 miles east of the northern tip of Lake Como.
The peaks that tower behind its slopes are among Europe's tallest.
Rising up from the valley floor are ancient vineyards, first laid out by Ligurians and Etruscans.
Once part of the Roman province of Rhaetia, the Valtellina continues to produce the wines celebrated by Vergil, Pliny and Strabo, and much appreciated by Caesar Augustus.


Seeking a Law To Fight Obesity
LEAD: REPRESENTATIVE Gary L. Ackerman weighed 286 pounds when he decided action was needed:


BEHIND BARBED WIRE
LEAD: Following the devastation of our Pacific fleet at Pearl Harbor, the Pacific Coast was hysterical over an invasion threat, to a degree that is almost impossible to understand 47 years later.
Japanese troops did invade the Aleutian Islands; a Japanese balloon bomb did land in Oregon; a few shells were lobbed onto the


Caroline M. Kirby Wed To Scribner Van Ingen
LEAD: Caroline Mary Kirby, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Edgar George Kirby of Greenwich, Conn., and Joseph Scribner Van Ingen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Terrell Van Ingen Jr. of Greenwich, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Richard Van Wely performed the ceremony at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church in


Steeples And Schnapps In Westphalia
LEAD: IN the south Munsterland town of Werne, the towering Gothic steeple of the large, light-filled Hallenkirche was restored last year.
When it was time for the reinstallation of the cross and the five-foot-high cock on top of it, the priest blessed them.
Music blared while the whole town watched as workmen climbed the narrow steeple to put the top-heavy cock back and remove the scaffolding.


Debate May Yet Prove Larger Than a Tempest In the No. 2 Spot
LEAD: IF Lloyd Bentsen won the 1988 Vice-Presidential debate here this week, as the opening rounds of local and national polls suggested, did that improve the November prospects of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis?


Donna Davidson Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Donna Lee Davidson, the daughter of Alan R. Davidson of Longboat Key, Fla., and Mrs.
William C. McPherson 3d of Rye, and Key Largo, Fla., to Richard Robert Lovely, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas D.


Vilma Bornemann Wed To Demetrios Caraley
LEAD: Vilma Mairo Bornemann, dean of studies at Barnard College, and Demetrios Caraley, the Janet H. Robb Professor of the Social Sciences and chairman of the department of political science at Barnard, were married yesterday at the nondenominational St.
Paul's Chapel of Columbia University.
The Rev.
William F.


AMERASIAN INFLUX EXPECTED BY U.S.
LEAD: The number of Amerasian children and family members coming from Vietnam to live in the United States is expected to expand from the current level of 200 to 300 monthly to 1,000 as a result of recent United States-Vietnam discussions, State Department officials directing the resettlement effort say.


BYE-BYE MY PRIVATE EYE
LEAD: Fiction, in some respects, is even more crime-ridden than life.
Consider the not-uncommon life situation in which two people have been married for some time only to find they have grown out of compatibility, let alone passion.
When this happens they can, with society's understanding nod, obtain a divorce and each go on with his or her individual life.


Next's Computer to Offer Package of Technologies
LEAD: Despite the great secrecy surrounding the Next Inc. computer, many of its basic features have already become known.
But there are still expected to be some surprises.


Supreme Court to Hear Case on Bandshell Noise
LEAD: New Yorkers who visit Central Park for its natural serenity and those who go there for rousing rock performances will do battle by proxy next February, when the United States Supreme Court hears a dispute over city rules that regulate amplified music at the park's bandshell.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''These events are creating a political situation in the country that, if it continues, could lead to extraordinary conditions.''  - President Raif Dizdarevic of Yugoslavia.  [ A1:6. ]


Dr. Frank Gollan, 78; Isolated the Polio Virus
LEAD: Dr.
Frank Gollan, a polio victim who isolated the virus of the disease and was instrumental in inventing the first heart-lung machine, died last week with his wife, Alice, at their home in what their son said appeared to be a double suicide.
He was 78, and his wife 81.  ''My father made various allusions to suicide,'' said Andy Gollan.


Polish Bid to Broaden Regime Falters
LEAD: The new Polish Prime Minister's effort to attract people into the Government from outside the Communist realm is faltering, undermined by the prospect of discussions here this month between the Government and the opposition.


Boston Loses Playoff; Candidates Set a Date
LEAD: The American League playoff ended yesterday, with Oakland's victory over Boston, and officials from both Presidential campaigns said the early completion of the series cleared the way for a Thursday debate between Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis.


Books of The Times; Kazin Views What the Writer's Eye Has Seen
LEAD:  A Writer's America  Landscape in Literature  By Alfred Kazin  Illustrated. 240 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Columbus Day Closings
LEAD: Most Federal Government offices as well as the Federal Reserve and the United States government bond market will be closed today in observance of Columbus Day.
Most banks will also be closed, although the nation's stock and commodity markets and most businesses will be open.
All Canadian stock markets and bond markets will be closed in observance of Canada's Thanksgiving holiday.


Chilean Victors Calm Economic Fears
LEAD: As soon as it was apparent that Gen.
Augusto Pinochet had been refused eight more years in power in a plebiscite last Wednesday, Chilean opposition groups quickly reassured businessmen that many of his economic policies would be maintained once democracy returns here.


Base Closings: Everyone Wins
LEAD: Four years ago, the Grace Commission on government waste pointed out that the Pentagon was still operating a 121-year-old base that had been scheduled for closing in 1964, in 1970, in 1978 and again in 1979.
Now the days of obsolete bases appear to be truly numbered, thanks to a pending bill that represents a triumph of national interest over parochial obstructionism.


Miriam Mahdaviani Wed
LEAD: Miriam Eva Mahdaviani, a dancer with the New York City Ballet and a choreographer, was married yesterday to Eric Jay Goldstone, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon B. Goldstone of Scranton, Pa., and Naples, Fla.
Rabbi Simon H. Shoop and Cantor Joseph Handlin performed the ceremony at Federal Hall in New York.


Packers Finally Win One
LEAD: Brent Fullwood ran for three second-half touchdowns and Green Bay intercepted five passes today as the Packers routed the New England Patriots, 45-3, for their first victory of the season.


Washington Bank Head Faces Board Challenge
LEAD: A highly visible board fight is shaping up in Washington involving Luther H. Hodges Jr., the chairman and chief executive of the Washington Bancorporation, as three directors challenge his leadership.


Horace Kramer, 70, Consultant
LEAD: Horace Z. Kramer, a prominent Nassau County Democrat, tax expert and political consultant, died of congenital heart disease Saturday at his home in Woodmere, L.I.
He was 70 years old.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Omnicom to Issue Debt
LEAD: Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. will raise $75 million in convertible subordinated debentures for Omnicom Group Inc.
Proceeds of the offering will be used to reduce Omnicom's borrowings under its commercial paper program and short-term domestic bank line of credit, and the remainder, if any, will be used for general purposes, including acquisitions.


Chicago Blacks Split on Mayoral Candidates
LEAD: Delegates to a meeting intended to unite Chicago's black community behind one mayoral candidate have cast most of their votes for two contenders.


Anne Geary, Lawyer, Weds Charles Joseph
LEAD: Anne Morris Geary and Charles Stephen Joseph, both lawyers in New York, were married yesterday at the lighthouse on the Haig Point Plantation, Daufuskie Island, S.C.
The Rev.
John M. van Dyke, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony, assisted by Dr.
Alvin Lieberman, an uncle of the bridegroom.


David Mamet Lends a Hand To Homeless Vietnam Veterans
LEAD: Ken Smith, a 36-year-old paramedic and former combat infantryman in Vietnam, had never heard of David Mamet. ''Didn't know him from a hole in the ground,'' he said.


TOLL IS PUT AT 200 IN ALGERIAN RIOTS
LEAD: Six days of rioting have left 200 Algerians dead by unofficial estimates and the Government of President Chadli Benjedid divided and under siege.


Israelis Revolutionize Hair Removal Industry
LEAD: For the 350 families of this collective community in the Upper Galilee, the outlook is bright.
Officials of their kibbutz-owned factory are confident that worldwide sales of the Epilady hair remover, which the factory began making two years ago, will double, to $60 million.


Abigail R. Ostow, Psychiatrist, Is Wed
LEAD: Dr.
Abigail Ruth Ostow, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Mortimer Ostow of Riverdale, the Bronx, and Arthur Gershon Telegen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Telegen of Milton, Mass., were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents.
Rabbis Morton Leifman and Shlomo Balter performed the ceremony.


Treasury Offers Bills and Notes This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week begin with tomorrow's regular weekly auction of new three-month and six-month bills, which was postponed today because of Columbus Day.
On Wednesday the Treasury will auction $6.75 billion of new seven-year notes.


New Rangers Line Goes Right to Work
LEAD: The rewards may not yet qualify as a jackpot, but the inspired combination Michel Bergeron began playing in the third period of last Thursday's game against the Chicago Blackhawks has paid some handsome dividends.


Bush Joins Parade In the Chicago Area To Woo Ethnic Vote
LEAD: Vice President Bush today pledged to ''never forget'' the lack of freedom in Eastern Europe as he continued his effort to attract ethnic voters.


Rates May Ease in the Near Term
LEAD: The bond market's mood has brightened considerably over the past few months, as more and more signs of a moderation in economic growth and inflation have appeared.


Leslie E. Halprin Marries Joseph Heyison, a Lawyer
LEAD: Leslie Eileen Halprin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Halprin of New Haven, was married last evening at Congregation B'nai Jacob in Woodbridge, Conn., to Joseph Avery Heyison, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack R. Heyison of Oil City, Pa.
Rabbi Michael Menitoff and Cantor Joseph Konigsberg officiated.


The Coleman Stove
LEAD: To the Editor:


Initial 'Cosby' Reruns Didn't Meet Projections
LEAD: Despite a high-powered publicity campaign, reruns of ''The Cosby Show'' - the most expensive repeats ever telecast - fell short of expectations in their first week.


Coffee, Tea or Video? Airlines Testing Small TV's
LEAD: Northwest Airlines, looking for a better way to occupy fidgety passengers on long international flights, has begun testing a miniature television mounted in front of passengers.
Two other airlines are also planning to use the three-inch color screens.


Of Barbecue and Bellwethers: In Missouri, the Race Is Too Close to Call
LEAD: Scott Gedstad, a restaurant owner, decided to vote for Vice President Bush as soon as the Democrats nominated Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, whom he dislikes because ''he's too much a Government giveaway man, too much a socialist.''


Sir Egerton Richardson, Jamaican Diplomat, 76
LEAD: Sir Egerton Richardson, Jamaica's first representative to the United Nations and its former Ambassador to Washington, died at his home on Saturday night, the authorities said today.
He was 76 years old.
The cause of Sir Egerton's death was not known, but he had reportedly been ailing for more than a year.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing in the Guide of the Long Island Weekly yesterday gave an incorrect telephone number for the Oyster Festival next Saturday and Sunday in Oyster Bay.
The correct number for information is (516)-624-8082.


3 More Palestinians Die In Occupied Territories
LEAD: Israeli soldiers swept through at least 30 villages in the West Bank today, and two Palestinians were killed in clashes with troops during a general strike, an Israeli Army spokesman said.


Naples Journal; Is It Over Then? City Closes Its Heart to the Car
LEAD: Italy's romance with the automobile, a frenzied and abiding passion that has withstood the rigors of decades, is turning to heartache.


U.S. Climate Limits Use of Energy Cogeneration
LEAD: To the Editor:


Redskins Roll Past Cowboys
LEAD: Mark Rypien threw three touchdown passes and ran for one score today to lead the Washington Redskins to a 35-17 victory over the error-prone Dallas Cowboys.


Elizabeth A. Schwartz and David W. Hinden Wed
LEAD: Elizabeth Ann Schwartz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Schwartz of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to David William Hinden, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Hinden of Hartsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Alexander Shapiro officiated at the Four Seasons in New York.


Challenge By Saudis To OPEC
LEAD: Saudi Arabia called on other members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries this weekend to reduce their oil production to the agreed-upon levels and said it was not responsible for the fall in oil prices, now at their lowest levels in two years.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; A Voice in Europe
LEAD: There is a plan for 330 million West Europeans to be free, by 1992, to reside and do business anywhere in the 12 countries of the European Community.


Sundstrom Lifts Devils
LEAD: Patrik Sundstrom scored two power-play goals in the third period Saturday night as the Devils rallied to defeat the Quebec Nordiques, 5-3.


Man Stabbed at Stony Brook College Party
LEAD: A 20-year-old man was slightly wounded when he was slashed during a dispute in front of a fraternity house on the campus of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, L.I., yesterday, the police said.


YUGOSLAV LEADER ISSUES A WARNING ON NATION'S CRISIS
LEAD: President Raif Dizdarevic, in a television address to the nation, warned tonight that the crisis in Yugoslavia might lead to ''extraordinary conditions.''


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, OCTOBER 10, 1988
LEAD:  Companies


To Forgive, Divine
LEAD: ''Everybody is entitled to make a mistake,'' said Senator Howard Metzenbaum, referring to an excess of zeal on the part of one of his staffers.
What a refreshing statement; in this election year, what a humane idea.


Reviews/Music; A 'Carmen' With Verismo Overtones
LEAD: Bizet's ''Carmen'' has gone through a lot of alien country on its way through history to the present.
It has picked up bad habits along the way.
The opera's brutality and realism are a particular source of stylistic confusion, being identified - and falsely I think - with those of an intervening verismo school.


The Race for Congress; Liewberman Fights Uphill For Senate
LEAD: Most mornings, shortly after sunrise, Joe Lieberman, Democratic candidate for Senate, runs three or four miles through the suburban Westville section of town, where he has lived for the past 20 years.
Sometimes, his wife, Hadassah, joins him.
Sometimes, as the couple jogs along the quiet tree-lined streets, they push a baby carriage carrying their 6-month-old daughter,


4 NATIONS AGREE ON CUBAN PULLOUT FROM ANGOLA WAR
LEAD: Officials from Angola, Cuba, South Africa and the United States agreed yesterday that all Cuban troops should be withdrawn from Angola within 24 to 30 months, American officials said.


Ex-Vermont Educator Guilty
LEAD: George Sleeman, a former Bennington superintendent of schools, has been convicted on nine charges of embezzlement and perjury.
A Vermont District Court jury deliberated three hours before returning guilty verdicts Saturday.


Help Continues for Hurricane Victims


Stephanie Present Is Wed tO Dr. Michael Podolak
LEAD: Stephanie Danielle Present and Dr.
Michael Joseph Podolak were married yesterday at Tavern on the Green in New York by Rabbi Martin J. Zion.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Columbus Day
LEAD:  NEW YORK Parade: Starts at 11:30 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, moving north to 86th Street, then east to Third Avenue.
Parking: Alternate-side parking rules suspended.
Sanitation: Today's collections will be made tomorrow.
Government offices: Closed.
Post offices: Special delivery and Express Mail only.


Residents Cheer After Guard Is Slain At Housing Project
LEAD: Residents of a crime-ridden public housing project cheered when the body of a security guard was carried to an ambulance after he died in a hail of bullets.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Spanish Agency Bought
LEAD: Publicis-FCB, a new European alliance between Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, Chicago, and Publicis S.A., Paris, has increased its stronghold in Spain to almost $90 million in billings by buying Arge, one of the country's leading agency networks.
Terms were not disclosed.
The newly added $45 million Madrid-based shop will operate under the same name and leadership.


Unions Wary of Icahn on Eastern
LEAD: About three years ago, Carl C. Icahn triumphantly donned a T.W.A. pilot's jacket and danced around his office, jubilantly proclaiming: ''I own an airline.
I own an airline.''


Donna Etkins Marries Micah Kroloff, Lawyer
LEAD: At the Beacon (N.Y.) Hebrew Alliance yesterday, Donna S. Etkins, the daughter of Lillian Etkins of Beacon and the late Abraham Etkins, was married to Micah N. Kroloff, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Charles A. Kroloff of Westfield, N.J.
The bridegroom's father officiated, assisted by Cantor Martha T. Novick.


Outdoors: Sea Ducks at Sunrise
LEAD: Oct. 1 was sultry, more suitable for swimming than participating in the opening day of the state's sea duck hunting season, but Dixon Merkt of Lyme, Conn., and I had made plans for the excursion more than a month earlier.


Boy, 14, Is Arrested In a Student's Death
LEAD: A 14-year-old Edison High School student has been arrested in connection with the stabbing death of a 17-year-old student near the school's main gate after a dance, the police said yesterday.


Eva Sambi Colin Is Bride Of John Usdan, Executive
LEAD: Eva Sambi Colin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick C. Colin of Roslyn Estates, L.I., was married at the Pierre last evening to John Lemberg Usdan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel H. Usdan of New York.
Rabbis Lee Friedlander and David Lincoln officiated, assisted by Cantor David Lefkowitz.


6 Killed in Accident in Kansas
LEAD: A fiery head-on collision of a car and a pickup truck killed six people, five of them members of one family, and injured a seventh person, investigators from the Kansas Highway Patrol said today.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; CEBA Awards Presentation
LEAD: This year's CEBA awards for excellence in communications to black audiences will be presented Oct. 20 at the New York Hilton.


MGM/UA Names 3 Merrill Lynch Bankers to Top Posts
LEAD: The MGM/UA Communications Company said yesterday that it would name three investment bankers from Merrill Lynch Capital Markets to top positions at the motion picture and television studio.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.


Latvians Establish a Movement to Seek Sovereignty
LEAD: Alarmed at having become a minority within their own borders, Latvians created an independent political organization this weekend to demand sovereignty in governing their republic.


For Decency in the Fields
LEAD: What farm workers first asked of the Federal Government in 1972 seemed modest enough: drinking water and toilet facilities in the workplace.
But 15 years later, these minimum standards are not yet assured, even after a Federal appeals court ruling that the Labor Department had improperly failed to protect field hands from communicable diseases and heat stress.


E.P.A. Blows Up a Hazard That Had Become a Symbol
LEAD: Skeptical and bemused, but mostly cooperative, about a third of this city's 8,000 residents evacuated their homes today as the Federal Government safely destroyed a 20-year-old container of potentially lethal chemicals that had threatened the center of town.


Disney World Is Cited For Polluting Creek
LEAD: Walt Disney World could face thousands of dollars in fines for polluting a creek with treated sewage, according to officials of the Environmental Protection Agency.


Bridge; American teams win two opening rounds at World Team Olympiad.
LEAD: Both United States teams won their first- and second-round matches when the World Team Olympiad began here today.


Dodgers Pitcher Suspended for 3 Days
LEAD: In a decision that could have a major impact on the National League championship playoff, the president of the league yesterday imposed a three-day suspension on Jay Howell of the Los Angeles Dodgers for having pine tar on his glove in Saturday's game against the Mets.


A's Sweep Red Sox and Advance to World Series


Reservations About Quayle Linger, Worrying Some Republican Leaders
LEAD: Senator Dan Quayle appears to be a threat to George Bush's chances of winning the Presidency next month, despite Mr.
Bush's early successes in undermining Michael S. Dukakis's image.


Corrections
LEAD: The About New York column on July 30, about restoration of a mural at the Church of the Ascension in Manhattan, described the winning bid incorrectly.
Holly Hotchner was the winning bidder and the project director; Robert Sawchuck was a co-conservator with her.


Many Black Monday Cases Unheard
LEAD: A recent survey of investor sentiment about the nation's stock and options markets has found that a year after the market crash, small investors who lost money or had complaints continue to be frustrated by the market.


36 Sinhalese Villagers Are Slain in Sri Lanka
LEAD: At least 36 Sinhalese villagers were massacred in northern Sri Lanka on Sunday night, a military spokesman said today, and the killings were attributed to Tamil separatists.


Horse Racing; 2 Grass Horses Are on Rise
LEAD: New leaders of the nation's grass horses and sprinters may have been crowned yesterday at Belmont Park when Sunshine Forever scored an easy victory in the $600,000 Turf Classic and Mining whipped Gulch in the $223,200 Vosburgh Stakes.


On the Road Again, With a Passion
LEAD: After nearly a decade of fuel shortage fears, Government regulation and functional but generally unexciting new cars, Americans' passion for the automobile, high speed and the open road is being rekindled this fall with a fervor that excites drivers, delights car makers and frightens safety experts.


Fugitive Planner Arrested
LEAD: A financial planner who disappeared with $25 million and left notes of apology for his former clients was arrested as a fugitive Saturday in Japan after being expelled from Taiwan, Federal Bureau of Investigation agents said.


U.S. CRIME LEVELS SHOW RISE IN 1987
LEAD: The nation's crime levels rose 1.8 percent last year, the Government reported today, ending a five-year decline that the Reagan Administration had attributed partly to vigorous law enforcement and tougher treatment of criminals.


Review/Television; 20 Years of '60 Minutes'
LEAD: Considering the profits and prestige the program has brought to CBS, ''60 Minutes'' is being given a surprisingly chintzy 20th-anniversary party.
Here is a clip festival on the cheap.
It runs for two hours, but not even on the same night.
The first half, covering 1968 to 1978, can be seen tonight at 8.


Review/Television; Debate About U.S.'s Nuclear Arsenal
LEAD: As the Presidential candidates argue over which nuclear weapons to keep and which to cut, the complexities of nuclear policy tend to be simplified for point-scoring purposes.
So tonight's showing of ''To What End?'' comes as a timely analysis of the choices that will face the next President.
The illuminating documentary can be seen on Channel 13 at 10 P


Swiss Gain Big Stake on Wall St. In Deal That Could Offer a Model
LEAD: After more than six months of intense negotiations, the First Boston Corporation, one of Wall Street's largest securities firms, and its London-based sister company, Financiere Credit Suisse-First Boston, agreed yesterday to merge.


Venice Journal; Repair of Old Canals Divides Eclectic Community
LEAD: Founded at the turn of the century as a canal-graced center of artistic and intellectual ferment, Venice today seethes with questions like these:


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Australia's 28,000 coal miners voted Friday to accept restructuring plans that industry officials say could increase production as much as 10 percent.
Mining companies, suffering from low world prices and rising shipping costs, want to introduce measures that include increasing shifts to eight hours, from seven, and extending the weekly operation of mines to six days, from five.


Stock Fraud In 10 Nations
LEAD: Investigators from the United States and nine other nations will meet in Washington on Monday to coordinate inquiries into an extensive international stock swindle, Swiss judicial sources said Friday.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Nuclear Tests Discouraged


Some in Westchester Care Enough to Help
LEAD: To the Editor:


Spotlight at Apple Shifts to a Rising Star
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. said on Friday that Delbert W. Yocam, president of its education and Pacific divisions, had said he will resign from his operational duties in November 1989.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about New York City's capital spending and borrowing incorrectly stated the level of debt repayment in six years.
It will be $3.8 billion in 1994.


Crafty Bengals Topple Jets, 36-19
LEAD: The Bengals, overcoming an early 9-0 deficit produced on turnovers, showed they were for real today as Boomer Esiason led them to a 36-19 trouncing of the Jets.


Foul Play Ruled Out In Infant Girl's Death
LEAD: A preliminary autopsy has shown that a 6-month-old girl died of complications from her premature birth, not from child abuse or a dog attack, according to the Monroe County Medical Examiner.


TUNE IN TO GET UP FOR THE SLOPES
LEAD: With a nip of fall in the air, skiers are beginning to get edgy about tuning up for the winter.
These days, when videotapes are being created on practically every subject, it comes as no surprise that both tuning the body and tuning the skis can be learned from a television screen.
There is some advantage to having the expert right there in the living room, but more important, watching a video is an easy and relaxing way to learn, especially when skiing sequences are interspersed between the how-to information.


Publishers Seek a New York Address
LEAD: When the Boston book publisher David R. Godine inaugurates its New York office this morning, Jessica Benson will not have much worry about being late for work. ''I'll be working from my apartment the first six months to a year,'' said Ms.
Benson, the sole employee in Godine's new office. ''After that we may rent space with an existing publisher.


Corporate Penalty Plan Stirs Debate
LEAD: A proposal that outlines how corpo-rations should be punished for committing crimes is fueling a debate in government and academic circles.
A draft of the proposal, written by the staff of a Federal agency, will receive its first public airing tomorrow at a hearing in Manhattan.


Japanese Lift Purchases of U.S. Property
LEAD: Confounding almost the entire investment community, the Japanese have continued to pour billions of dollars into United States real estate in 1988, a new study reported today.


Hungary Sets the Pace For East Bloc Change
LEAD: When Hungary abolished private enterprise after World War II, a symbol of Communism's triumph over capitalism was the conversion of the huge stock market, a Beaux-Arts pile of granite in downtown Budapest, into television studios.


Valerie Miller Marries
LEAD: Valerie Ann Miller and Jonathan David Galef were married yesterday at the Harmonie Club in New York by Rabbi David Posner.
The bride, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Miller of Armonk, N.Y., is the creative services coordinator for L'Oreal Fragrance and Cosmetics in New York.
Mr.
Galef, president of Pegasus Computer Systems in New York, is a son of the late Mr.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; U.S. News Rate Base
LEAD: U.S.
News &amp; World Report will raise its rate base 100,000 to 2,150,000, a 5 percent increase, beginning Jan. 1.
The weekly magazine had posted its highest circulation, 2.36 million, in its 55-year history, according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations statement of the first half of 1988.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; First Event of '92 Summer Games: Bidding
LEAD: AS a network television show, the Olympic Games had a startlingly off year in 1988, losing money for both ABC, which carried the Winter Games in Calgary, and for NBC, which just concluded its presentation of the Summer Games in Seoul.
The audience shortfalls would seem to pose serious doubt as to the event's value as a sure-fire network hit and the networks' willingness to pay rich prices for future


The Shuttle Returns to Florida and to Work    Discovery, which was the first shuttle to fly in space since the Challenger disaster in 1986, completed a four-day mission last Monday. It will be refurbished for its next flight, scheduled for February. (Agence France-Presse)


Review/Art; The Drawings of Michelangelo: The First Flowerings of Genius
LEAD: No one can be sure just what disappeared when Michelangelo set ablaze perhaps hundreds of his own drawings not long before his death.
As an old man deeply concerned with his place in history, the artist apparently determined that posterity should not possess the false starts and reconsiderations these preparatory drawings represented.


Indiana Democrats Count on a Bayh
LEAD: In this conservative, Republican-dominated state, the Democrats are banging on the door of the Indiana governor's mansion after 20 years of being kept out.


Bronco Interception Helps Top 49ers
LEAD: Crisp winds were blustering through Candlestick Park today at nearly 35 miles an hour, and the Denver Broncos and San Francisco 49ers played a sort of hodgepodge football game that seemed to sweep the crowd of 61,711 off its feet.


Market Place; Election Forecast For Investors
LEAD: A MONTH before the Presidential election, the markets and investors are pondering the impact of the outcome.
There are all kinds of guides, from past performances to policies of the contenders.
But that does not mean they have the answer.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-9


A Pollution Garden Grows So Ozone Can Run Amok
LEAD: ''Become an Ozone Damage Detective,'' beckons a sign at the entrance to the Air Pollution Garden, an exhibit at the Institute of Ecosystem Studies in this Dutchess County village.


The Press Corps Strikes Back
LEAD: Only four weeks to go, and the pressures within the Bush campaign are plainly intensifying.


300 Protest as North Speaks in California
LEAD: About 300 people turned out to jeer Oliver L. North, the former National Security Council aide, while he urged more than 1,000 Christian business leaders to fight the ''alien and godless philosophy'' of Communism.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; On Their Own
LEAD: Normally, liberal Democrats in Congress can count on the endorsement of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. to help win re-election.
In practical terms, that means volunteers to assist in a wide range of activities, including distributing pamphlets and leaflets, registering voters and getting out the vote on election day.


Next Inc. Produces a Gala (And Also a New Computer)
LEAD: At last, it's here, the event the computer world has been waiting for.


Control Defeats the Conga Line in Sky
LEAD: It began so innocently aboard Governor Dukakis's campaign charter.


A Long Celebration After a Long Wait
LEAD: They tore down the goal posts, they caused the police to reroute traffic near their campus and they celebrated deep into the night.
The Columbia faithful acted just like college football fans do after an impressive victory, which is notable since they have not had any practice in the past five years.


Schooners Transport Sailors Into Another Era
LEAD: For the modern sailor, to step aboard today's traditional schooner is to enter the sailing world of the 18th century.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Publisher Relishes Task At Elle
LEAD: ANN SUTHERLAND FUCHS is not merely happy about her new job as publisher of Elle.
On Friday, her second day on the job, she was ectastic. ''Some people were born to save the world,'' Mrs.
Fuchs said. ''I was born to be publisher of Elle.
It is like utopia to me.''


Canada Jobless Rate Off
LEAD: Canada's unemployment rate dropped to 7.8 percent in September from 8 percent a month earlier, the Government agency Statistics Canada said Friday.
The report can be helpful to the Conservative Government in the Nov. 21 election.
The total number of unemployed in the labor force dropped by 21,000, to 1,048,000, during the month.


Tax Watch; 4th-Quarter Plans To Reduce Taxes
LEAD: IN the final quarter of the year, the thoughts of many investors turn to taxes and how to avoid them.
While the Tax Reform Act of 1986 did its best to dash hopes of avoidance, there are still techniques available to soften the tax bite.


Convict's Victim Makes an Ad
LEAD: Clifford Barnes is making a radio commercial - to the delight of George Bush and the concern of Michael Dukakis.


Pentagon Needs Separate Procurement Board
LEAD: To the Editor:


Frank W. Emig, A.F.L.-C.I.O Official, 62
LEAD: Frank W. Emig, director of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s department of community services since 1985, died Saturday of cancer.
He was 62 years old.
As director of community services for the federation, Mr.
Emig headed representatives in 188 cities in 37 states responsible for coordinating blood drives, food banks and other charities, according to Rex Hardesty, a federation spokesman.


Tourism Has Indeed Returned to Vietnam
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wilson Foods 'Poison Pill'
LEAD: A Delaware Chancery Court has denied an effort by the Doskocil Companies to invalidate a ''poison pill'' takeover defense of the Wilson Foods Corporation.


Pope Continues His Tour of France


WASHINGTON TALK: Politics; Hostage Situation Has Both Campaigns Uneasy
LEAD: When word reached the capital last week that an American hostage was about to be released in Lebanon, the White House was gripped by both excitement and apprehension.


Amid Cheers, Aiming to Close In on a Dream
LEAD: The Athletics looked ahead to the World Series next week.


Thomas to Make Pro Debut on Ice
LEAD: In her 15 years as an amateur figure skater, Debi Thomas left behind many vivid memories.
She was the first black star in a sport traditionally dominated by white athletes, and her unusual blend of strength and grace captivated audiences and won national and world championships.


Nancy Kislin Marries R. P. Flaum, a Lawyer
LEAD: At Anshe Emeth Memorial Temple in New Brunswick, N.J., Nancy Jill Kislin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Kislin of North Brunswick, N.J., and Richard Paul Flaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Flaum of Boca Raton, Fla., were married yesterday by Rabbi Bennett F. Miller.


A Pianistic Paradox
LEAD: It took only a few bars of ''Hommage a Rameau'' to hear that Steven Silverman is a pianist of taste and sensitivity.
Listening to him play at Weill Recital Hall late Saturday afternoon, one admired the natural purity of Debussy's precise rhythmic writing and the warm chordal textures with their careful separation of colors.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Addenda
LEAD: *
MacUser, a monthly magazine providing business Macintosh users with comparative product reviews, will increase its circulation 22 percent to 280,000, from 230,000, and its rate base will go up 24 percent with the February issue.


A Report Sees Many Jobs but Many Jobless
LEAD: Employers in New York and New Jersey are struggling to find workers while hundreds of thousands of the region's black and Hispanic residents remain unemployed, according to a study released yesterday by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Tracy-Locke Deal
LEAD: Tracy-Locke, Dallas, the subsidiary of Omnicom Group that is celebrating its 75th anniversary this year, has agreed in principle to buy Stern/ Monroe, a $25 million Dallas-based shop, for an undisclosed amount.
Lawrence N. Sterne, principal of the Stern/Monroe agency, will become chairman/corporate development when the agency consolidation is done.


Cheryl Pierson Weds Accomplice
LEAD: Cheryl Pierson, the Long Island teen-ager who hired a classmate to kill her father after saying he had sexually abused her for years, yesterday married her longtime boyfriend, Robert Cuccio.
Mr.
Cuccio was also convicted in the case for giving a payoff to the killer.


Deborah Lynne Donaldson Wed to William C. Gourd
LEAD: The Asbury United Methodist Church in Tuckahoe, N.Y., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Deborah Lynne Donaldson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert John Donaldson of Bronxville, N.Y., to William Courtney Gourd, a son of Josephine Stanley Gourd of Ridgefield, Conn., and the late Michael Gourd.


Deng's Daughter Peruses the Art of Manhattan
LEAD: On her first trip to SoHo the other day, Deng Lin, a Chinese artist who is accomplished in the brush-and-ink tradition that has flourished in her country for more than a thousand years, circled warily around a huge and complex Frank Stella wall piece at the Leo Castelli Gallery on Greene Street.
She paused meditatively in front of a simpler floor piece by Ellsworth Kelly, composed of two flat semicircular planes.


Construction Delays Due at Holland Tunnel
LEAD: People who drive through the Holland Tunnel to jobs in New York City can expect a longer morning trip starting tomorrow, when one lane of eastbound traffic approaching the entrance will be closed so a tollbooth rehabilitation project can begin.


Topics of The Times; A Sanctuary for Mustangs
LEAD: About 150 wild mustangs received a wonderful gift last week: free run of an 8,300-acre, privately owned preserve in the Black Hills of South Dakota.
The horses - roughly one-third of 1 per cent of the wild mustangs roaming Western lands - were too old for adoption under a Government resettlement program.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: This year's record winning streak at Fenway Park, which helped the Boston Red Sox win their division title, revived memories of the late-season streak by the Chicago Cubs in 1935 that helped them win the National League pennant.
How many of those 21 Cub victories in a row were at Wrigley Field?


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct.10, 1988:  MONDAY  La-Z-Boy Chair Co  PS Group  Phillips Petroleum  Xerox Corp  TUESDAY  CBI Industries  Chesapeake Corp  Diversified Energies  ITT Corp  Procter &amp; Gamble  Reliance Group Hldgs  SL Industries  TECO Energy Inc  Weyerhaeuser Co


Today, 52d Ain't Got That Swing
LEAD: When they talked about the Duke yesterday on 52d Street, they were evoking not a Presidential candidate, but a jazz great.


Don't Even Think of Stealing This Radio!
LEAD: Christopher Conquest's first car stereo was a portable boom box that he kept in the back seat.
It was stolen in 1980.
He bought a new car and had a stereo radio and cassette tape player installed.
That unit was stolen last year.
He had a third unit installed.
It was stolen several months ago.


Topics of The Times; Books Before Uniforms
LEAD: Mayor Edward Koch has persuaded a local clothing manufacturer to donate 400 uniforms for New York City schoolchildren, ''with the thought that it might help in the learning process to have that kind of discipline.''


Electric Boat Workers Deal With Anger and an Offer
LEAD: The pickets were conspicuously absent today here on Thames Street outside the Electric Boat submarine shipyard, where about 9,000 machinists, mechanics and other tradesmen had been on strike for the last 14 weeks.
Many of them were meeting in union halls, living rooms and coffee shops, learning the details of a four-year contract their leaders tentatively agreed to late Saturday.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, appointed Earnest W. Deavenport Jr. president of the Eastman Chemicals division, Kingsport, Tenn.


Billy Daniels, Who Rose to Fame On 'Old Black Magic,' Dies at 73
LEAD: Billy Daniels, the veteran nightclub performer, actor and big-band singer who rose to fame with his recording of ''That Old Black Magic,'' died of stomach cancer Friday at the Kenneth Norris Jr.
Cancer Hospital and Research Institute at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles.
He was 73 years old and lived in Hollywood Hills,


Dean Burk, 84, Chemist for Cancer Institute
LEAD: Dean Burk, a retired chief chemist at the National Cancer Institute, died of cancer Thursday at the home of his daughter in Washington.
He was 84.


Navy Warns of New Soviet Torpedo
LEAD: New Soviet torpedoes, armed with conventional warheads, have become so explosive that one hit could put a large American aircraft carrier out of action, according to a United States Navy assessment.


Under Little-Noticed New Provision, U.S. Must Find Options to Atom Tests
LEAD: The Federal agency that designs and makes nuclear arms must try to develop ways to insure the reliability of the weapons without explosive testing, according to a provision in the annual military budget measure that President Reagan recently signed into law.


Raise the Age for Boys To Enter First Grade
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fatal Shootings of Young People on the Rise in Florida
LEAD: Hunched over slightly, Aaron Miller steadies his .22-caliber pistol and fires, blowing pea-size holes in a target's black bull's-eye.
The 10-year-old is probably as good a shot as any at a popular suburban shooting range.


ON YOUR OWN: Fitness; High Cholesterol Found in Children
LEAD: Asobering statistic is emerging from a program in Michigan to increase physical fitness among children.
A University of Michigan group is finding that one-fourth of the school children it tests have elevated cholesterol levels.


I.B.M. Receives A Large Order
LEAD: A European consortium of 10 airlines said Friday that it had given the International Business Machines Corporation one of the company's biggest European orders, involving four new mainframe computers and upgrades of two others.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Improved Relationship
LEAD: Six years ago, American Jewish groups raised a ''Where was George?'' question, not about Vice President Bush, but about George P. Shultz, who was President Reagan's choice to become Secretary of State succeeding Alexander M. Haig Jr.
Their answer, voiced with some disquiet, was that Mr.
Shultz had been president of the huge Bechtel Corporation, which was doing billions of dollars worth of construction in Saudi Arabia and hence perceived as hostile to


Trinity Wasn't Church of Revolutionaries
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis


Away From Home, Dial a Candidate
LEAD: Benson Ginsburg, a CBS News cameraman covering the Presidential campaign, has a telephone answering machine, but the message on it is hardly the usual, ''I'm not in right now, so please leave your name and number.''


Review/Television; A Life in, and Out of, an Institution
LEAD: ''Winnie'' is a puzzle.
The made-for-television movie on NBC at 9 this evening gives Meredith Baxter Birney (''Family Ties'') an opportunity to act up a storm in the title role of a moderately retarded woman institutionalized for some 30 years.
We root for Winnie as she struggles to prove that she can make it on her own but, while protecting its veneer of heartwarming uplift, the film, based on a true story, ends up demonstrating precisely the opposite.


When Fishing Is an Indoor Sport
LEAD: As the fishing season winds down, the armchair angler tends to gear up.
Books and videos on fishing offer a winter's worth of immersion in the sport.
But it takes a fishing trip south, or a parlor game, to take the pastime out of solitary confinement.


Metro Matters; A Clear Pledge: Instilling Values In First Grade
LEAD: On weekday mornings across the country, the most saluted man in America, William Safire once wrote, is Richard Stans.
But Friday morning Marilyn Meyer's 17 first graders at P.S. 142 placed their hands over their hearts and clearly enunciated their Pledge of Allegiance to the flag and to the republic, not for Richard Stans, but ''for which it stands.


Pint-Sized Paraders    There were about 20,000 participants and the police estimated that a crowd of 230,000 watched. (NYT/Neal Boenzi)


Review/Dance; Classical Drama From Martha Graham Troupe
LEAD: It was Martha Graham who developed the idea of nonlinear drama in dance.
As a result, even once-experimental film directors such as Jean-Luc Godard looked old-fashioned by the 1960's to those familiar with Miss Graham's great gift for telling a story without ''telling'' it.


A's Sweep Red Sox and Win Pennant
LEAD: The post-game celebration was brief.
The Oakland Athletics gathered together on the infield grass late today, hugged and smiled and waved joyously, and then retreated to the security of their clubhouse, where they popped corks and sprayed one another obligingly with champagne.
They were done, but they were not done.


Sports World Specials; No Place Like Home
LEAD: For more than 25 years, Lehigh football coaches from Bill Leckonby to Hank Small, the incumbent, took prospective recruits over South Mountain to a landscaped bowl surrounded by corn fields.
They pointed and said, ''That's where our new stadium will be.''


Candidate Apologizes for Remark
LEAD: A Democratic candidate for the Senate says he did not intend to offend anyone when he said that ''polacks, spiks, wops and the Irish'' were welcome in the Democratic Party.


Lasorda Displays Irritation on Howell
LEAD: Tommy Lasorda, the Los Angeles Dodgers' manager, stopped short of igniting a dispute with Dave Johnson, the Mets' manager, last night, but he left the clear impression that he didn't think too highly of the way Johnson questioned Jay Howell's glove in the third game of the National League pennant playoff.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; A Fresh Fish Starts With a Clean Sidewalk
LEAD: The workday starts at about 1:30 A.M. at Terry's Fish and Seafood, with a steam-cleaning of the sidewalk outside the storefront at Northern Boulevard and 86th Street in the Jackson Heights section of Queens.


Big Traders' Caution Remakes the Market
LEAD: A year ago institutional money managers would have snapped up shares of a blue-chip growth company if, in the absence of negative news, it dipped by as much as a quarter of a point.
But one afternoon recently, with these big players decidedly more cautious, the stock of the Warner-Lambert Company slid by a point and a half on sell orders that totaled less than 5,000 shares.


Newsweek Seeks Job Cuts
LEAD: Newsweek magazine has offered early retirement to 100 employees, or 10 percent of its work force, citing higher costs and shrinking advertising.


TV NOTES
LEAD:  A 12th Anniversary


Chilean Burden: A Legacy of Terror
LEAD: As Chile moves toward its expected democratic transition in the coming months, a major hurdle will be how to deal with the thousands of deaths, disappearances and reports of torture linked to the regime of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet.


AIDS Spurs Soviet-U.S. Cooperation
LEAD: All morning long, Kathleen Eglin had been practicing to greet Dr.
Valentin I. Pokrovsky, the Soviet Union's leading AIDS expert.
When he stepped off the elevator, she was waiting.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Corrections
LEAD: The Advertising column in Business Day on Wednesday misidentified the first international advertising agency to become a minority owner of a South Korean agency.
Backer Spielvogel Bates paid $40 million in April for a minority share of Diamond Advertising of Seoul.


Late Games
LEAD: The fourth game of the National League playoff between the Mets and the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Islanders-Los Angeles Kings hockey game began too late to be included in this edition.


No More F.B.I. 'Taco Circuit'
LEAD: If there was an auspicious aspect to a Federal judge's finding that the F.B.I. had discriminated against Hispanic agents, it was the response from the F.B.I.
Director, William B. Sessions: ''During my tenure as Director, approximately one-half of the agents currently in the F.B.I. will be eligible to retire.


Hundreds Said to Starve Each Day In War Areas of Southern Sudan
LEAD: Hundreds of people are dying of hunger every day in areas of the southern Sudan where a guerrilla war has uprooted thousands, relief workers and a Sudanese official say.


Contract at Deere Easily Wins Union Ratification
LEAD: Blue-collar workers at Deere &amp; Company factories in five states overwhelmingly ratified a new contract with their first general pay increase since 1981, United Auto Workers officials said today.


In Zaire, AIDS Awareness vs. Prevention
LEAD: The gates of a presidential complex here are about to swing open for what health officials call the condom conference.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Account
LEAD: *
New York Republican State Committee/Victory '88 to Lubicom for print advertising for Vice President Bush's presidential election campaign and the Republican ticket in New York.


Nominees Wage Intensified War Of Attack Ads
LEAD: Here are a few questions a weekend television watcher was likely to encounter:


Sharon Polansky Weds J. I. Herbst
LEAD: Sharon Honey Polansky, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Polansky of Plainview, L.I., and Jeffrey Ira Herbst, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Adolph Herbst of Peekskill, N.Y., were married yesterday morning at the Mountain Lakes House in Princeton, N.J., by Rabbi Lauren Levy.


L.S.U. Quarterback Surprises Auburn
LEAD: After two humiliating weeks that included being benched by his coach, Mike Archer, L.S.U.'s outstanding junior quarterback, Tommy Hodson, returned to full-fledged hero status Saturday night.


Stuart M. Cobert and Marcy Engel, Lawyers, Wed
LEAD: Marcy Engel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Engel of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Stuart Martin Cobert, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maxwell Cobert of Upper Montclair, N.J.
Rabbi Amiel Wohl performed the ceremony at the Hampshire Country Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y.


As Giants Keep Scraping By Morris Looks for Better Days
LEAD: With the exception of a stretch here and a stretch there, the Giants have not played very well through their first five games.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Ralph Frank Jr. has joined Mendelsohn/Zien Advertising, Los Angeles in the newly created post of vice chairman.


Worker Protection Endorsed
LEAD: Legislation to provide better protection for Government employees who report waste or fraud in their agencies won Senate approval on Saturday and was sent to President Reagan.


Rich and Famous Adding Kings Games to Life Style
LEAD: Outside Chasen's, where imposing men work to keep the great unwashed outside the entrance to the restaurant, the sign attached to the awning, beneath silver and black balloons, says ''Private Party.'' There are those who would suggest that the Los Angeles Kings have been holding private parties for more than two decades as one of the least accepted franchises in the National Hockey


Projects in Third World Create Growing Market
LEAD: Although the market for exports to cash-strapped developing countries has fallen strikingly in the past decade, third-world projects financed by the international development banks have created a booming market for an array of products.


Giamatti Hangs 'Em
LEAD: What Jay Howell should have said was:


A Time to Get Mad
LEAD: No doubt fired up by the North Carolina barbecue he was eating during the interview, Michael Dukakis told Robin Toner of The New York Times that he finally was ready to slug it out with a ''bankrupt'' opponent who was relying on ''disgraceful'' tactics.
It's about time.


Dollar Falls in Thin Trading; Reaction to Job Report Seen
LEAD: The dollar tumbled yesterday in trading that was very light because most major traders in the United States and Japan had the day off.


Washington Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Bancorporation (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,801,000
3,645,000
Per share
.54
.59
Shares outst
7,051,000
6,214,000
9mo net inc
9,942,000
b5,523,000
Per share
1.41
-
Shares outst
7,037,000
6,183,000


Palestinians Are Said to Agree On Need to Declare a State
LEAD: Palestinian leaders have agreed to recommend declaring a Palestinian state, officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization said today, but the timing of a special meeting to issue the statement remains uncertain.


F.D.A. Pressed to Approve More AIDS Drugs
LEAD: Advocates for AIDS patients, dissatisfied with the progress of developing and approving new treatments for the disease, are continuing to put pressure on the Food and Drug Administration through meetings with Government officials and demonstrations.


Medusa Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medusa Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
61,017,000
59,535,000
Net inc
6,787,000
7,076,000
Share earns
.64
.67
9mo sales
138,746,000
137,739,000
Net inc
13,297,000
b15,575,000
Share earns
1.26
1.48


Maine Paper Mill Workers End Bitter 16-Month Strike
LEAD: One of the most bitter strikes of the 1980's ended today when members of the paper workers union decided to break off their 16-month-old walkout against the International Paper Company.


Bustle of Life in Sea Ice
LEAD: IN a discovery that could lead to a better understanding of the fragile polar ecosystem, scientists have found a surprising concentration of tiny plants and animals thriving in the pores of the sea ice that forms each winter and surrounds the Antarctic continent, the National Science Foundation announced yesterday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Stores Asked To Place Ads All Week
LEAD: FOR years, American retailers have concentrated their advertising on end-of-the-week shoppers.


Vigilant Children Are the Heroes As Salmon Make a Comeback
LEAD: NEARLY 3,000 miles of creeks, streams and rivers course through Snohomish County, a booming suburban area north of Seattle, but students at the Jackson Elementary School here are concerned about only one small stretch of water.


Howell's Penalty Reduced to 2 Days
LEAD: In what basically was a compromise, A. Bartlett Giamatti, the National League president, yesterday cut Jay Howell's suspension by one day, meaning he will be eligible to pitch tonight in the sixth game of the National League playoff in Los Angeles.


Dara Lyn Meyers Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Dara Lyn Meyers, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Burt R. Meyers of White Plains and West Yarmouth, Mass., was married yesterday to Evan Moses Kingsley, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Ralph P. Kingsley of North Miami Beach, Fla., and Lenox, Mass.
The bridegroom's father and Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum performed the ceremony at Bet Am Shalom Synagogue in White


Yugoslavia Unglued: How Unrest Grew
LEAD: Under Tito, Yugoslavia was synonymous with tough leadership.
But it has been like a rudderless ship for the last eight years, with a series of crises that have raised serious questions about its direction.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Bank Leumi Account To Partners &amp; Shevack
LEAD: The Bank Leumi Trust Company has assigned its advertising to Partners &amp; Shevack, a Mickelberry Corporation subsidiary.
The budget is $1.3 million and represents the charter account for the renamed agency.


Chile Victors Now Plan For a Presidential Vote
LEAD: Victorious opposition forces, trying to remain united after defeating Gen.
Augusto Pinochet in the plebiscite last week, have begun the search for their own presidential candidate.


Truck Hits School Bus; 16 Students Are Hurt
LEAD: A tractor-trailer truck struck the rear of a school bus today, injuring 16 students and the bus driver as the vehicles tumbled down an embankment, the authorities said.


Review/Music; New York Chamber Symphony Opens Season
LEAD: Gerard Schwarz put together a nicely rounded, all-American program for his New York Chamber Symphony's season opener at the 92d Street Y Saturday night: Aaron Copland's ''Appalachian Spring'' Suite, a new work by Ned Rorem and a concert version of Leonard Bernstein's ''Trouble in Tahiti.'' But because the birth of his daughter kept Mr.


Gtech Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gtech Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Revenue
30,302,000
33,511,000
Net inc
448,000
c1,448,000
Share earns
.05
.15
6mo rev
63,215,000
57,586,000
Net inc
b1,512,000
c2,389,000
Share earns
.16
.25


Ravenswood Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ravenswood Financial Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,393,000
1,134,000
Per share
1.11
.91
9mo net inc
3,709,000
3,282,000
Per share
2.96
2.62


Twin Dies; Twin Is Charged
LEAD: A 19-year-old man was charged with driving while impaired after his car spun out of control early today and hit a utility pole, killing his twin brother, who was the only passenger.
The man, Craig Voogt of Melville, who suffered head injuries, also was charged with speeding after the accident, which left Keith Voogt dead.


First National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,257,000
500,000
Per share
.47
.19
9mo net inc
2,017,000
1,640,000
Per share
.76
.65


The Prosecution Adds Nussbaum To Witness List
LEAD: Hedda Nussbaum is expected to be named today as a possible prosecution witness against Joel B. Steinberg in the beating death of Lisa Steinberg, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.


First Victory For Islanders
LEAD: Tomas Jonsson scored on a screened slapshot from the blue line five minutes into the third period tonight to lift the Islanders to a 3-2 victory over the Vancouver Canucks.


Studies Unmask Origins of Brutal Migraines
LEAD: MIGRAINE headache, long mired in popular myths and medical misconceptions, is at last yielding its miserable secrets to neurologists who study the cellular and chemical functions of the brain.


G-R-I Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* G-R-I Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,931,000
19,072,000
Net inc
178,000
383,000
Share earns
.08
.17
9mo rev
61,547,000
60,104,000
Net inc
731,000
897,000
Share earns
.33
.40


Mayor Sees City's (and His) Renewal
LEAD: The voice on the evening newscasts sounded tough.
The New Jersey State senator was saying that he was introducing a bill that would sanction the death penalty for drug dealers who have a record of narcotics offenses and who are convicted of selling to a pregnant woman or juvenile.


Corporate Securities Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corporate Securities Group
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
945,376
627,383
Net inc
8
56,303
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
1,609,500
1,235,962
Net loss
66,382
b98,732
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Patterns
LEAD:  Caution's the Word


Spearhead Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spearhead Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,252,000
9,342,000
Net inc
316,000
968,000
Share earns
.07
.19
Shares outst
4,801,037
5,105,714


Elvis Presley Joins the Fads At Book Fair In Frankfurt
LEAD: Nobody could remember whether Elvis Presley came to the Frankfurt Book Fair the last time he was in the area 30 years ago.
But he was sure there last week, his sideburns gleaming and his crooked smile flashing - and no Army uniform this time.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Horse Racing  Victory for a Long Shot: High Browser, the longest shot in a field of 10, dueled with Miss Unnameable before winning by a length yesterday in the Athenia Handicap at Belmont Park.
The winner, a 3-year-old Tom Rolfe filly trained by Mack Miller, paid $27.40 for $2 to win and ran the mile and three-eighths under Pat Day in 2:18 3/5.


First Commercial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
972,304
567,026
Per share
.23
.15
9mo net inc
2,327,837
929,039
Per share
.57
.36


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL A3-14  The exile of Khmer Rouge leaders, including Pol Pot, is a necessary part of a settlement of the war in Cambodia, involved nations, including China, Vietnam and the United States, agreed.
Page A1


New School Unveils Its Restored Orozco Murals
LEAD: New York City has added another gem to its long list of artistic treasures, one that it almost let slip away.
This latest addition is not new, but it is newly restored: a cycle of five frescoes that the Mexican muralist Jose Clemente Orozco painted at the New School for Social Research on West 12th


City National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* City National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b12,682,000
c12,849,000
Per share
.51
.53
9mo net inc
b33,553,000
c31,354,000
Per share
1.37
1.29
b-Includes non-recurring income of $599,000, or 2 cents a share and $855,000, or $1.37 a share for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Amerford International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerford International Corp
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
25,262,623
19,774,431
Net loss
368,949
541,650
Yr rev
95,320,254
77,668,326
Net inc
275,538
b754,454
Share earns
.21
-
b-Net loss


River Forest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* River Forest Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,329,000
2,947,000
Per share
.41
.35
9mo net inc
10,293,000
8,861,000
Per share
1.25
1.02


Cubans at Home in New Land at Last
LEAD: Carlos M. Castaneda, the Cuban-born editor of El Nuevo Dia, one of Puerto Rico's principal newspapers, was in a somber mood, at odds with the alluring backdrop of cloudless sky, emerald sea and verdant hills.


Review/Theater; Some Merry Pranksters From the 18th Century
LEAD: If there is any moral to be drawn from Oliver Goldsmith's venerable 1772 comedy, ''She Stoops to Conquer,'' it is that sooner or later what goes around comes around, to use contemporary parlance.
In the case of ''She Stoops to Conquer,'' the repercussions that its merry pranksters bring on themselves through practical jokes that rebound and romantic machinations that run awry come swiftly and sweetly home to roost.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''They do a whole bunch of talking but they don't give you any answers on the big problems.


First Boston Merger Brings Sense of Relief
LEAD: Within First Boston Inc. yesterday there was a sense of relief that the long-awaited deal with the firm's London-based affiliate, Financiere Credit Suisse-First Boston, was finally announced.
Some called it a year late, because of the turmoil and setbacks the firm has been through in the past year.


Intervoice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intervoice Inc.
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,616,762
1,331,757
Net inc
457,532
191,584
Share earns
.13
.06
6mo rev
4,680,248
2,485,742
Net inc
799,665
315,095
Share earns
.24
.10


Controllers See '90 Slump
LEAD: A majority of United States corporate controllers expect a recession in 1990 but foresee continued economic growth over the next year, a survey by the National Association of Accountants found.


Lincoln Logs Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Logs Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,350,839
7,124,363
Net inc
1,253,670
1,193,860
Share earns
.92
.83
6mo sales
9,154,112
10,062,194
Net inc
447,729
766,464
Share earns
.33
.54


NASA Says Seals Worked
LEAD: Inspection has turned up no damage to the O rings that sealed the joints in one of the shuttle Discovery's solid-fuel booster rockets, NASA reported today.


Missing Hikers Safe After Night on New Hampshire Mountain


Consolidated Papers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Papers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
221,767,000
188,236,000
Net inc
34,487,000
22,042,000
Share earns
.79
.51
9mo sales
674,565,000
540,619,000
Net inc
113,026,000
63,153,000
Share earns
2.59
1.45


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day last Wednesday about bidding to acquire Macmillan Inc. misstated a description in court papers about a telephone conversation between Michael Tokarz of Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company and two Macmillan executives, Edward P. Evans and William F. Reilly.
Mr.
Tokarz's deposition says he told his lawyers, who were in his office at the time, that the call ''would look bad on the record.


Saudis' Plan On Oil Output Raises Prices
LEAD: Oil prices rebounded in world trading yesterday after Saudi Arabia reiterated that it would cut its production if others did the same.


Don't Sentimentalize Hirohito's Wartime Role
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Defense Aide Calls on Allies To Spend More to Deter the Soviets
LEAD: A senior Defense Department official said today that the Soviet military remained a strong threat despite Moscow's re-examination of domestic policies, and the official called on the allies of the United States to take a bigger share of the West's defense burden.


Athletics Spread Success Around
LEAD: The final moments of the celebration were almost done.
The players were allowing themselves final sips of champagne, the manager was recalling a summer full of memories for the surrounding news media, and the general manager, dressed in faded blue jeans, tennis shoes and a shirt opened at the collar, was telling a couple of reporters how the whole thing had finally come together.


Reviews/Dance; Dakin of Graham Group Takes 3 Roles in a Night
LEAD: Even a major dancer in a great company does not usually appear in a leading role in three highly demanding works on a program, but Christine Dakin accomplished this unexpected feat superbly with the Martha Graham Dance Company on Saturday night.


A Friend in Pennsylvania
LEAD: The state whose blue-orange motor vehicle license plates say, ''You've got a friend in Pennsylvania'' could be thinking these days of the Democratic-run Senate Judiciary Committee.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Dodgers Lead Series, 3 to 2  The Dodgers beat the Mets, 7-4, to gain an edge in the National League playoff.
Jay Howell's suspension was reduced, making the Dodger pitcher eligible for tonight's game.
Page D27.


John Pirie, 81, a Retired Airline Executive
LEAD: John Charles Pirie, a lawyer and retired airline executive, died of cancer Wednesday at the Meridian Nursing Home in Annapolis, Md.
He was 81 years old and lived in Annapolis.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
San Francisco Marriott, a 1,500-room hotel opening in October 1989, to Rosenthal, Greene &amp; Campbell, Bethesda, Md.


Fewer Failures Of Banks Seen
LEAD: The number of United States commercial bank failures is expected to decline by about 25 percent in 1989 after reaching a record this year, the head of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation says.
The F.D.I.C. chairman, L. William Seidman, told a news conference at the American Bankers Association's annual convention Sunday that by the end of 1988 as many as 250 banks will have failed or needed Federal assistance to stay afloat.


Campaign Trail; Rather's Role A Matter of Debate
LEAD: The news has sent shock waves through the corridors of CBS.
Dan is - angry.
Dan Rather is - very upset.


CHESS
LEAD: If you put three grandmasters into a small, double-round competition, it would be a reasonably safe bet that they would take the top places.
And that is what happened in the Baden-Baden, West Germany, International Tournament in July: Vitaly Tseshkovsky of the Soviet Union won first prize with a 10-4 score; Dusan Rajkovic of Yugoslavia and Mihai Suba of


The Manipulators
LEAD: This campaign is getting real exciting.
Only about a month to go, and still nobody knows whether the American people will choose Lee Atwater or John Sasso.


Foreign Agents Said to Have Entered Bomb Labs
LEAD: Congressional investigators have found evidence that visitors from the Soviet bloc and other countries, including suspected intelligence agents, have routinely been allowed access to the Energy Department's nuclear weapons laboratories.


For Jefferies, Times Get a Little Tough
LEAD: As Gregg Jefferies energized the Mets in the last month of their season, the rookie's sudden prominence created the sense that his talent and motivation had come together to merge with the right time and place.


Rangers Shut Out; First Time Since '86
LEAD: There was a light show done in their honor before the game, replete with spotlights and lasers.
The memory the Rangers took away from the evening, though, was undoubtedly that of the light show conducted at their expense in the third period.
Red light after red light went on behind their goal, leaving them to slink off in the glare of a 5-0 loss to the Devils.


Minorco's Plan For Newmont
LEAD: The Minerals and Resources Corporation, which is attempting a takeover of Consolidated Gold Fields P.L.C. of Britain, said today that it would sell Gold Fields' 49.3 percent stake in the Newmont Mining Corporation if its bid succeeds.
Newmont owns the biggest


Jets Determined To Hone Technique
LEAD: Coach Joe Walton today put his team back on the hook he had allowed them to escape from on Sunday.


First National Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Bancorporation
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,465,000
3,856,000
Per share
.57
.50
9mo net inc
12,243,000
11,142,000
Per share
1.56
1.43


Ripley Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ripley Co.
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,604,187
1,421,903
Net inc
48,251
76,081
Share earns
.08
.13
6mo sales
3,209,981
3,011,949
Net inc
136,564
189,626
Share earns
.23
.32


Conston Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conston Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Revenue
50,089,000
47,538,000
Net loss
1,429,000
b245,000
Share earns
-
.03
6mo rev
100,242,000
94,432,000
Net inc
450,000
3,355,000
Share earns
.06
.44


Athens Court Votes to Send Bombing Suspect to the U.S.
LEAD: A Greek court ordered today that a Palestinian accused by the United States Government of bombing an American passenger plane be extradited to the United States.


Tenneco Selling Its Oil Company For $7.3 Billion
LEAD: Wrapping up the most extensive auction of properties ever by an American corporation, Tenneco Inc. said today that it expected to receive $7.3 billion in cash from buyers of its oil and gas properties.


Bankers Seek to Avoid A Role in Savings Crisis
LEAD: Bankers are growing increasingly concerned that they will be asked to help pay for bailing out their ailing cousins in the savings and loan industry.


SPI Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SPI Pharmaceuticals (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
28,672,000
20,375,000
Net inc
2,326,000
1,797,000
Share earns
.23
.18
9mo sales
79,784,000
52,474,000
Net inc
6,683,000
8,140,000
Share earns
.66
.80


Superheroes' Battleground: Prime Time
LEAD: Bang!
Pow!
Crunch!
Thunk!
Iron Man, She-Hulk and Daredevil are coming to prime-time television.


General Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,681,000,000
9,733,000,000
Net inc
815,000,000
661,000,000
Share earns
.90
.73
9mo rev
27,583,000,000
28,228,000,000
Net inc
2,375,000,000
b2,517,000,000
Share earns
2.63
2.76


N.F.L. Notebook; Craig Sets the Pace For Running Backs
LEAD: The way Roger Craig sees it, his body should be like a finely tuned automobile.
Like rolling into a body shop for oil changes and new filters, Craig three times a week visits a chiropractor and twice a week has a massage.
He is 6 feet and 212 pounds, having lost 13 pounds since last season.


Thomas S. Farrell, College President, 76
LEAD: Brother Thomas S. Farrell, founding president of Walsh College, died of a stroke Saturday.
He was 76 years old.


Hallwood Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hallwood Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,137,000
13,192,000
Net inc
b472,000
c3,047,000
Share earns
.10
.66
Shares outst
4,656,000
4,621,000
Yr rev
26,155,000
39,190,000
Net inc
b9,328,000
c14,045,000
Share earns
2.00
3.07
Shares outst
4,659,000
4,574,000


Nominees Set to Meet Thursday For Debate
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis and Vice President Bush will meet in their second debate Thursday at 9 P.M., Eastern daylight time, at the Pauley Pavilion of The University of California at Los Angeles, the campaigns said today.


2D NUCLEAR PLANT IS ORDERED CLOSED BY ENERGY DEPT.
LEAD: Facing the latest safety problems at the nation's nuclear weapon plants, the Department of Energy has shut down plutonium processing at the Rocky Flats Plant near Boulder, Colo.


Frisch's Restaurants Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 18
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frisch's Restaurants Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 18
1988
1987
Revenue
46,409,008
45,391,494
Net inc
516,179
1,404,533
Share earns
.10
.28


Bangladeshi Asks for Help on Controlling Floods
LEAD: In an appeal to the General Assembly, the Foreign Minister of Bangladesh said today that a permanent solution to the country's annual flood disasters must be reached through regional cooperation with international support.


Jesse A. Spilka Weds Susan Rachel Brophy
LEAD: Susan Rachel Brophy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira N. Brophy of New York, was married yesterday to Jesse Adam Spilka, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Spilka of New York.
Rabbi Martin Zion officiated at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens.


As Strife Persists, Algerian Asks for Time
LEAD: President Chadli Benjedid of Algeria pleaded tonight for more time to institute programs to solve the nation's political crisis.


What Roe v. Wade Said
LEAD: To the Editor:


Plasti-Line Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plasti-Line Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Sales
18,708,000
17,769,000
Net inc
725,000
496,000
Share earns
.20
.14
Shares outst
3,582,000
3,585,000
9mo sales
54,766,000
46,888,000
Net inc
1,653,000
1,468,000
Share earns
.46
.41
Shares outst
3,580,000
3,586,000


U.S. Panel Proposes Steps to Cut Safety Lapses at O'Hare Airport
LEAD: Eighty measures to improve operations at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, including higher pay and other incentives to attract experienced air-traffic controllers, have been proposed by a Government team that studied the nation's busiest airport.


Sports People; 'Not Dead Yet'
LEAD: Wisconsin football fans, some of whom are frustrated over the 0-5 start of Coach Don Morton's team, saw him in a coffinlike box if they tuned into his television show over the weekend.
At the start of the show, Morton's head popped out of a pine box that had been lined with felt.
On the lid was a sign that read, ''We might be down, but we're not dead yet.


Rite Aid to Sell Super Rite Stake
LEAD: The Rite Aid Corporation said it had decided to sell its 46.8 percent stake in Super Rite Foods Inc., and Super Rite Foods, in turn, reported that an investor group would make an offer to acquire all of the grocery company's common shares.
The investor group includes Super Rite's chairman, Alex Grass, and other members of management.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. Why do cats like catnip?
A.The active substance of catnip, Nepeta cataria, is a chemical called nepetalactone that sets off in the cat's brain the behavioral patterns usually connected with a variety of pleasurable or exciting things, according to research by Dr.
Benjamin L. Hart, an animal behavior expert at the University of California at


VLSI Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VLSI Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 25
1988
1987
Revenue
58,849,000
44,754,000
Net inc
2,268,000
2,051,000
Share earns
.10
.09
Shares outst
23,560,000
23,293,000
9mo rev
156,302,000
124,956,000
Net inc
3,775,000
5,214,000
Share earns
.16
.22
Shares outst
23,307,000
23,427,000


Drop in Oil Prices Threatens Mexican Plan
LEAD: The sharp decline in oil prices could jeopardize the Mexican Government's austerity program, which has succeeded in slowing the rate of inflation in this economically troubled country.


Sara Lee to Expand Hosiery Holdings
LEAD: The Sara Lee Corporation, the leader in the United States hosiery market with its Hanes and L'eggs brands, received permission to purchase a controlling stake in France's most popular hosiery maker, Dim S.A.
The French Finance Minister, Pierre Beregovoy, said he had given Dim's parent, Societe Bic, approval to sell a 31 percent stake in the stocking maker to Sara


Recipe Fortifies Breast Milk for Premature Babies
LEAD: Scientists have developed a recipe for fortifying mother's milk that improves the odds of survival for tiny premature infants, the Agriculture Department has reported.


Sports People; Tyson Confers
LEAD: Mike Tyson was still at the Orwell, Ohio, farm of his promoter, Don King, yesterday, conferring with his attorney, Howard Weitzman, about the divorce suit filed Friday by the fighter's wife, Robin Givens.
A source close to Tyson said that one legal approach being considered is to seek an annulment of the marriage to preclude Givens from gaining a share of the couple's property.


On Horse Racing; Memorable Season For Phipps Stable
LEAD: The D. Wayne Lukas stable is snakebit these days, and the snake doing the biting wears black silks and a cherry-red cap.


Roatan Journal; On Scorned Isles, They'd Have Victoria Whipped
LEAD: It is often said that this forgotten sliver of Honduras is striving to be forever England.


Grand Met Seeking End to Court Order
LEAD: Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., the British conglomerate attempting to take over the Pillsbury Company, will ask a Federal court in Detroit Tuesday to quash a restraining order that is preventing Grand Met from buying Pillsbury shares.


Campaign Trail; Quayle Gets Even With Questioners
LEAD: Senator Dan Quayle, who rides in a curtained-off portion of his Boeing 727, ''the Hoosier Pride,'' shies away from reporters.
But the 41-year-old Indiana Senator is plainly handling the generally rough treatment with some aplomb.


Research Yields Clues to Drug Resistance in Cancer Therapy
LEAD: RECENT research advances hold the promise of overcoming one of the most serious problems in cancer treatment: the tendency for tumors in some patients to become resistant to chemotherapy.


Walking a Tightrope On Intelligence Issues
LEAD: With an off-the-cuff retort to a provocative question, Jim Wright, the Speaker of the House, has rekindled one of Washington's longest running and most acrimonious debates - about what role Congress should have in overseeing American intelligence operations.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Carlton Communications P.L.C., London, said it had completed the acquisition of Technicolor Holdings Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.


Old Fashion Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Fashion Foods Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Revenue
4,910,000
4,621,000
Net inc
57,000
b383,000
Share earns
.05
.31
Shares outst
1,197,745
1,224,793
b-Included a gain of $203,000 from a retroactive change in income tax accounting.


THE PLAYOFFS: Sports of The Times; 'JH' Inspired Gibson's Home Runs
LEAD: IF the Dodgers win the National League pennant, the Mets' biggest mistake will not have been whatever runners they left on base or whatever bad pitches they threw.
Their biggest mistake will have been demanding the search of Jay Howell's glove.
Howell was using pine tar in order to get a better grip on the ball.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith Gets Card Business
LEAD: American Greetings, the 82-year-old Cleveland-based greeting card company, has called on a nearby agency, Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith, to handle its retail trade programs.
A seven-figure budget will be aimed at 90,000 stores and distributors.
The agency, whose specialty is retail and business advertising, already has such clients as Libbey Glass and Mr.


Luby's Cafeterias Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Luby's Cafeterias Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
68,896,000
61,964,000
Net inc
7,739,000
6,554,000
Share earns
.43
.36
Yr sales
254,301,000
232,858,000
Net inc
27,509,000
b23,665,000
Share earns
1.51
1.30


Belgian Coalition Gets A Lift in Local Voting
LEAD: The Government of Prime Minister Wilfried Martens, which has tried to move Belgium toward a federal system separating French-speaking and Flemish-speaking interests, appears to have emerged unscathed in nationwide municipal elections.


Hidden Victim In Brawley Case Is Civil Rights
LEAD: Since graduating from Radcliffe in 1971 and Columbia Law in 1975, Suzanne Lynn has devoted her legal career to civil rights.
In 1986, Ms.
Lynn, who is black, was named chief of the state Attorney General's civil rights bureau, supervising six lawyers.


Czech Premier Quits Over Policy Rift
LEAD: Czechoslovakia's Prime Minister resigned today after 18 years in office, apparently because of differences with the new party leader.


Sanmark-Stardust Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sanmark-Stardust Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
20,941,000
12,730,000
Net loss
1,843,000
b105,000
Share earns
-
.01
Yr sales
96,219,000
60,550,000
Net loss
1,764,000
b1,766,000
Share earns
-
.25


Telerate Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telerate Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
112,325,000
85,985,000
Net inc
23,618,000
19,161,000
Share earns
.25
.20
9mo rev
326,366,000
238,586,000
Net inc
70,632,000
51,957,000
Share earns
.75
.55


Kllm Transport Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kllm Transport Services (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 2
1988
1987
Revenue
24,827,000
20,230,000
Net inc
568,000
877,000
Share earns
.22
.34
9mo rev
71,139,000
55,169,000
Net inc
2,200,000
b2,373,000
Share earns
.86
.92


Ruth Tendler, Administrator, 62
LEAD: Ruth Tendler, assistant director of the Lincoln Institute for Psychotherapy, died of lung cancer Wednesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


Communications Transmision Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications Transmision Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,277,000
18,707,000
Net loss
1,387,000
b1,373,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a chart in Business Day on Friday about Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company's profits misstated the contributions of two divisions.
Allstate contributed 52.2 percent of profits; the merchandise group contributed 42.7 percent.


Coca-Cola Promotes Marketing Executive
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it had named Ira C. Herbert, executive vice president and corporate marketing director, president of Coca-Cola USA, in an apparent effort to strengthen its marketing.


Sunwest Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunwest Financial Services (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,700,000
6,700,000
Per share
.29
.68
9mo net inc
17,200,000
25,400,000
Per share
1.85
2.58


Samuel Adams, Ex-C.I.A. Officer And Libel Case Figure, Dies at 54
LEAD: Samuel A. Adams, a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst who was a co-defendant in Gen.
William C. Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS, died yesterday, apparently of a heart attack, at his home in Strafford, Vt.
He was 54 years old.


Deceit Wins the Day
LEAD: CORRUPTION is a nasty game. I liked it. You play the part of Derek


Afghan Rebel Attacks Are Reported to Go On
LEAD: Moslem guerrillas fired rockets into the Afghan capital on Sunday night, killing five or six people, an official of the Soviet-allied Government said today.
The official said he did not know how many people were wounded in the attack and could not provide further details.


American Recreation Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Recreation Centers (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 24
1988
1987
Revenue
6,491,000
5,500,000
Net loss
691,000
b1,184,000
Share earns
-
.25
b-Net income


Bush's Attack on Crime Appeals to the Emotions
LEAD: A hush came over the crowd in Roman Hall here today when Vice President Bush singled out Helen Lanza midway through his latest speech against crime.


An Autumnal Oasis of Solitude


Micron Products reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micron Products (AMEX)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
17,550,000
3,939,000
Net inc
4,000
388,000
Share earns
-
.22
The company said its 1988 results include $13,180,000 in sales of Numedco Inc., acquired in February and non- recurring acquisition costs of $166,000.


Campaign Trail; One Job Bentsen Isn't Seeking Now
LEAD: It began so perfectly for Lloyd Bentsen over the weekend.


New Ozone Threat: Scientists Fear Layer Is Eroding at North Pole
LEAD: EVEN as they ponder the implications of the vast hole that opens each year in the protective ozone layer over Antarctica, a major international team of scientists are now focusing new attention to the Arctic, where experts fear the ozone layer may also be developing worrisome gaps.


Braintree Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Braintree Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
428,000
399,000
Per share
.27
.26
Shares outst
1,546,260
1,534,860
9mo net inc
1,177,000
1,316,000
Per share
.76
.86
Shares outst
1,538,979
1,534,860


Americus Journal; Town Goes Public To Resurrect Cafe
LEAD: Down at Americus's principal intersection, the one with the red blinking light, a modest sign peering dimly through a window identifies the Breckinridge County Cafe.


Lebanon, With 2 'Governments,' Faced With Deepening Stalemate
LEAD: Lebanon's warring factions are at a standoff, still locked in a constitutional dispute that threatens partition and more violence.


Brawley to Get Muslim Name
LEAD: Tawana Brawley has expressed a desire to become a Muslim and will receive a new Muslim name next Feb. 26 at a dedication of a Nation of Islam mosque here, an official of the religious group said today.


EXILE OF POL POT IS SEEN AS KEY TO CAMBODIA PACT
LEAD: Nations involved in diplomatic efforts to end the war in Cambodia agree that several leaders of the Khmer Rouge should be sent into exile in China as part of any settlement, Asian officials and diplomats here say.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Washington Talk page yesterday about the political implications of efforts to free American hostages in Lebanon gave an incorrect date in some copies for the release of David P. Jacobsen.
It occurred on Nov. 2, 1986.


Adolph E. Meyer, Historian, 90
LEAD: Adolph E. Meyer, professor emeritus of educational history at New York University, died of pnuemonia Sept. 30 at his home in Champaign, Ill.
He was 90 years old.


'Jewish Journalism'
LEAD: ''A People in Print: Jewish Journalism in America,'' is to open at the Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street, at noon Thursday.
The exhibition, which runs through Feb. 23, examines the role of the Jewish press and the personalities who shaped it.
In addition to more than 300 drawings, paintings, periodicals, photographs and related artifacts, the exhibition also features two video presentations and letters from Presidents Jefferson and Madison.


Holiday Slows Bond Activity
LEAD: Activity in the Treasury bond market was virtually nonexistent yesterday, with the United States market closed for Columbus Day.
Japanese financial markets were also closed.


No Help for Journalists
LEAD: Most Washingtonians eventually become accustomed to the ways of the Federal bureaucracy, but now and then something occurs that leaves even the most experienced rolling their eyes to the heavens.


Driver and 2 Officers Hurt in Cruiser Crash
LEAD: Two police officers and a civilian were injured yesterday when a police car crashed with a car at Morris Avenue and 166th Street, the police said.
It was the third time in less than a month that a civilian was injured in an accident involving a patrol car.


Advanced Micro Devices Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Micro Devices Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 25
1988
1987
Sales
285,484,000
260,912,000
Net inc
7,179,000
b69,669,000
Share earns
.06
-
9mo sales
877,800,000
734,535,000
Net inc
53,420,000
b61,345,000
Share earns
.56
-


Precious Metals Up Sharply; Dollar's Softness Is a Factor
LEAD: Futures prices of gold, platinum and silver surged yesterday in reaction to the weaker dollar and a strong rally in the oil market.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Paper Maker Cites Diversity
LEAD: Although the International Paper Company has made its presence felt in just about every aspect of the paper manufacturing business, the $7.7 billion company has kept a low profile on the ad front.


QUAYLE ANSWERS SUCCESSION QUERY
LEAD: Senator Dan Quayle, arguing all the while that the question was ''inappropriate,'' today outlined what he would do if he had to assume the duties of President in an emergency.


Griffin to Buy Stations
LEAD: The entertainer Merv Griffin agreed Friday to pay $34 million for four radio stations of the Federal Communications Corporation.
The stations are WHJJ-AM and WHJY-FM in Providence, R.I., along with WVEZ-AM and FM in Louisville, Ky.
The operations represent the entire broadcast holdings of Federal Communications, based in Providence, whose principal owner is Robert Fish.


Trial Set in Robbery Of Wells Fargo in '83
LEAD: After more than three years of arguments, motions and other twists, a Federal trial is set to begin today for five people accused in the 1983 robbery of $7.1 million from a Wells Fargo depot.


Structural Dynamics Reearch reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Structural Dynamics Reearch (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
19,163,000
15,629,000
Net inc
1,509,000
911,000
Share earns
.23
.18
Shares outst
6,462,000
5,039,000
9mo rev
53,643,000
43,904,000
Net inc
3,754,000
2,153,000
Share earns
.58
.43
Shares outst
6,426,000
4,953,000


State by State; From Jersey to Missouri, Voters Are Fed Up
LEAD: The American public is fed up with the Presidential candidates and the way they're running their campaigns.


International Research &amp; Development Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Research &amp; Development Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,883,072
5,013,647
Net inc
1,050,138
601,374
Share earns
.18
.11
9mo rev
16,206,145
13,566,148
Net inc
2,303,628
1,035,497
Share earns
.41
.19


Doctors Test New Plastics for Artificial Lenses and Corneas
LEAD: NEW plastic materials that do not repel water will soon enhance the long-term prospects of patients who need artificial lenses or corneas, scientists have reported.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
AM International, Chicago, a supplier of graphics-industry products, said its president and chief operating officer, Jerry O. Williams, had resigned and that the chief executive, Merle H. Banta, had assumed the responsibilities.


U. of Chicago Maintains Its Intellectual Vigor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Laszlo Berger, 86, Analyst on Wall Street
LEAD: Laszlo Berger, a Wall Street analyst and investment broker for more than 50 years, died, apparently of a heart attack, on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old.


Corrections#YES#
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about alternatives to the explosive testing of nuclear weapons misstated the number of tests for reliability that occur at the nuclear test site in Nevada.
They are carried out occasionally, making up a small fraction of the two dozen or so explosive tests performed for all purposes each year.


Buick or Olds? G.M. Wants It Clear
LEAD: ''This is not your father's Oldsmobile,'' blares the voice in a television commercial proclaiming a new generation of cars from the oldest division of the General Motors Corporation.


Cooking and Spelling Chilli (as in Illinois)
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cattle Prices Are Increasing
LEAD: Cattle prices are being pushed higher this fall by hefty demand and smaller supplies, but analysts at the Agriculture Department say consumers may not see much further effect at retail beef counters.


Il Progresso Backs Bush And Praises His Stands
LEAD: Il Progresso, the Italian-language newspaper, yesterday endorsed the candidacy of Vice President Bush, saying the Republican represents ''the traditional values of Italian Americans.''


Critic's Notebook; They Sing, They Dance, They're Utterly Different
LEAD: When Prince started a two-night stand at Madison Square Garden on Oct. 2, and Michael Jackson arrived at the New Jersey Meadowlands the next day for his first of three shows, it shaped up as a trans-Hudson battle of the bands.


Bank of New Hampshire Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New Hampshire Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,242,000
1,825,000
Share earns
.66
.54
9mo net inc
5,836,000
5,281,000
Share earns
1.73
1.57
The company said year-ago results have been restated to reflect the acquistion of Suncook Bank, which has been accounted for on a pooling-of-interests basis.


Nikko Securities Names President of Unit in U.S.
LEAD: The Nikko Securities Company said yesterday that it had appointed Hideo Suzuki, a 28-year employee of the company, as president and chief operating officer of its United States subsidiary.


Assix International Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Assix International Inc. (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,721,673
1,261,769
Net inc
351,908
245,744
Share earns
.12
.09


Dukakis, in Levittown, Offers a Plan To Help Young Families Buy Homes
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, saying it was time to ''redeem the promise'' of home ownership for young Americans, proposed a program today for first-time home buyers that would allow the use of Individual Retirement Accounts as down payments.


FASHION: By Design; Sensible Shoes Go Chic
LEAD: To downtown dressers, the ''cop on the beat'' shoe is not new.
For several years, sprightly young women have been finishing off their all-black outfits with chubby-toed, thick-soled, black leather shoes much like the ones worn by police officers.


Dow Jones &amp; Company Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 12
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Jones &amp; Company Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 12
1988
1987
Revenue
383,755,000
298,621,000
Net inc
31,992,000
36,839,000
Share earns
.33
.38
9mo rev
1,190,111,000
897,229,000
Net inc
185,115,000
152,673,000
Share earns
1.92
1.58


National Community Bank (New Jersey) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Community Bank (New Jersey)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
11,100,000
9,200,000
Per share
1.07
.88
9mo net inc
30,700,000
25,200,000
Per share
2.96
2.44


Met Fans Squeezed in Parking Lot Shutout at Shea
LEAD: The man who oversees parking at Shea Stadium is the first to admit that traffic before and after Met games is an ordeal.
That is why he tries to be the first to arrive, at 6 A.M.


Treaty Bans Sea Burning Of Toxic Wastes
LEAD: Nations that have signed an international treaty designed to protect the marine environment voted last week to prohibit the practice of incinerating toxic wastes at sea.


Knicks vs. Nets: Already?
LEAD: The Knicks and Nets will open the exhibition season tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, and Eddie Lee Wilkins will continue his quest to become the backup center to Patrick Ewing.


Long Night for the Mets
LEAD: The Los Angeles Dodgers put their pine-tar problems behind them Sunday night, outlasted the Mets in a struggle that raged for four and a half hours, and finally nailed them in the 12th inning on a home run by Kirk Gibson.


Interchange Financial Servces reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interchange Financial Servces
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
745,934
566,192
Per share
.39
.32
9mo net inc
2,121,526
1,748,614
Per share
1.07
1.01


Cutting Trash Down to Size
LEAD: Each year Americans throw away 16 billion disposable diapers, 1.6 billion pens and 2 billion razors.
That's just part of an annual 1,300 pounds of household waste per person.
Yet acceptable places to dump the garbage are fast disappearing because of tighter environmental standards and opposition from local communities.


Electrosound Group Incorporated reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electrosound Group Incorporated (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,538,000
7,847,000
Net loss
1,808,000
b89,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income and includes a tax credit of $59,000.
The latest quarter included an after-tax charge of $1,779,000 relating to the company's pro rata share of losses at Memory-Tech, its 40 percent owned compact disc manufacturing joint venture with Mitsubishi Corp.


Driver Cited in Hayride Crash
LEAD: A tractor driver was arrested for public intoxication after 11 teen-agers were injured when a hayride wagon overturned late Saturday.
The wagon overturned as it was going down a steep road in Eagle Creek Park, the authorities said.
Many of the 40 passengers were affiliated with the Fellowship of Christian Athletes at Speedway High School.


Immucor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Immucor Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,357,331
1,925,518
Net inc
277,136
b296,374
Share earns
.07
.09
Shares outst
4,067,869
3,415,148
b-Includes a tax benefit of $106,695.


Group Hails Corporate Aid On Housing
LEAD: A nonprofit group overseeing the creation of 1,000 apartments for low-income families in New York City has raised more than 30 percent of the total cost - $25 million -from corporate investors, officials of the group say.


The Editorial Notebook; From the Inside: Yonkers I
LEAD: Imagine a once-serviceable red brick public school now boarded up and dilapidated.
Then imagine, on the same two-acre site, small clusters of single-family town houses, neat lawns, shrubs and flowers.


Perjury Case Raises Legal Eyebrows
LEAD: The case against a prominent Manhattan negligence lawyer accused of suborning perjury has added to a debate in legal circles over whether courtrooms are appropriate settings for sting operations, particularly if the tactic involves fake court documents.


Eagles Beat Sputtering Giants
LEAD: The Giants, who had played poorly but managed to win three of their first five games this season, played poorly and paid for it tonight.
The Giants' defense gave up 24 points, allowed yet another quarterback to post All-Pro numbers, including an 80-yard bomb at the end of the game, and lost a 24-13 decision to the Eagles at Veterans


For a Chief of State, No Wrinkles, Please
LEAD: In its bid for acceptance as a world fashion power, the British fashion industry has an effective champion in Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST APARTHEID - 10 A.M.


Gelman Sciences Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gelman Sciences Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,146,000
14,768,000
Net inc
b471,000
55,000
Share earns
.20
.02
Yr sales
61,737,000
53,201,000
Net inc
b1,176,000
413,000
Share earns
.50
.17


Sports People; Colts' Woes Grow
LEAD: Jack Trudeau, the Indianapolis Colt quarterback who was injured three weeks ago, underwent reconstructive knee surgery yesterday and will be out for the rest of the season.
Trudeau, who won the starting job over the veteran Gary Hogeboom a week before the injury, suffered ligament and cartilage damage in a 23-17 loss at Cleveland.


Drexel Judge Suspects Firm Acted Improperly for Defense
LEAD: In his strongest response yet to charges that he has violated conflict-of-interest laws, the Federal judge hearing the securities-fraud action against Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. yesterday suggested that a New York law firm representing a major defendant had acted improperly in the case.


Fumes From Toxic Chemical Spill Injure 22 at Electrical Company
LEAD: Twenty-two workers at an electrical company were stricken by fumes from a spilled chemical today, most of them after an evacuation order was ended and they re-entered the building, officials said.


N.A.A.C.P. Plans Vote Drive
LEAD: The N.A.A.C.P.
National Board is planning a nationwide voter drive linked to the 25th anniversary of the murder of Medgar Evers, a Mississippi civil rights leader.


Reviews/Dance; Changes a Baby Brings
LEAD: Melanie Slater set up small archetypal worlds in three dances performed on Saturday night at Dance Theater Workshop's Bessie Schonberg Theater.


Review/Music; Tangled Love and Hate
LEAD: Musical Theater Works was founded in 1983 to give composers a public forum for their works in progress.
The company's first production of the season, ''Passionate Extremes,'' a hybrid chamber opera and musical comedy, is running through next Sunday at the Theater at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church (Lexington Avenue at 54th Street).


Village Super Market Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Village Super Market Inc.
Qtr to July 30
1988
1987
Sales
184,022,000
159,004,000
Net inc
2,090,000
1,501,000
Share earns
.63
.59
Yr sales
621,468,000
567,395,000
Net inc
6,140,000
4,173,000
Share earns
1.84
1.73
Shares outst
3,343,376
2,411,869


Builder Casts His Swine Before Town
LEAD: The day after local officials snubbed Bill Auble's proposal last April to build apartments and a shopping center on farmland that borders this tiny upstate village, something curious happened.
A hog farm suddenly appeared on Mr.
Auble's land, just off the main north-south route into the village.


Dow Jones Net Falls by 13%
LEAD: Revenues and income from The Wall Street Journal and other printed publications owned by Dow Jones &amp; Company declined sharply in the third quarter, overshadowing strong gains in electronic publishing at Telerate Inc., a partly owned subsidiary, and in other news and information services segments.


Robins Case Trustees Said To Be Split
LEAD: The court-appointed examiner in the A. H. Robins bankruptcy case has filed a report indicating that the trustees are deeply divided over many issues critical to the disbursement of a $2.4 billion trust fund for victims of a birth-control device made by Robins.


Psychologist's Expert Testimony Called Unscientific
LEAD: PSYCHOLOGISTS and psychiatrists who testify as experts in court are themselves on trial, after a fashion.


It Was Parades and Politics in New York


Europe-Latin Accord
LEAD: The European Community signed an agreement in Paris today with the Inter-American Development Bank to encourage growth of private European investment in Latin America, a community statement said.
The agreement lays the foundations for the I.A.D.B. and the 12-nation community to promote investment and set up joint ventures between Western European concerns and small and medium-size companies in Latin America.


Accounts of Jailed Planner
LEAD: A receiver for the fugitive financial planner arrested in Tokyo last week said today that he had moved to identify and freeze accounts held or controlled by the suspect in two countries, and might have located a third account.


Amazon Settlers Turn Forests To Ash in Name of Progress
LEAD: The fires that have raged around this frontier town for the last three months have once more pushed back the jungle and turned forests into black and sapless land.
But the mood of Redencao is anything but mournful.


Attwoods PLC reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Attwoods PLC (OTC)
Year to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
161,829,000
112,143,000
Net inc
b19,417,000
13,366,000
Share earns
1.80
1.38
Results are in U.S. dollars; the dollar amounts were translated from sterling at the rate of one pound equals $1.766 for the 1988 period and for the 1987 period at the rate of one pound equals $1.53.


Columbus Day Closings
LEAD: The Federal Reserve and the Treasury bond market were closed yesterday for Columbus Day.
Most banks were also closed, although the nation's stock and commodity markets were open.
In Japan and Canada, all financial markets were closed for national holidays.


S.E.C. Inquiries Scrutinized
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has failed to investigate most reports of suspicious foreign trading of United States securities, despite a growing number of illegal trades originating from abroad, a House panel said today.


Fetal-Tissue Panel Reached No Decision on Abortion Morality
LEAD: To the Editor:


Talking Business; with Grove of Intel; Using Diversity In a Downturn
LEAD: The semiconductor industry's leading indicator, the book-to-bill ratio, is expected to drop for the fifth straight month when it is released this week.
It might even fall below 1, which would be the lowest value since 1986.
The ratio compares orders with shipments, and a level below 1 indicates that fewer new products are being ordered than are being shipped.


Campaign Trail; Dukakis Gives Aides The Cold Shoulder
LEAD: Poised for the second and final Presidential debate on Thursday, the staffs of both candidates are nervously trying to shape the television styles of Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis.
Clearly Mr.
Bush has to lower his voice, stop the abrupt hand gestures and refrain from the kind of comments he made in a television interview last year on how his father used to discipline him.


'Winter' Wonderland in Maine


Bold Plans for Curing Sick Housing
LEAD: Less than four months into his new job, Vincent Lane, the head of the Chicago Housing Authority, has set an audacious course for himself: he wants to turn a giant public housing system that is overwhelmed by gangs, crime and corruption into a laboratory for innovation.


Ms. Solomon Wed To J. I. Griffin 4th
LEAD: The wedding of Joan Lynna Solomon, the daughter of Mr. and Richard A. Solomon of Chevy Chase, Md., to James Isaac Griffin 4th, a son of Mr.
Griffin 3d of Dallas and the late Davyne S. Griffin, took place yesterday at the Audubon Society in Chevy Chase.
The Rev.
Thomas Kryder Reid, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Robert


Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc.
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,091,382
896,349
Net inc
49,622
b25,284
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
1,969,423
1,888,983
Net loss
21,616
100,962
b-Net loss


Digging for Key to Freed Slaves' Lives
LEAD: Archeologists are sifting through the remnants here of the largest known community of freed slaves in Westchester County.
The finds so far - from the stone foundation of a house built in the 1850's - have included shards of ceramic pottery, a 1902 coin, a brass button of a uniform from the New York Central-Harlem River


Deere Workers in Five States Ratify a Three-Year Contract
LEAD: Blue-collar workers at Deere &amp; Company factories in five states overwhelmingly ratified a new contract with their first general pay increase since 1981, United Auto Workers officials said Sunday.


A Jet in Trouble Dumps Its Fuel, Dousing Queens
LEAD: The pilot of a jetliner with engine trouble jettisoned some of its fuel over Queens yesterday, showering some residents of Far Rockaway with kerosene before landing the plane at Kennedy International Airport.


Book Award Nominees
LEAD: Peter Gay, Don DeLillo and J. F. Powers are among the 10 authors nominated for the 1988 National Book Awards.
The nominations were announced yesterday by Barbara Prete, the executive director of the sponsoring organization, National Book Awards Inc.


Consumers Accepting 4% Inflation
LEAD: According to many economists, the inflation rate has remained at 4 percent to 5 percent for so long now that people are becoming accustomed to it.


The Demographics of Drink
LEAD: What color do you drink?


Sale by Goodrich
LEAD: The B. F. Goodrich Company, based in Akron, Ohio, reached an agreement to sell its Engineered Rubber Products unit to a management group from its aerospace division.
Terms were not disclosed.
The unit designs and produces such textile-reinforced specialty products as inflatable life rafts, helicopter emergency flotation systems and inflatable tanks for fluid storage.


Token Plot: To Catch A Suspect
LEAD: A swindle in which criminals jam subway turnstiles and retrieve deposited tokens is rising in New York City.
In this series of photographs, taken with a hidden camera tripped by remote control at the 116th Street and Broadway station on IRT No. 1 line, a suspect is shown as he tampers with a turnstile and is eventually arrested by the transit police.


Sterling Capital Corp reports earnings for As of Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Capital Corp (AMEX)
As of Sept 30
1988
1987
Assets
18,025,616
16,947,724
Per share
7.21
6.78
Assets represent net assets.


In London, 60's Panache Returns
LEAD: Among the many current trends in British fashion is a resurgence of the ethnic or hippie dressing of the 1960's, considered a romantic period by today's young people, who were infants at the time.
Retailers - who have been exploring the 300 fashion houses exhibiting at Olympia, the convention center in the Kensington section, and attending the 19 formal fashion shows -find that hippie looks have replaced the conservative or yuppie looks prevalent just six months ago.


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abbott Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,212,407,000
1,090,673,000
Net inc
172,322,000
145,800,000
Share earns
.76
.64
9mo sales
3,630,687,000
3,154,023,000
Net inc
529,700,000
442,506,000
Share earns
2.34
1.94


Prague Symphony
LEAD: Jiri Belohavek is to conduct the Prague Symphony Orchestra in a program of Czechoslovak music at Carnegie Hall on Oct. 19 at 8 P.M.
Steven Mayer, a pianist, will join the orchestra to perform Dvorak's Piano Concerto in G minor.
Dvorak's Symphony No. 8 in G major and Smetana's ''Moldau'' will complete the program.


Help for the F.B.I.
LEAD: ''F.B.I.
Confirms Amazing Powers of Psychic,'' said the headline on this week's front page of The National Enquirer.


Stocks Close Mixed as Dow Climbs 8.71
LEAD: The stock market ended mixed yesterday in slow Columbus Day trading, but the Dow Jones industrial average managed on a small gain to reach a new high since the market tumbled last Oct. 19.


Sports People; Surgery for Dravecky
LEAD: Dave Dravecky, the San Francisco Giant pitcher, has undergone successful surgery to remove a cancerous tumor in his throwing arm, the Giants said yesterday.
The 32-year-old left-hander underwent an eight-hour operation at the Cleveland Clinic on Friday.
He will remain in the hospital for the next few days.


Fur Vault Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fur Vault Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Revenue
13,843,000
13,629,000
Net loss
2,600,000
955,000


Intel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intel Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Revenue
784,939,000
501,128,000
Net inc
142,711,000
80,514,000
Share earns
.78
.45
9mo rev
2,147,429,000
1,334,617,000
Net inc
367,121,000
152,518,000
Share earns
2.05
.84


Evans Incorporated reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evans Incorporated (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Sales
19,652,000
19,553,000
Net loss
1,367,000
1,378,000
6mo sales
34,431,000
36,462,000
Net loss
3,695,000
4,122,000


2 Killed in Factory Explosion
LEAD: At least two people were killed and seven injured when a carbon dioxide tank exploded today at a plant that makes airplane and rocket parts.


Congress to Adjourn by Week's End
LEAD: A little later than Congressional leaders had hoped but with more decorum than anybody on Capitol Hill expected, the 100th Congress is wrapping up its business, aiming for adjournment by the end of the week.


Leaving It to Charity And Knitting Needles
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hostage Charge Against Indian Protester Dropped
LEAD: A judge today dismissed Federal hostage-taking charges against a militant Indian, Timothy Jacobs, but said he would leave it to a jury to decide whether a second defendant was guilty.


SRI LANKA CAPITAL IS AN ARMED CAMP
LEAD: Hours after the massacre on Sunday of more than 40 ethnic Sinhalese villagers, apparently by Tamil guerrillas, Sri Lanka's capital was under heavy military guard today as Sinhalese militants called a nationwide strike.


O'Brien Energy Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* O'Brien Energy Systems (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,460,000
3,684,000
Net inc
896,000
79,000
Share earns
.09
.01
Year-ago first quarter results is adjusted to reflect O'Brien Energy Systems' June 1988 acquisition of three British companies.


Neti Technologies reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neti Technologies
Year to May 31
1988
1987
Revenue
370,000
3,614,000
Net loss
2,520,000
8,775,000
The company said 1988 revenues were entirely from its computer timesharing and software licensing operations.
Revenue in 1987 resulted primarily from the company's computer hardware sales and leasing operations, which were sold May 31, 1987.


U.S. Bank Sues Israeli Enterprise
LEAD: The Finance Ministry, the Bank of Israel and private bankers today held emergency talks with the top management of Koor, Israel's largest industrial concern, after the Bankers Trust Company filed a lawsuit demanding the company's liquidation.


Getty Offers To Buy Apex Division
LEAD: The Getty Petroleum Corporation said yesterday that it had offered to buy the Clark Oil and Refining Corporation and some other assets of the Apex Oil Company for $553.5 million in cash.


Resorts Stock Drops on Move by Griffin
LEAD: The deal between Merv Griffin and Donald J. Trump to split up Resorts International Inc. showed signs of unraveling yesterday as Mr.
Griffin withdrew his pending tender offer for Resorts stock and asserted that he now had the right to cancel the deal entirely.


Market Place; Delta a Favorite In Airline Stocks
LEAD: MANY companies believe they must continually report strong quarterly and annual earnings to please investors and analysts, but Wall Street has been willing to tolerate exceptions when it is convinced that a payoff will be even greater later on.
Delta Air Lines is one such exception, analysts say.


Acronyms at Large
LEAD: In the Pentagon's office of acronyms the latest word in unconventional warfare is LIC, or Low Intensity Conflict.
LIC, pronounced ''lick,'' is an umbrella concept covering everything from guerrilla and anti-guerrilla operations to welldigging and road building in poor countries to help prevent farmers from succumbing to communism.


DMI Furniture Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DMI Furniture Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Sales
9,956,000
9,505,000
Net inc
317,000
238,000
Share earns
.06
.04
Yr sales
41,768,000
40,155,000
Net inc
1,765,000
1,425,000
Share earns
.31
.27


Bridge
LEAD: Play in the World Championships was slightly delayed here today when astonished players were faced with old deals they had encountered yesterday.
This organizational glitch was quickly repaired.


Bank of Granite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Granite Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,301,000
1,161,000
Per share
.43
.39
9mo net inc
3,761,000
3,365,000
Per share
1.25
1.13


Reporter's Notebook; Latvians Extending a Hand to Outsiders, Just a Bit
LEAD: Sergei Yegorenok was something of a rarity at this weekend's inaugural congress of the Latvian Popular Front.


Biin to Display New Computers
LEAD: Biin, a joint venture between the Intel Corporation and Siemens A.G., will introduce today two computer systems intended for specialized fault-tolerant applications where high security is desired.
These computers are widely used in such applications as banking, electronic funds transfer and airline reservation systems.


Townsend Scudder, 88, Teacher and Author
LEAD: Townsend Scudder 3d, an educator and author, died of heart failure Friday at the health center at Pomperaug Woods, a retirement community in Southbury, Conn.
He was 88 years old and lived at Pomperaug Woods.


How It Happened; A Few Extra Swings, Then 3 Dodgers Connect
LEAD: Steve Sax ran out to the batting cage, taking his bat with him but leaving his uniform shirt in his locker. ''You got to wear your shirt,'' Manny Mota, a Los Angeles Dodgers coach, told him. ''The people are starting to come in.'' Sax, wearing a gray T-shirt, argued briefly, then raced to the clubhouse and returned a minute later, the gray uniform shirt partly buttoned but hanging over his pants.


Aboil in the Balkans
LEAD: Yugoslavia has long been a maverick among the nations of Eastern Europe.
Dominated for decades by a man who took orders from no one, it resisted Stalin's iron grip and remained steadfastly nonaligned.
Now, goaded by an ambitious politician named Slobodan Milosevic, it's torn by turmoil that seems remarkably like the ethnic rivalries erupting in parts of Mikhail Gorbachev's empire from Armenia to the Baltic.


Blaze in Chicago Leaves 3 Dead
LEAD: A fire swept through the top two floors of an apartment building today, killing three people and seriously injuring five others, two of them young children, an official of the Fire Department said.


Books of The Times; Centenary for Author of an Indubitable Classic
LEAD:  Anita Loos  A Biography  By Gary Carey  Illustrated. 331 pages.
Alfred A.Knopf. $24.95.


Profit Increases 23% at G.E.
LEAD: The General Electric Company said today that its net earnings rose in the third quarter by 23 percent, to $815 million, or 90 cents a share, from $661 million, or 73 cents a share, in the corresponding period last year.


Catalogue Unit Takes Buyout Bid
LEAD: In a move to head off an unwanted takeover bid, the Best Products Company, one of the nation's biggest catalogue showroom chains, said yesterday that it had accepted an offer of $27.50 a share, or $685 million, from Adler &amp; Shaykin, a Manhattan investment firm specializing in management buyouts.


Joint U.S.-Vietnamese Teams Find Remains of Americans
LEAD: Joint United States-Vietnamese search teams found the remains of a number of American servicemen missing from the Indochina war during a 10-day search ending today, an official United States statement said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Careers; New Concept On Research In Colorado
LEAD: MORE than two dozen Coloradans with doctoral degrees in technical fields descended on New York last week to promote their state as a high-tech research center.
The group, representing a consortium called the Colorado Alliance of Research Universities, later flew to Washington to sell its ideas there.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.27
8.27
7.45
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.27
7.27
6.68
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.45
7.45
6.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.59
8.59
9.56
30-YR.


Sage Drilling Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sage Drilling Co Inc
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,387,000
1,171,000
Net loss
b904,000
275,000
Yr rev
5,515,000
4,307,000
Net loss
1,477,000
856,000
b-Included charges of about $986,000 for the write down of assets to be sold and about $340,000 for additional depreciation on rig equipment.


South Africa Opens Segregated Local Voting
LEAD: South Africans of all races began voting today in segregated nationwide elections for local councils despite a boycott call by anti-apartheid leaders in defiance of emergency regulations.


Skolniks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Skolniks Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to July 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,267,667
1,849,530
Net inc
65,137
112,278
Share earns
.03
.07
Shares outst
2,450,000
1,650,000
Yr rev
9,165,753
7,841,392
Net inc
600,723
595,987
Share earns
.33
.36
Shares outst
1,850,000
1,650,000


International Capital Equipent Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Capital Equipent Inc
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
532,000
549,000
Net inc
139,000
b260,000
Share earns
.06
-
Yr rev
1,831,000
2,440,000
Net inc
46,000
b662,000
Share earns
.02
-


Serara T. Ketlogetswe, Botswana's Ambassador, 68
LEAD: Serara T. Ketlogetswe, Botswana's Ambassador to the United States, has died at a hospital in the capital, Gaborone, the southern African nation's press agency reported today.
He was 68 years old.


Michael Anthony Jewelers Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michael Anthony Jewelers Inc. (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
128,000,000
77,000,000
Net loss
1,100,000
b3,100,000
Share earns
-
.66
Shares outst
4,988,000
4,650,000
b-Net income  Fiscal 1988 results include the sales of MAJ Manufacturing Co.


Month of Enlightenment
LEAD: OCTOBER is Computer Learning Month, and throughout the country efforts are under way to increase the public's understanding of how computers can be used more effectively in schools, at home and at work.


Less Lead in Rivers
LEAD: A decline in lead contamination in major American rivers has been found at two-thirds of 300 sites studied from 1974 to 1985, scientists at the United States Geological Survey have reported.


Reviews/Dance; At Home in the Ordinary
LEAD: Deborah Hay made simplicity eloquent in ''The Man Who Grew Common in Wisdom,'' the solo she presented Friday night at the Warren Street Performance Loft.


Mets Lose to Dodgers and Go From Dream to Crisis
LEAD: Less than 12 hours after they had blown a lead in the ninth inning and a game in the 12th, the Mets returned to Shea Stadium yesterday and might have blown a pennant.


Sports People; DeLoach Drops Out
LEAD: Joe DeLoach, who won the 200-meter dash at the Olympics, said yesterday that would not compete for the rest of the school year at the University of Houston while deciding on his future. ''The best thing for me to do is sit and wait,'' said DeLoach, a native of Bay City, Tex. ''I'll red-shirt this year and make a decision later.


Magna International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magna International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Sales
418,117,000
266,744,000
Net inc
b2,941,000
d6,676,000
Share earns
.10
.23
Shares outst
27,819,000
27,289,000
Yr sales
1,458,603,000
1,152,463,000
Net inc
c19,542,000
40,345,000
Share earns
.70
1.56
Shares outst
27,836,000
25,860,000


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:  DEAR Diary:


Student Loan Marketing Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Student Loan Marketing Assn (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
57,500,000
46,200,000
Share earns
1.37
1.08
9mo net inc
166,200,000
133,200,000
Share earns
3.93
3.03


Fanning the Flames of Conservatives
LEAD: At the White House, in the twilight of the Reagan Presidency, departures of such high-profile figures as Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d and Education Secretary William J. Bennett have tempered the fires of the Administration's conservative voices, except for one.


Jury Screening Starts In Steinberg Trial
LEAD: Forty-six potential jurors were selected and 152 others were excused yesterday as the judge and both sides in the trial of Joel B. Steinberg began what promises to be a nearly monthlong search for a jury.


Campaign Trail; Rather Is Bearer Of Unexpected News
LEAD: Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts arrived in Los Angeles yesterday for their second and final debate Thursday night, only to find out that they had been upstaged by Dan Rather.


Fab Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fab Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Sales
36,122,000
38,376,000
Net inc
2,415,000
3,049,000
Share earns
.69
.84
9mo net inc
6,580,000
b10,397,000
Share earns
1.87
2.86
b-Includes a gain of $1,800,000 from a change in accounting principle.


Darling Vs. Hershiser
LEAD: The National League pennant comes down to one game in Los Angeles tonight involving two starting pitchers who have won a total of 40 games this season but have failed to win or lose a game in the league championship series.


What to Know About Related Foods
LEAD: THERE are many hidden hazards for people with allergies, said Dr.
Sami L. Bahna, chairman of the department of allergy and immunology at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation.
He suggested a number of potentially perilous situations.
Even when labeling is available, foods to which people are highly allergic appear under unfamiliar names.


Ryan's Family Steak Houses reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryan's Family Steak Houses (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 28
1988
1987
Revenue
51,647,000
42,240,000
Net inc
5,094,000
4,220,000
Share earns
.10
.08
9mo rev
144,977,000
114,607,000
Net inc
14,626,000
12,399,000
Share earns
.28
.24


EASTERN SHUTTLE LIKELY TO BE SOLD TO TRUMP TODAY
LEAD: The Texas Air Corporation will announce today that it has sold the Eastern Airlines shuttle to Donald J. Trump, the New York real estate developer, for more than $300 million, people close to the talks said yesterday.


Shamrock Appeal To Workers on Bid
LEAD: Shamrock Holdings Inc., rebuffed in its $2.4 billion bid for the Polaroid Corporation, plans to appeal to the company's employees, who are major stockholders.
Polaroid, based in Cambridge, Mass., has rejected a request by Shamrock to meet with its workers.


Books of The Times; Obsessions With Money and Sex Bring Trouble
LEAD:  Are You Listening Rabbi Low  By J. P. Donleavy  405 pages.
Atlantic Monthly Press. $18.95.


Chairman Is Retiring From Jordan Marsh
LEAD: The Allied Stores Corporation said yesterday that Elliot J. Stone, chairman of the company's Jordan Marsh department stores for six years, will retire, effective Jan. 1.


CPC International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPC International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,215,361,000
1,326,450,000
Net inc
76,695,000
59,271,000
Share earns
.98
.72
Shares outst
78,144,000
81,960,000
9mo sales
3,523,655,000
3,841,761,000
Net inc
206,654,000
b277,787,000
Share earns
2.62
3.38
Shares outst
78,609,000
81,960,000


Army Civilian Admits He Passed Weapons Data to South Africans
LEAD: A former Army weapons analyst pleaded guilty today to espionage charges after confessing that he had passed classified military information to Washington-based South African diplomats.


How a Fake Office Created a Real Office
LEAD: Fans of a certain age remember when play-by-play radio broadcasts of a baseball game were actually created in a studio far from the ball park.
Imaginative announcers relied on brief messages sent over telegraph lines.
To heighten reality, recordings of crowd noises were played - cheers, for example, when the latest wire message announced a home run.


On a Safer Track
LEAD: After weathering four years as director of the Interior Department's beleaguered Minerals Management Service, William D. Bettenberg has apparently had enough.
Effective Oct. 23, he will take a secondary position at the agency, which has been the focus of Congressional investigations and press reports of alleged mismanagement.


Bank Is Charged by U.S. With Money-Laundering
LEAD: The Federal Government charged today that an international bank holding company had conspired with cocaine dealers to launder millions of dollars in illegal drug money in a network that reached from the United States to Europe to the Medellin drug cartel in Colombia.


Ralph Gampell, 71, Court Administrator
LEAD: Dr.
Ralph Gampell, a physician and lawyer who was former chief administrator of the court system in California, died of cancer Oct. 3 at his home in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 71 years old.


The Editorial Notebook; From the Outside: Yonkers II
LEAD: ''I love the flowers,'' says William Coram, pointing to the bright autumn blossoms alongside his brown-shingled dwelling in Greenburgh, N.Y. ''I have them blooming all summer long.''


Newmil Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmil Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,320,000
2,339,000
Per share
.21
.32


Interco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
629,950,000
609,985,000
Net inc
b34,881,000
c38,429,000
Share earns
.93
.90
6mo sales
1,269,220,000
1,231,067,000
Net inc
b65,570,000
c64,943,000
Share earns
1.73
1.52
Shares outst
37,830,425
42,804,493


An Old Custom, Funeral Cakes
LEAD: SPECIAL occasions of every sort feature food and funerals are no exception.
In many cultures, there are foods that are customarily served after a funeral.


Review/Film; Holocaust With a Twist
LEAD: Among the starving inmates of a Nazi concentration camp, there is one well-fed and well-muscled man.
An accident of fate has placed him in this peculiarly mortifying position.
Before the war, both he and the camp's commandant were boxers, and the commandant is now feeling frustrated and alone.
So the commandant (Manfred Krug) earmarks this prisoner, Jan Kominek (Stefan Kvietik), as his own personal plaything.


First Virginia Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Virginia Banks Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
15,757,000
14,508,000
Per share
.75
.71
9mo net inc
45,183,000
42,524,000
Per share
2.15
2.08


Wayland Flowers Dies; Ventriloquist Was 48
LEAD: Wayland Flowers, a ventriloquist who brought life to a cackling, off-color puppet named Madame, died on Tuesday, five weeks after collapsing on stage.
He was 48 years old.


Mets Win, 5-1, For a Showdown
LEAD: The New York Mets defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers, 5-1, to tie the National League Championship Series at three games each.
The seventh and deciding game is scheduled for tonight in Los Angeles with the Dodgers' Orel Hershiser to pitch against the Mets' Ron Darling.
Articles, page A27


Teaching Children To Cook By the Book
LEAD: IF food is comforting to children, cookbooks tailored for them represent a wealth of reassurance.
When done well, they encourage children to build the most basic skills.
And they offer something more: stolen moments with a busy parent.


Lyons Transforms Role on Jet Defense
LEAD: The thing that Marty Lyons is probably best remembered for in the last two years when it comes to the Bills' Jim Kelly is creating a new penalty in pro football: ''Giving him the business.''


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The drunken-driving manslaughter trial of Bruce Kimball, the diver whose car killed two teen-age boys and injured six other people when it veered into a crowd Aug. 1 in Brandon, Fla., has been postponed until Dec. 12 at the request of defense lawyers.
Kimball, who has been free on $10,000 bond, failed to make the United States Olympic diving team; he won a silver medal in platform diving in 1984 at Los Angeles.


Moderate Economist Named Czech Premier
LEAD: Apparently trying to forge greater unity within its leadership, the Czechoslovak Communist Party appointed a moderate economist as Prime Minister today and announced a shuffling within the party.


Echlin Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Echlin Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
354,586,000
300,365,000
Net inc
19,359,000
10,106,000
Share earns
.35
.18
Yr sales
1,294,297,000
1,099,703,000
Net inc
62,072,000
45,634,000
Share earns
1.12
.88


Reagan Vows to Support Sihanouk's Forces
LEAD: President Reagan told Prince Norodom Sihanouk today that the Administration regards him as a pivotal leader in a future Cambodian government and that it will increase aid to the non-Communist Cambodian opposition, Administration officials said today.


Dr. B. Frank Polk Is Dead at 46; Expert on Epidemiology and AIDS
LEAD: Dr.
B.
Frank Polk, a leader in AIDS research who was a professor of epidemiology at the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health in Baltimore, died of a brain tumor yesterday at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
He was 46 years old.


Review/Dance; The Enactment of a Ritual
LEAD: Too many cooks might have spoiled the broth in ''Shifted Hearts,'' a new duet by Gabrielle Lansner and Lissy Trachtenberg that was performed on Friday evening at the Dia Art Foundation.
Set to a musical collage by Guy Yarden, the dance was a matter of white gauzy hangings, long trains of white material and long-winded wafting and manipulation of the material to no apparent purpose.


U S Sprint Seen Turning a Corner
LEAD: After years of bitter customer complaints, dismissed managers, shifting ownership and huge losses, U S Sprint finally seems ready to turn the corner.


The Long Delays In Gathering Data
LEAD: IT is nearly the middle of October and no one knows yet what happened to the economy in September.
Only one major Government statistic has appeared so far, reporting that unemployment fell slightly last month (good news, perhaps), but fewer new jobs were created than in previous months (bad news, maybe).


East Flatbush Casts Wary Eye On AIDS Babies
LEAD: At this moment in world history, is there anything more soul-wrenching than babies with AIDS?
For them, things start bad and, one way or another, just keep getting worse.


Grenoble Journal; The Alps Won't Do; Mayor's Ambition Is Taller
LEAD: Although locked in by steep mountains, Grenoble has always prided itself on being a few iconoclastic jumps ahead of the rest of France.
It rebelled against Louis XVI one year before the revolution of 1789; it stoutly resisted the occupying Nazis when much of the country wavered or collaborated.


Aspiring Congressmen Tough Out Jersey Races
LEAD: In the three Congressional districts in New Jersey's southern counties, voters rarely reject an incumbent.
This year challengers are having an even tougher time because of the competition for voter interest from the Presidential and United States Senate contests.


Lance Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lance Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 3
1988
1987
Sales
91,699,000
85,354,000
Net inc
9,299,000
8,140,000
Share earns
.29
.25
9mo sales
274,141,000
263,474,000
Net inc
29,390,000
27,109,000
Share earns
.92
.83


Candidates Focus on the U.S. Role in World Economy; Bush Says Rival Wants To Exploit U.S. Fears
LEAD: Vice President Bush offered a stinging rebuke to Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's warnings about foreign investment today, calling his language ''protectionist demagoguery'' designed to exploit a fear of foreigners and frighten the American public.


Florence E. Wall, 95, Authority on Cosmetics
LEAD: Florence E. Wall, an authority on cosmetics, died Oct. 2 at the Carolton Chronic and Convalescent Hospital in Fairfield, Conn., after a long illness.
She was 95 years old and lived in Manhattan.


No Sinking Feeling For the Dodgers
LEAD: After producing nearly as many errors as hits, after leaving the victory champagne on ice and trudging back to the clubhouse, the Los Angeles Dodgers did not duck or hide tonight.
No moaning, no groaning.


Teachers Strike in Arkansas
LEAD: Teachers in the state's second-largest school district walked off the job today after the school board rejected a mediation committee's recommendation that they be given a 3 percent raise.
Classes for 21,000 students in the Pulaski County Special School District were canceled.
The district covers all the schools in the county in which Little Rock is situated, except the Little Rock and North Little Rock schools.


For Bush on the Campaign Trail, The Style Is First Sour, Then Sweet
LEAD: At one moment, Vice President Bush sneers bellicose Clint Eastwood lines and calls his Democratic opponent's record ''immoral'' and ''insensitive.'' At another moment, he spins literate, compassionate visions of how he would gently but firmly lead the country.


About Education
LEAD: Elizabeth Jensen, who teaches American history to a class of 11th graders, has written on the blackboard: ''Resolved: The British Government possesses the legitimate authority to tax the American colonies.'' Having defined the debate, she sits in a corner with pencil and notebook and listens as rebels and loyalists re-enact the history that ultimately led to the Declaration of Independence.


Bonn Sets Credit Line For Soviets
LEAD: West German bankers have completed arrangements for the largest Western credit line ever to the Soviet Union - a package worth $1.6 billion to help Moscow modernize its food and consumer goods industries.


Baby Is Shot to Death
LEAD: A 13-month-old Brooklyn boy was fatally shot last night when a revolver held by his 21-year-old uncle accidentally discharged, the police said.
The child, Lorenzo Burton, of 765 Lincoln Avenue, East New York, was shot one in the face.
The boy's uncle, who was not immediately identified, was being questioned early today.


Some Israelis Sense a Futility In Steps to Quell Arab Revolt
LEAD: Amira Shamrukh, a 44-year-old Palestinian mother with 14 children, spent another day in an Israeli military court today, trying to keep another of her sons out of jail for stone-throwing.


Review/Television; Inner Voyage in 9 Parts
LEAD: ''The Mind'' is not the kind of series you snuggle into with a bowl of popcorn.
This is television demanding that you sit up straight, pay attention and perhaps even take notes.
This is - to use that unfashionable label -educational television.
And public television, bless it, is the only broadcasting entity around these days willing to tackle such a project.


Octel Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Octel Communications (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
17,961,000
7,899,000
Net inc
2,618,000
b722,000
Share earns
.18
.06
b-Includes a $241,000 tax credit.
The company said its improved performance was due to success in selling its voice processing products.


INSIDE
LEAD:  New Credit for Soviet Union  West German bankers will provide a $1.6 billion line of credit for Moscow, which wants to improve its food and consumer goods industries.
Page D1.
Cubans Detain Cup Yacht  A Cuban gunboat forced a ship carrying the 132-foot New Zealand, which failed in its bid for the America's Cup, into a Cuban port.


Housing Issue By Massachusetts
LEAD: The Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency is offering $94.56 million of tax-exempt residential housing revenue bonds, with a maximum yield of about 8.185 percent, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Futures Broker Cited for Fraud
LEAD: GNP Commodities Inc., a Chicago-based futures brokerage that the Nomura Securities Company of Japan is in talks to purchase, has been charged with fraud, regulators said today.


Kohlberg, Kravis Withdraws Kroger Bid
LEAD: Ending speculation that it might pursue a hositile takeover bid, Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company today withdrew its unsolicited $5.03 billion bid for the Kroger Company.
The giant supermarket company had rejected the bid from the leveraged buyout firm as inadequate four days ago.


A School Lunch Update
LEAD: The Agriculture Department has a new school cafeteria cookbook that includes recipes, labor-saving tips and a little pizazz for the pinto bean.


A Chase and Gunfire In Suspect's Capture
LEAD: A suspected car thief was captured after leading police on a 10-mile chase through two towns, ramming a stolen car into a police cruiser, then firing at an officer as the suspect tried to run away, the police said.


For a Chicago 'Baseball Joint,' Extra Innings
LEAD: Babe Ruth drank here - between innings, if the legend is true - and Bill Veeck threw his wooden leg across a stool and rhapsodized here for hours.
And future baseball greats, it now appears, will get a chance to become part of the lore at McCuddy's saloon.


Westinghouse Electric Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westinghouse Electric Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,057,000,000
2,766,600,000
Net inc
204,600,000
180,600,000
Share earns
1.41
1.25
9mo rev
8,851,300,000
8,039,000,000
Net inc
574,100,000
505,000,000
Share earns
3.95
3.51


Johnson Is Charged
LEAD: Ben Johnson, the Olympic sprinter who was disqualified for steroid use after winning the 100-meter run, was charged with assault and dangerous use of a weapon yesterday in Toronto.
The charge came five days after a driver said a man pointed a handgun at him from a Porsche later identified as belonging to Johnson.


Valcom Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valcom Inc
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
61,026,000
43,090,000
Net inc
1,051,000
795,000
Share earns
.24
.21
Shares outst
4,381,300
3,693,000
9mo sales
161,146,000
119,008,000
Net inc
3,153,000
2,254,000
Share earns
.72
.61
Shares outst
4,381,300
3,686,333


Price Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Price Co (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 28
1988
1987
Sales
985,600,000
786,500,000
Net inc
24,100,000
19,100,000
Share earns
.49
.39
Yr sales
4,053,400,000
3,236,300,000
Net inc
94,753,000
73,324,000
Share earns
1.93
1.50


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Raytheon Campaign
LEAD: A new, multimedia campaign for the Raytheon Company by Della Femina, McNamee WCRS, a unit of WCRS Group, will break on national television Saturday and in national print Monday.
Continuing the theme ''Quality starts with fundamentals,'' the new campaign has billings of about $8 million, or approximately the same as the previous campaign, also by Della Femina.


Cadet Who Became Ill in Police Training Hospitalized Again
LEAD: One of several cadets stricken by a kidney ailment in police training last month re-entered the hospital today with intestinal bleeding, officials said.


Macmillan Has Deficit
LEAD: Macmillan Inc. reported yesterday that it had a loss of $1.7 million in the third quarter, compared with a profit of $43.3 million, or $1.52 a share, in the similar quarter a year earlier.
Sales rose 5.7 percent, to $340.7 million, from $322.2 million a year earlier.


Knogo Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knogo Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,832,000
13,843,000
Net inc
1,505,000
2,057,000
Share earns
.29
.30
Shares outst
5,187,930
6,924,612
6mo rev
29,484,000
25,734,000
Net inc
2,860,000
3,245,000
Share earns
.55
.47
Shares outst
5,202,479
6,870,824


Burke's Shutout a Milestone
LEAD: Sean Burke has played only 33 games for the Devils and he is already their career leader in shutouts.


Henrietta Jacobson, A Yiddish Actress, 82
LEAD: Henrietta Jacobson, a longtime star of the Yiddish theater in New York, died of heart failure Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Joyce Purnick Is Appointed To the Times Editorial Board
LEAD: Joyce Purnick, urban affairs correspondent of The New York Times, will join the newspaper's editorial board on Jan. 1.
Her appointment was announced yesterday by Jack Rosenthal, editorial page editor of The Times.


LSI Logic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSI Logic Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
93,990,000
68,879,000
Net inc
7,491,000
3,209,000
Share earns
.18
.08
9mo rev
259,501,000
183,873,000
Net inc
19,411,000
5,560,000
Share earns
.47
.14


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Rule on Press Liability in Identifying Rape Victim
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the First Amendment shields the press from liability for publishing information that, while accurate, nonetheless invades someone's privacy or damages a reputation.


PENTAGON LAXNESS ON CONTACTS SEEN
LEAD: Congressional investigators say that when Melvyn R. Paisley was Assistant Navy Secretary he repeatedly met with officials of the Boeing Company, his former employer, although he had told the Navy he would not deal with the company.


Review/Television; Facing Breast Cancer and One's Own Mortality
LEAD: The 99 women and 1 man who agreed to be interviewed and to share their feelings on ''Destined to Live: 100 Roads to Recovery,'' an NBC special that will be shown at 10 o'clock tonight, have all had a glimpse of their own mortality.
All have had breast cancer and have searched their souls for strength to go on.


Clerics in South Africa Urge Boycott of Segregated Vote
LEAD: Leading South African churchmen, theologians and academics defied the nation's emergency laws today, calling for a boycott of segregated local elections nationwide.


At Harvard, Guidelines On Speech and Dissent
LEAD: Lawyers and philosophers have been wrestling with the question of how to define free speech for at least 200 years.
Now Harvard Law School has weighed in.


The 100th Congress's Sour Ending; A Flawed Approach to College Aid
LEAD: Imagine a college aid plan that generously rewards parents who save, yet costs the taxpayers nothing.
Sound too good to be true?
Alas, it is.
But under pre-election pressure to deliver the bacon without the calories, the Senate chose to believe what it heard and voted, 94 to 0, to attach Senator Edward Kennedy's education Savings Bond proposal to the catch-all ''technical corrections'' tax bill.


Arts Center, Once Threatened, Is Named for Benefactor


Cypress Semiconductor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cypress Semiconductor Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1988
1987
Revenue
36,934,000
20,873,000
Net inc
5,480,000
b3,224,000
Share earns
.15
.09
9mo rev
98,165,000
52,920,000
Net inc
14,552,000
b9,430,000
Share earns
.39
.26


Book Notes
LEAD:  Books on TV ''Bookmark,'' a national weekly television series about books and authors, will be aired by PBS starting in January.
Lewis H. Lapham, editor of Harper's magazine, will be the host of the 26-part series, which is being underwritten by the Bell Atlantic Corporation.


Recalling Vietnam: Building Bridges on a Stage
LEAD: Some came with old peace symbols from the 1960's affixed to their coats.
Some came in full dress military uniform with Medals of Honor tied around their throats with powder-blue ribbons.


Now, Make Peace Within Angola
LEAD: Patient American diplomacy is now paying off in southern Africa.
A further round of talks has brought new progress toward a peace agreement that would secure both Namibian independence and the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola.
Details of Cuba's withdrawal schedule remain to be worked out.
Yet the atmosphere is encouraging, and the Nov.


Review/Music; Of the Stage and Screen
LEAD: Dennis Russell Davies and the American Composers Orchestra addressed themselves to concert-hall byproducts of the American musical theater tradition Sunday afternoon in Carnegie Hall.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  ST.
LOUIS (NL) - Named Jim Riggleman third-base coach.
BASKETBALL  HOUSTON (NBA) - Traded Jim Petersen and Rodney McCray, forwards, to Sacramento for Otis Thorpe, forward.
INDIANA (NBA) - Released Herbert Crook and Jarvis Basnight, forwards, and Troy Lewis, guard.


Spaniards Study English (Not the King's) in U.S.
LEAD: Berta M. Villamayor, a 16-year-old student from Madrid, told a visitor what she learned in her English course at the Duence International School here last summer.


Reaching the Peak
LEAD: The subject of Howard Nemerov's first talk as the nation's Poet Laureate, given at the Library of Congress last week, was ''Poetry and Nonsense.''


Lomas &amp; Nettleton Mortgage Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lomas &amp; Nettleton Mortgage Investors (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
30,230,366
23,546,621
Net inc
7,202,225
7,271,738
Share earns
.62
.62


Digital Warranty
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation effectively raised its prices by 6 percent to 9 percent on most products by eliminating a free one-year warranty program.
A Digital spokesman said customers would be advised to purchase a ''standard warranty,'' which adds about 6 percent to 9 percent to equipment costs.


Not Only Tourists Are Victims of Cabbies
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lilco Makes Gains in Bid for a Permit
LEAD: The Long Island Lighting Company today scored technical and political victories in its long struggle to win a commercial operating license for its Shoreham nuclear power plant.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
GENERAL COMMITTEE - 9:30 A.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Borden Inc. said it had acquired two plastic packaging manufacturers, Macaple S.A. of France, and Pelapack Plastics Pty.
Ltd. of Australia.
The company also said it had undertaken a $22 million expansion of its Texas packaging film plant.
Terms of the acquisitions were not disclosed.


Bercor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bercor Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1988
1987
Revenue
28,031,000
40,071,000
Net loss
3,103,000
b729,000
b-After a gain of $80,000 from a change in accounting principle.


Sonoco Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonoco Products (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
408,942,000
344,435,000
Net inc
23,393,000
15,674,000
Share earns
.53
.36
9mo sales
1,195,823,000
935,307,000
Net inc
71,903,000
43,397,000
Share earns
1.64
1.13


BB&amp;T Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BB&amp;T Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
10,206,000
8,156,000
Per share
.54
.43
9mo net inc
28,241,000
25,581,000
Per share
1.50
1.37


Standard Shares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Shares Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
197,365,000
157,592,000
Net inc
4,781,000
3,249,000
Share earns
1.82
1.24
6mo sales
393,655,000
321,728,000
Net inc
10,009,000
7,026,000
Share earns
3.81
2.68


India Opposition Parties Join In a Coalition to Oust Gandhi
LEAD: A new opposition party was born in India today, the amalgamation of four often-squabbling groups whose leaders say they believe that in unity they can end the Nehru-Gandhi political dynasty.


Giants Fall Victim to Big Plays Again
LEAD: It seems that after each Giant game this season, certain plays have been singled out as the difference between victory and defeat.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
N.A.
7.65
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.30
N.A.
6.64
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.43
N.A.
7.29
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.64
N.A.
9.64
30-YR.


Video Superstores of America Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Video Superstores of America Inc
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,770,000
1,221,000
Net inc
b687,231
c39,487
Share earns
.06
-
Yr rev
5,742,025
4,121,336
Net inc
786,120
c625,781
Share earns
.07
-


Dukakis Plan Improves College Loan Program
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; J. Walter Thompson In Management Shifts
LEAD: A new management group has been appointed for the Asia Pacific region by the J. Walter Thompson Company, said Burton J. Manning, the agency's chairman and chief executive officer.
The move is in line with a policy of decentralizing management similar to a shift in the company's European region last month.


COMPANY NEWS;
LEAD: Tenneco Inc. said today that it would receive more than $6.4 billion in cash after taxes and expenses from the auction of most of its oil and gas businesses.


Alex Gottlieb, 81, Dies; TV and Film Producer
LEAD: Alex Gottlieb, who produced more than 50 television shows and Hollywood movies during his four-decade career, died of a cerebral hemorrhage in Los Angeles on Sunday.
He was 81 years old.


Judge Rejects Waste Verdict
LEAD: A Long Island waste disposal company was convicted yesterday of falsely contending it burned 1,400 bags of infectious medical waste that were later found in a Brooklyn warehouse, but the judge set aside the jury's verdict, according to the Brooklyn District Attorney.


First Federal Savings PR reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings PR
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,723,328
b2,758,893
Per share
.76
.52
9mo net inc
9,845,352
b8,850,425
Per share
1.95
1.65
b-Includes tax credits of $69,000 for the quarter and $200,000 for the 9 months.


Vivigen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vivigen Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,474,800
928,000
Net inc
209,000
b123,000
Share earns
.09
.05
9mo rev
4,118,100
2,728,000
Net inc
553,300
b411,200
Share earns
.23
.17
b-Includes tax benefits of $51,100 and $170,700 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Lions Sign Witkowski
LEAD: John Witkowski, former Columbia quarterback, has signed with the Detroit Lions as a backup to Rusty Hilger.
Witkowski, 26 years old, played three games for the Lions during the 1984-85 season.
Hilger moved into the No. 1 spot after Chuck Long suffered a partial ligament tear in his left knee.
Hilger was signed last week as a free agent after backup Eric Hipple broke his ankle two weeks ago.


Kentucky Weighs Bond Sale in Japan
LEAD: Kentucky is considering a $100 million bond sale in Japan to take advantage of lower interest rates than are available in the United States market, state officials said yesterday.


Half-Ton of Cocaine Is Seized in Queens
LEAD: Police officers seized about 1,000 pounds of cocaine from a house in Little Neck, Queens, on Monday night, bringing to 14,000 pounds the amount of the drug seized in New York City over the last four months, officials said yesterday.


Police Add Computer To Arsenal
LEAD: The 67th Precinct station house in Brooklyn could have been conjured up by a Hollywood director, from the telephones ringing off the hook to the gruff but kindly sergeant presiding over the hubbub from behind his high-altitude wooden desk.
Below him, uniformed officers, some herding handcuffed suspects, thread their way past bewildered-looking complainants.


Chapparal Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chapparal Resources Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
187,000
150,000
Net inc
332,000
b68,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
624,000
475,000
Net inc
347,000
b168,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Hycor Biomedical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hycor Biomedical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,864,000
1,672,000
Net inc
170,000
131,000
Share earns
.03
.02
9mo sales
6,080,000
5,328,000
Net inc
509,000
321,000
Share earns
.10
.06


Ozawa Cancels
LEAD: Because of the death of his wife's mother in Japan, Seiji Ozawa, music director of the Boston Symphony, will not be leading the orchestra's concerts at Carnegie Hall tonight and tomorrow night.
David Zinman, music director of the Baltimore Symphony, will conduct.
The program, which has been altered, will be the Chopin Piano Concerto No.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Hawley Martin Halts Ford &amp; Westbrook Bid
LEAD: Hawley Martin Partners said yesterday its planned acquisition of Ford &amp; Westbrook would not take place because ''the financial condition of Ford &amp; Westbrook was not what had been originally anticipated.'' Both agencies had agreed in principle to merge late in August.


First Maryland Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Maryland Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
14,263,000
11,489,000
Per share
.80
.67
Yr net inc
41,125,000
33,588,000
Per share
2.30
1.97
Fiscal 1987 share figures have been restated to reflect a 6-for-5 stock split effected in the form of a 20 percent stock dividend distributed in March 1988.


Hugh Algernon Percy, Duke of Northumberland, 74
LEAD: Hugh Algernon Percy, the 10th Duke of Northumberland, died today, a family spokeswoman said.
He was 74 years old.


Hundreds Protest Government Policy on AIDS Medications


Cone Overcomes The Early Pressure
LEAD: In the right-field bullpen at Dodger Stadium, just minutes before the game of his professional life, David Cone continued to receive unsolicited opinions on his brief journalism career.
The opinions were as unfavorable as they were loud.


8 Are Hurt When Tanker Hits Car and Flips, Spilling Fuel
LEAD: Eight persons were injured last night, none seriously, after a tanker truck carrying 3,000 gallons of gasoline collided with a car, overturned and caught fire in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn, the police said.


Co-op Space For Artists In Brooklyn
LEAD: ARTISTS priced out of the market for lofts in Manhattan have long sought refuge from high rents by taking space in the city's other boroughs.
But in the last few years some of them have found that the push to revitalize industrial neighborhoods close to Manhattan has also pushed up the prices of loft space there, too.


Candidates Focus on the U.S. Role in World Economy; 'Make America No. 1' Is Message of Dukakis
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis stepped up his appeal to national economic self-interest today, saying it was time for a ''second Declaration of Independence'' from trade deficits, from Federal debt and from ''an over-reliance'' on foreign capital.


Review/Theater; At Hartford, Mark Lamos's Vision Of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'
LEAD: ''Pyramus and Thisby,'' the play-within-the-play performed by Bottom and his fellow workmen, usually provides a hilarious finale to ''A Midsummer Night's Dream.'' That is most pointedly not the case in Mark Lamos's production of Shakespeare's comedy at the Hartford Stage. ''Pyramus'' caps Mr.
Lamos's ''Dream'' the way an episode of ''Masterpiece Theater'' might follow a movie by Fellini, or a Bach cantata might conclude a pop concert by David Bowie.


Political Memo; Analyzing the Electoral Vote: Does G.O.P. Have a 'Lock'?
LEAD: Around this time every four years, Republicans begin speaking about ''the lock,'' and when they recite the words there is usually a gleam of knowing confidence in their eyes.


New Bond Funds Are Being Offered
LEAD: FALLING interest rates are the friends of bond investors, but to realize the benefit of rising bond prices at times when rates fall, investors must pay close attention to the kinds of issues they own.


Economist Sees Hope for Continued Texas Upturn
LEAD: Despite the recent fall in oil prices, Texas is likely to continue to build on its fledgling economic recovery over the coming year, a leading Texas economist said here today.


Eateries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eateries Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,698,600
2,086,300
Net inc
13,196
b124,189
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
8,786,300
5,037,200
Net loss
422,124
c224,101
b-Net loss  c-Includes a $35,000 charge from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Six Are Killed in Crash Of an Air Force Tanker
LEAD: An Air Force tanker plane crashed this afternoon at Wurtsmith Air Force Base, killing 6 people and injuring 10 others.


Putting the Books to the Test: A Professional Offers an Assessment
LEAD: AS someone who takes food seriously, as an art, profession and pleasure, I judge a children's cookbook by these criteria:


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 12 ,1988
LEAD:  Companies


U.S. Utility Planting 52 Million Trees
LEAD: Concerned that its new coal-burning power plant in Connecticut will add to the trend toward a warming of the atmosphere around the globe, an electric utility has come up with an unusual response: it will pay to have trees planted in Guatemala.


Judge Cuts Sentence in Corruption Case
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday reduced the prison sentence of Richard L. Rubin, once described as a ''power broker'' for the late Donald R. Manes, despite a prosecutor's assertion that Mr.
Rubin, who is supposed to be cooperating with investigators, may not have told what he knows about political corruption.


Next P.L.C. to Sell Stores to Ratners
LEAD: Next P.L.C., a British fashion retailer, agreed to sell 433 jewelry stores in Britain to the Ratners Group P.L.C. for about $232 million.
The sale follows last year's bidding war between Next and Ratners for the Combined English Stores Group P.L.C., a retail chain that included the Salisburys and Zales jewelry stores.


180 More Wild Horses Found Dead in Nevada
LEAD: A ground search in central Nevada by the Bureau of Land Management has found 180 more wild horses slaughtered, bringing to 450 the total believed to have been shot to death bureau officials said today.


Signed, Then Traded
LEAD: In what was apparently a prearranged deal, the Sacramento Kings signed Otis Thorpe yesterday, then traded him to the Houston Rockets for two forwards, Rodney McCray and Jim Petersen.
The 6-foot-11-inch Thorpe, the most coveted of the off-season restricted free agents, was one of five National Basketball Association players to average more than 20 points and 10 rebounds a game last season.


Amserv Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amserv Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,870,392
1,497,972
Net inc
255,113
241,814
Share earns
.10
.10


Drexel Judge Assails Defense Tactic
LEAD: In response to a call to disqualify himself from presiding over the Drexel Burnham Lambert securities fraud case, a Federal judge suggested yesterday that several prominent defense lawyers might have violated ethical rules.


Dukakis Plan Improves College Loan Program; About That Interest
LEAD: To the Editor:


Truvel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Truvel Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,307,000
138,000
Net inc
1,000
b435,000
9mo sales
3,616,000
297,000
Net loss
1,582,000
908,000
b-Net loss


Charlotte Charles Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charlotte Charles Inc
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
3,897,000
4,355,000
Net loss
888,000
595,000
Yr sales
38,223,000
39,186,000
Net loss
188,000
b43,000
b-Net income


Toyota Is Considering Another Plant in U.S.
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation is near a decision on building another assembly plant in the United States, one that would be used to produce light trucks, a senior Toyota official said today.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Mini-Series Covering Ad Business
LEAD: FINALLY, after television mini-series on police officers, doctors and lawyers, there will be one on the advertising business.


Not Only Tourists Are Victims of Cabbies
LEAD: To the Editor:


Study Says 53,000 Got Prison Furloughs in '87, and Few Did Harm
LEAD: With Vice President Bush pounding Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis almost daily on the issue of furloughs for prisoners, a new study has found that such a temporary release from custody was granted to almost 10 percent of the Federal and state inmate population last year.


Dukakis Plan Improves College Loan Program; Every Option Is Needed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campaign Trail; A Nervous Wife Presses Her Issues
LEAD: One person who will, most certainly, be at the debate is Kitty Dukakis, the wife of the Democratic nominee.


Shearson Offering $200 Million Issue
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton entered the debt market yesterday with a public offering of $200 million in 9 7/8 percent senior subordinated notes, due in 2000, at a price of par.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  A Chef Turns Publisher Daniel Boulud, the executive chef of Le Cirque, has started a monthly newsletter with his wife, Michele.
The attractive publication, ''Easy Cooking With Great Chefs,'' has some very sensible features, including a column with buying and cooking tips for seasonal produce, fish and other food.


Algeria to Lift State of Emergency As Unrest Ebbs in Riot-Torn Cities
LEAD: A state of emergency that included the use of the military will be lifted Wednesday morning, the Government announced tonight.
Officials also said a 10 P.M.-to-6 A.M. curfew would be lifted.


Steel Output Declines
LEAD: Steel production fell to 1.836 million tons in the week ended Saturday, a decline of 3.7 percent from 1.906 million tons in the previous week, the American Iron and Steel Institute reported on Monday.
Production amounted to 85.6 percent of capacity in the latest week, down from 88.9 percent in the previous week.


The Seam of Their Faces
LEAD: CAME morning yesterday and the sun here reflected off the hills and the haze and the crawling cars on the swelling freeways.
It was a day like most days in this City of Angels and 24 Dodgers.
There was no rain and no prognostication of rain.
This meant that the two major events in this country at this time - one annual, the other quadrennial - would not have to alter plans.


Bridge
LEAD: European teams continue to do well in the World Team Olympiad, with strong performances by Sweden, Austria and Italy in both events, and Greece scoring surprisingly well in the open event.


Gibson Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gibson Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
13,589,000
12,118,000
Net inc
764,000
660,000
Share earns
.24
.21
9mo sales
35,444,000
30,680,000
Net inc
1,723,000
1,415,000
Share earns
.55
.45


The Proof of the Pudding: Two Sample Recipes
LEAD:  A Better Burrito A 4-course Mexican meal in a single tortilla (Adapted from ''KidsCooking: A Very Slightly Messy Manual'' by the editors of Klutz Press, 1987)  Preparation time:


Armenians Astir: Write-In Candidate Wins 78%
LEAD: The Communist Party of Armenia has proclaimed ''election-rigging'' in the case of a biophysicist who ran a write-in candidacy for public office and won more votes than the party's hand-picked nominee.


Acadian Farmers Rediscover a Staple
LEAD: FOR the first time in four generations, the Bouchard family of Fort Kent, Me., will not harvest potatoes this year.
As the harvest begins in Aroostook County, it seems strange and a little disconcerting to Albin and Rita Bouchard, who were born and raised in this potato-growing country at the northern tip of the state.


A Most Ferocious Math Problem Tamed
LEAD: By piecing together the output of hundreds of computers on three continents, a team of mathematicians succeeded yesterday in solving a monster computational problem that had defied all previous efforts.
The achievement is likely to force cryptographers to reassess the future application of some codes used by governments and banks.


Bentsen Says Bush Plays Politics With Crime
LEAD: Senator Lloyd Bentsen today accused Vice President Bush of ''playing politics with the tragedies of crime'' to win advantage in the Presidential campaign.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-13  Israeli measures have not worked to quell Palestinian uprisings in the occupied territories.
As the disorders enter the 11th month, some in the military concede that the tough measures may add to the violence in the short run.
Page A1


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Penguins 8, Capitals 7: Mario Lemieux scored his first three goals of the season, two of them short-handed, to lead Pittsburgh to victory over Washington in Pittsburgh last night.
Mike Ridley of the Capitals scored four goals.
Lemieux, who was held to one assist by the Capitals in the season opener Friday night, also had two assists.


Metro-North Police Division Is Demoralized, Report Says
LEAD: The Metro-North police unit is a demoralized, chaotic agency in the midst of a crisis of goals, leadership and management, an independent report released yesterday said.


Chandler and Marlowe Are the Toast of a Party
LEAD: Philip Marlowe might have described it as ''a lot of Hollywood swells trying to feel good about themselves supporting literature,'' said Roger Simon, president of the American chapter of the International Association of Crime Writers.


Precious Metals Off Sharply; Crude Oil Is a Bit Lower
LEAD: Prices of precious metals futures fell sharply yesterday, giving back most of the previous day's gains.
Crude oil prices seesawed in nervous trading before finishing slightly lower on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Gasoline and heating oil futures were mixed.


U.S. to Pay $750,000 In Suit on LSD Testing
LEAD: The Justice Department announced today that it had settled a lawsuit by nine Canadians who charged that the C.I.A. made them the subjects of mind-control experiments involving drugs.


Lukens Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lukens Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
157,295,000
131,120,000
Net inc
8,509,000
6,057,000
Share earns
1.00
.72
9mo sales
449,341,000
369,312,000
Net inc
23,785,000
15,093,000
Share earns
2.79
1.80


Tyson Foods Bids For Holly Farms
LEAD: Tyson Foods Inc., the nation's largest poultry processor, announced today that it had proposed to buy the Holly Farms Corporation for more than $1 billion.
Holly Farms is a diversified food company with about 50 percent of its sales in chicken.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co., Chicago, the department store chain, elected as a director James A. Perkins, increasing the board to 12 members.


Note and Bond Prices Ease a Bit
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds eased slightly in light trading yesterday.


New York Area Retail Sales Off
LEAD: New York City retail sales continued to languish in September, with average declines from September 1987 of 1.1 percent in the city and six-tenths of 1 percent in the metropolitan area, several leading retailers reported in a monthly spot check.


Israelis Go to Bankers Trust To Halt Liquidation Attempt
LEAD: A delegation of Israeli bankers and industrialists is scheduled to meet with officials of the Bankers Trust Company this morning at the bank's headquarters on Park Avenue to block an effort to liquidate that country's largest industrial concern.


Cup Yacht Detained by Cuba
LEAD: New Zealand, the 132-foot sloop that failed in her challenge for the America's Cup last month, is now in a Cuban port after a gunboat intercepted a ship carrying the yacht from San Diego to New York.


Knicks Down Nets; Ewing Is Sidelined
LEAD: The exhibition season is always a time for experimentation and it was no different tonight as the Knicks defeated the Nets, 112-102, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It was the first of 95 National Basketball Association exhibition games.


Ursula Nordstrom, 78, a Nurturer Of Authors for Children, Is Dead
LEAD: Ursula Nordstrom, the former publisher and editor in chief of juvenile books at Harper &amp; Row, and an innovative force in children's book publishing, died of ovarian cancer yesterday at the New Milford (Conn.) Hospital.
She was 78 years old and lived in Bridgewater, Conn.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline on the Fashion page yesterday about Margaret Thatcher's interest in fashion referred incorrectly to her position.
She is the head of government in Britain; Queen Elizabeth is the head of state.


High School Is Offering A Multilingual Future
LEAD: In Los Angeles, a city ever more aware of hard-charging competition from the nations bordering the Pacific, the question about education is no longer simply, ''Why can't Johnny and Jane read?''


Bogus Perfume Is Charged
LEAD: Police in Southern California have cracked a counterfeit perfume operation, seizing hundreds of thousands of phony bottles of such brand-name scents as Giorgio, Chanel, Poison and Joy, the San Bernardino, Calif., sheriff's department said.


Better Screening Of Older Drivers Urged in Report
LEAD: A Federal study of elderly motorists today called for better screening to identify impaired drivers but concluded there was no justification to restrict driving solely on the basis of age.


Elmer (Mousey) Alexander, Drummer, 66
LEAD: Elmer (Mousey) Alexander, a veteran drummer who performed with some of the nation's major orchestras, died of heart and kidney failure Sunday in South Seminole Community Hospital in Longwood, Fla.
He was 66 years old and lived in Longwood.


ENERGY SECRETARY VOWS FAST ACTION ON ARMS REACTOR
LEAD: Energy Secretary John S. Herrington said today that he had appointed a special team to correct safety failures at the Savannah River Plant and to put a reactor that produces vital nuclear weapon material back into operation in January.


Review/Jazz; A Mixed Bag of 3 Bands
LEAD: Last Friday's Superband concert at Town Hall, featuring three bands and an immense amount of talent, was a standard jazz spectacle.
As in many of these shiny events - the stage was littered with odd, 70's-styled constructions of chrome and fabric, and there was a meager light show casting fragments of lights on stage - the music fought hard to escape the packaging.


New Trend on Campus: Nonstop Public Reading
LEAD: At 3:29 A.M., the elm-lined plaza fronting Princeton University's Firestone Library is dark, cold and crowded.
Students huddled in ski jackets and under quilts listen intently as Ronald Extract, flashlight in hand, bends over a makeshift lectern to read page after page of Thomas Pynchon's novel ''Gravity's Rainbow.


Gibson Bunt Is Puzzling Move
LEAD: Kirk Gibson made a remarkably rapid return to the Los Angeles Dodgers' lineup tonight, but no sooner did he appear in it than he made a remarkably eyebrow-raising play.


Mosinee Paper Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mosinee Paper Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
58,751,000
55,658,000
Net inc
3,093,000
2,088,000
Share earns
.40
.26
9mo sales
179,128,000
159,681,000
Net inc
5,893,000
4,164,000
Share earns
.76
.53


Dollar Declines Against Yen And Ends Flat Versus Mark
LEAD: The dollar fell against the yen yesterday, reflecting a downward sentiment that has been overtaking the foreign exchange market since the vigorous summer rally peaked last month.


Edward Chodorov, 84, Playwright And Writer and Producer of Films
LEAD: Edward Chodorov, a Broadway playwright and the author or producer of some 50 motion pictures, died on Sunday after a brief illness at his home in New York City.
He was 84 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Friday about a jury verdict against officers and directors of a Maryland savings and loan misidentified a California mortgage insurer in some references.
It should have been identified throughout as the TMIC Insurance Company Inc.
Although TMIC was formerly called the Ticor Mortgage Insurance Company, TMIC's parent, known by the one word Ticor, is not a mortgage insurer and is not directly involved.


International Paper Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Paper Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,400,000,000
2,000,000,000
Net inc
201,000,000
102,000,000
Share earns
1.74
.92
Shares outst
112,100,000
105,400,000
9mo sales
7,000,000,000
5,800,000,000
Net inc
548,000,000
282,000,000
Share earns
4.76
2.54
Shares outst
111,800,000
105,000,000


WINE TALK
LEAD: ST.
GREGORY OSTIENSE came to northern Spain in the year 1039, commanded by Pope Benedict IX, to rid the land of a plague of locusts.
Five years later, exhausted by his labors -which seem to have been successful - the saint died here in Logrono, today the center of the bustling Rioja wine district.


Goodrich-Michelin
LEAD: The B. F. Goodrich Company is negotiating the sale of its aircraft tire operations to the French tire maker Michelin for undisclosed terms.
The companies said their talks included an agreement for aircraft wheel, brake and tire assembly operations, and a license for Michelin to use the Goodrich name and other trademarks relating to aircraft tires.


Founding Foodies Sell Silver Palate
LEAD: THESE days shoppers assume that stores will carry exotic salad dressings, thick preserves and mustards with complex flavors.
They also take it for granted that they can run out at 7 P.M. and grab a great meal to take home to eat in front of the television.
Ten years ago, however, such offerings were relatively rare - except at the Silver


Green Tree Acceptance Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Green Tree Acceptance Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
34,923,000
35,343,000
Net inc
6,444,000
7,451,000
Share earns
.33
.39
9mo rev
102,393,000
110,691,000
Net inc
22,481,000
b34,869,000
Share earns
1.23
1.89


Exchange's New Hours
LEAD: The Philadelphia Stock Exchange announced on Monday that in January it will open trading in foreign currency options and futures three and a half hours earlier than its present 8 A.M. start in an effort to increase trading with European investors.
In September 1987, the exchange became the first to open night trading in foreign currency options.


Samuel Morrell, Wine Merchant, 90
LEAD: Samuel Morrell, founder of Morrell &amp; Company, the Wine Emporium Ltd., died of a heart attack Sunday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 90 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Serbs Spar With Slovenians, Adding to Yugoslav Tensions
LEAD: Serbian Communist leaders replied angrily today to charges of Serbian nationalism made by Slovenian Communist leaders, as political tension rose in Yugoslavia before an important session of the Communist Party's Central Committee on Monday.


Shunned Deal Maker
LEAD: According to some in Washington's sizable circle of Middle East experts, a familiar figure has been feverishly pacing the sidelines in recent bouts of speculation over the release of Americans held hostage in Lebanon.


John Denver Canceled
LEAD: Because of scheduling conflicts, concerts by the singer John Denver at Radio City Music Hall, scheduled for tonight and Thursday night, have been canceled.
Ticket refunds are available at the Radio City Hall box office.


Technology Marketing Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technology Marketing Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,857,412
1,908,079
Net inc
b222,182
c514,967
Share earns
.08
-
6mo sales
6,151,936
4,278,303
Net inc
b625,343
c475,422
Share earns
.21
-
b-Includes tax credits of $74,716 and $210,292 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Banponce Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banponce Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,681,000
4,470,000
Per share
.81
.78
9mo net inc
15,089,000
6,371,000
Per share
2.62
1.11


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


MacMillan Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MacMillan Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
340,696,000
322,222,000
Net loss
1,057,000
b43,315,000
Share earns
-
1.52
9mo sales
764,254,000
704,856,000
Net inc
9,496,000
55,314,000
Share earns
.40
2.10


Griffin's Bid for Resorts Backed by Jersey Panel
LEAD: Merv Griffin yesterday received the approval of the New Jersey Casino Control Commission to take over Resorts International Inc. and said he intended to complete the deal in which he and Donald J. Trump will divide up the casino company.


U.S. Aides Express Concern Over Yugoslav Crisis
LEAD: There was a moment, last Friday, when violent demonstrations in two regional capitals in Yugoslavia made United States policy makers apprehensive that the Communist leaders of that Balkan country were losing control.


Algeria's Misfortune: 'One Quick Blow' From Oil
LEAD: Thousands of young Algerians have thrown rocks and firebombs and clashed with the police over the last week to protest economic conditions that economists and diplomats say have been deteriorating for years.


S.E.C. Aide Assails Plan on Punishing Companies
LEAD: Gary Lynch, the enforcement director of the Securities and Exchange Commission, yesterday voiced sharp criticism of proposed new Federal rules for punishing companies that violate criminal laws.


New P.I.P. Accord
LEAD: Postal Instant Press Inc. agreed to a revised merger agreement with Golder, Thoma &amp; Cressey, a Chicago leveraged buyout concern, that lowers the acquisition price to $15.50 a share, or about $61 million, from $17.41, or $69 million.
The Los Angeles-based company agreed to the new terms because debt financing was unavailable on terms that were comparable to the original financing commitment.


First Lady Calls Bushes To Offer Her Support
LEAD: Nancy Reagan has called Vice President Bush and his wife, Barbara, to say she is ''very supportive'' of Mr.
Bush's Presidential campaign and to deny reports that she is loath to turn the White House over to them, the President's chief spokesman said today.


Intel Acquires a Technology
LEAD: The Intel Corporation has purchased a promising new interactive video technology from the General Electric Company and plans to make chips incorporating the technology, industry sources said today.


IP Timberlands Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IP Timberlands Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
62,000,000
54,000,000
Net inc
37,000,000
34,000,000
Share earns
.75
.64
9mo rev
165,000,000
133,000,000
Net inc
92,000,000
75,000,000
Share earns
2.01
1.76


Ulster Protestant Interrupts Pope, Yelling 'Antichrist!'
LEAD: Pope John Paul II was interrupted at the beginning of a speech to the European Parliament today by the Rev.
Ian Paisley, the Northern Ireland Protestant politician, who noisily denounced him as ''the Antichrist.''


Congressional Study Says Job Bias Cases Are Poorly Handled
LEAD: The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission failed to properly investigate as many as 82 percent of the claims of job discrimination it closed in a three-month period last year, the General Accounting Office reported today.


Bonita G. Wrather, 65, an Actress and Executive
LEAD: Bonita Granville Wrather, a child film star of the 1930's and a longtime executive in the Wrather Corporation, a complex of oil, entertainment and real estate businesses founded by her husband, Jack Wrather, died of cancer yesterday at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
She was 65 years old and had homes in Holmby Hills, Calif., and


A Long Way From Beads and Fathers of the 20's
LEAD: When Adelaide Hall reminisces about ''Blackbirds of 1928,'' the hit Broadway revue that made her a star 60 years ago, the image of herself that she conjures is a far cry from the international grande dame of cabaret that she has long since become.


Prosecutor Vows to Sue 3 Advisers to Brawley
LEAD: The Dutchess County prosecutor who was cleared last week by a grand jury of involvement in the Tawana Brawley case, said yesterday that he would go ahead with his planned slander suit against Miss Brawley and her advisers.


Review/Architecture; Winter Garden At Battery Park City
LEAD: The Winter Garden at Battery Park City in lower Manhattan, a 120-foot-high room of steel and glass overlooking the Hudson River, opens formally to the public on Friday.
It is perhaps the grandest public space built in New York since Grand Central Terminal, and it is surely the most eagerly awaited: it was finished more than a year ago but has been kept under wraps, in part to allow the 16 45-foot-tall palm trees that have been planted under its glass roof a chance to acclimatize themselves to New


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Interpublic Group Unit Adds Fahlgren &amp; Swink
LEAD: The Interpublic Group of Companies said yesterday that its Lintas New York Inc. subsidiary had acquired Fahlgren &amp; Swink, an agency with offices in the South and Midwest, for an undisclosed exchange of stock.


Turnstile Thieves Get Revolving-Door Justice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ditmar Loses Lawsuit
LEAD: Art Ditmar, the former Yankee pitcher who was mistakenly identified in a beer commercial as having given up Bill Mazeroski's World Series-winning home run for the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1960, lost a bid to revive his lawsuit yesterday in Washington.
United States District Court Judge Alice M. Batchelder, citing a lack of jurisdiction, let stand a ruling that wrongly being branded a ''gopher ball'' pitcher generally is not a serious enough matter to sustain a libel lawsuit.


American Bank of Connecticut reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bank of Connecticut (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,479,000
1,304,000
Per share
.68
.60
9mo net inc
4,016,000
3,761,000
Per share
1.85
1.74


THE POP LIFE
LEAD:  Stones Confidential ''I think of our differences as a family squabble,'' Keith Richards said the other day about his strained relationship with Mick Jagger. ''If I shout and scream at him, it's because no one else has the guts to do it or else they're paid not to do it.
At the same time I'd hope Mick realizes that I'm a friend who is just trying to bring him into line and do what needs to be done.


Oh, for A 'Normal Country'
LEAD: Ask Vitaly Korotich, who edits the politically lively Soviet magazine Ogonyok, what he wants, what he is fighting for so hard.
He gives a shy smile and says, ''I'm tired of labels.
I want a normal country.''


Rite Aid Head Taking Advantage of the Market
LEAD: Sentiment might be expected to play a role in the latest investment move by Alexander Grass, chairman and chief executive of the Rite Aid Corporation.


A Conciliatory Tone Enters Albany Talks Over Shoreham Deal
LEAD: Although Governor Cuomo and members of the State Legislature continue to oppose each other over the settlement to close the Shoreham nuclear power plant, both sides have recently adopted a more conciliatory tone that makes acceptance of the basic settlement appear increasingly likely.


The 100th Congress's Sour Ending; 'Corrections' Worse Than the Errors
LEAD: No tradition is more sacred to the final days of a Congress than loading up one last bill with irrelevant amendments that wouldn't stand a chance of enactment on their own.
This year it's the so-called ''tax corrections'' bill.
Originally intended only to rectify technical errors and unintended windfalls in the 1986 tax reform, it's now shaping up as the Christmas Tree


Corrections
LEAD: A listing of Monday's New York lottery numbers published yesterday gave an incorrect number for the New York Numbers.
The winning number was 801.


Goddard Students Take Over Building
LEAD: A group of Goddard College students occupied the school's administration building for nearly two days, but by late this afternoon most had left and the remaining protesters had narrowed a 26-item list of demands to two.


Cameras Ready for Presidential Debate


The 400 Richest? Oh, No, Not for This
LEAD: The Nouvelle Restraint, also known as the Nouvelle Austerity, rides again on the charity circuit.
Or at least it did last night in the Plaza Hotel's Grand Ballroom, where 400 benefactors of the Literacy Volunteers of New York City showed up minus black tie to dance and dine on veal pot pie and ice cream snowballs.


Mortgage Bonds From Connecticut
LEAD: The Connecticut State Housing Finance Authority is offering $195 million of housing mortgage revenue bonds through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Hutton.


For PC's, the Mouse Will Reign
LEAD: In the world of the personal computer, the mouse is about to become king.


Boxing Notebook; King Is Back in Tyson Camp
LEAD: For a good part of the summer, and into the fall, Don King was feeling like the odd man out in the Mike Tyson industry.


Suntrust Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suntrust Banks Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
77,700,000
71,900,000
Share earns
.60
.55
9mo net inc
229,600,000
211,700,000
Share earns
1.77
1.62


Voting Machine of the Future


Senator Says F.B.I. Pursued Anderson
LEAD: A State Senator who is under indictment on mail and bank fraud charges said yesterday that two F.B.I. agents asked him to ''set up Warren Anderson,'' the Senate majority leader.


Ford Vans Recalled for Defect
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that it was recalling about 103,000 Aerostar minivans and Bronco II and Ranger SuperCab trucks from the 1986 model year because of a defect in the underseat wiring.
In addition to the Aerostar recall, Ford said it is recalling about 64,000 model year 1988 F-150, F-250 and F-350 pickup and other light trucks equipped with optional sliding rear windows, which may have been improperly tempered, Ford said.


10,000 Polish Students Urge Legalization of Association
LEAD: About 10,000 students at universities in major Polish cities held rallies today to demand legalization of the outlawed Independent Students Association.


Arminius N. Hayne, Musician, 102,
LEAD: Arminius N. Hayne, a musician who was believed to have been the oldest member of Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians, died of heart disease last Thursday in Brooklyn Hospital.
He was 102 years old and lived in the Clinton Hill section of Brooklyn.


Police Treat Youth's Death as Bias Case
LEAD: A black Staten Island teen-ager died after being hit by a car Friday night, and the police said yesterday that he might have been chased to his death by a group of whites angered during an argument that began outside a bar several blocks away.


Quayle, Loosening Style, Takes Grip on Campaign
LEAD: After more than six weeks of avoiding press conferences and impromptu campaign speeches, Senator Dan Quayle has changed his style, loosening it to the point that he now takes questions from reporters and exchanges quips with his audiences.


Woman, 47, Dies in Car Crash
LEAD: A 47-year-old woman was killed last night when a car and a truck collided at the intersection of Caton and McDonald Avenues in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn, the police said.
The woman, Eva Romero, of 564 East 2d Street, Brooklyn, was in a car driven by Herman Rivera, 25, of 165 Park Hill Avenue on Staten Island.


NBC Widens Authority Of Program Executive
LEAD: NBC yesterday greatly expanded the creative and administrative authority of Brandon Tartikoff, the programming executive who brought the network from last place nine years ago to first place last season.


The Smoking Law Revisited: Room Enough for Everyone
LEAD: SIX months ago, a significant number of New York's restaurateurs were ready to tear their hair out as the city's new smoking law went into effect.


State Dept. Does What It Can on Two Americans Jailed in Liberia
LEAD: To the Editor:


Passport Travel Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Passport Travel Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,676,000
7,501,000
Net inc
72,728
45,059
Share earns
.06
.04
9mo sales
30,307,000
20,677,000
Net inc
263,351
146,404
Share earns
.22
.12
The company said that effective Sept.


Cascade International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cascade International (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,983,000
4,002,000
Net inc
1,137,000
367,000
Share earns
.10
.03
Yr sales
21,897,000
15,838,000
Net inc
3,821,000
2,469,000
Share earns
.31
.20


Review/Opera; 2 Rareties in New Jersey
LEAD: The careers of Puccini and Mascagni are describable in purely musical terms - the first as a long crescendo, the second as a sudden, brilliant sforzando dissipating into nothing.
Mascagni's ''Zanetto,'' for example, has been virtually lost in the wake of his earlier ''Cavalleria Rusticana,'' the work that made him rich and famous but overshadowed the rest of his life.


Athletics' Pitchers Are Forming a Batting Rotation
LEAD: Two days after winning the American League pennant by completing an emphatic four-game sweep of Boston, the Oakland Athletics routinely returned to business today.
They stretched, they hit, they talked continually into a crowd of notepads, microphones and television cameras.
They also allowed their pitchers to grab bats and finally begin taking batting practice.


Cone Stars as Mets Battle Their Way Into Game 7
LEAD: With all of their oldtime talent for survival, the Mets drew back from the brink tonight when they defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers, 5-1, and forced the playoff for the National League pennant into the seventh and deciding game.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Puerto Rico Infrastructure Financing Authority is tentatively offering $323.1 million of special tax revenue bonds through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.


Santucci Office Accused of Bias In Racer's Death
LEAD: A Queens man went on trial yesterday on a charge that he had committed manslaughter by pouring oil onto a street to discourage drag racers, causing one racer to die when his car skidded into a tree.


Robeson Industries Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Robeson Industries Corp
Qtr to Aug 26
1988
1987
Sales
13,223,555
11,611,460
Net loss
203,231
1,915,538
6mo sales
18,619,360
21,644,229
Net loss
888,841
3,199,922


Where Summer Subtly Slips Into Fall
LEAD: ''Fall is definitely here,'' my husband said the other morning, returning from the front yard with the newspapers.
How did he know? ''Because the car seats are damp,'' he said. ''I guess it's time to put the top up.''


Review/Opera; Peter Sellars's Particular View of 'Tannhauser'
LEAD: A serio-comic opera might well be composed about the rise and fall of a sexually prone, spiritually supine television evangelist in the 1980's.
If so, Peter Sellars, with his talent for exploring the sleazy side of modern culture, would be an ideal choice as director.
But, with no such contemporary opera at hand, he was forced to spend his energies on Wagner's ''Tannhauser,'' which takes place in 13th-century Thuringia.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Thursday about shutdowns of nuclear reactors at the Savannah River nuclear weapon production plant misstated the date that the Boston Edison Company shut its Pilgrim Reactor in Plymouth, Mass.


Lessons
LEAD: If anyone has any doubts that boys are different from girls, just ask a college registrar.
Girls get better grades than boys in high school and go on to college in greater numbers.
But boys get higher scores on standardized tests - a matter of some economic significance since tests scores are used to award thousands of competitive academic scholarships.


Cyberoptics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyberoptics Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
628,035
319,082
Net inc
54,521
b30,674
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
1,545,922
983,804
Net inc
118,595
b22,258
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Chemfix Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemfix Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,750,000
5,400,000
Net inc
233,000
592,000
Share earns
.04
.08
Yr rev
24,000,000
14,000,000
Net loss
1,100,000
b1,100,000
Share earns
-
.16


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There is no military solution to what we are facing.
It is mainly a political problem.''  - Maj.
Gen.
Amram Mitzna, Israel's military commander in the West Bank.  [ A6:3. ]


The Darker Side Of the 'Baby Blues'
LEAD: ANN GREEN smothered her firstborn in 1980 and her second baby two years later, but the deaths were not considered suspicious until she tried to kill her third child.


Electric Boat Workers Vote 4-Year Contract
LEAD: Submarine builders at Electric Boat voted today to accept a new four-year contract, ending a 103-day walkout without achieving most of their demands.
The vote was 3,752 to 1,822. ''I'm glad it's over,'' said Joseph Messier, president of the 10,200-member Metal Trades Council.
Mr.
Messier said the contract is unpopular with many members because it is almost identical to one rejected by union negotiators in


EX-HOSTAGE FACES MARINE DISCHARGE
LEAD: A marine who spent 444 days as a hostage at the United States Embassy in Iran says he is being forced out of the Marine Corps because of emotional problems stemming from his captivity.


Reagan Due to Rule on U.S. Indictment of Marcos
LEAD: Faced with conflicting recommendations from his advisers, President Reagan is due to decide whether to approve the indictment of Ferdinand E. Marcos, the former ruler of the Philippines, before the Presidential election, senior Administration officials said today.


Senate Passes Tax Package That Includes 'Bill of Rights'
LEAD: The Senate passed a package of miscellaneous tax provisions late tonight that include increases, cuts and a first-ever ''bill of rights'' to strengthen the hand of taxpayers involved in disputes with the Internal Revenue Service.


Debaters In Jersey Turn Angry
LEAD: Meeting in their first debate, Senator Frank R. Lautenberg and the Republican challenger, Pete Dawkins, attacked each another tonight with what seemed to be intense anger, involving emotions that have been simmering during months of bitter campaigning.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: ASIAN cuisine has had a profound effect on Western cuisine in recent years.
My own cooking repertoire incorporates many techniques and seasonings that were unheard of in classic French and American cuisine just 10 years ago.
Our ideas about food textures and seasoning - pairing sweet and sour, hot and sweet, and so on -have evolved greatly with exposure to


Realty South Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Realty South Investors (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,342,000
936,000
Net inc
620,000
538,000
Share earns
.29
.25
9mo rev
3,436,000
2,394,000
Net inc
1,692,000
1,489,000
Share earns
.80
.73


United Telecommunications Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Telecommunications Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
805,809,000
750,604,000
Net inc
54,024,000
d24,126,000
Share earns
.52
.23
9mo rev
2,325,848,000
2,177,856,000
Net inc
b129,569,000
cd80,657,000
Share earns
1.25
-


Northwest Airlines Is Sued by Singer
LEAD: The Singer Company said it had sued Northwest Airlines Inc. for interfering with the sale of Link-Miles, its international flight-simulation business, to Thomson-CSF, a French electronics group.
The lawsuit, which seeks at least $75 million, was filed in United States District Court in Minneapolis, where Northwest has sued Singer and Paul A.


Other Side Assisted Judge's Daughter, Myerson Witness Testifies
LEAD: A witness disclosed under cross-examination yesterday that a divorce lawyer for the estranged wife of Bess Myerson's companion had helped obtain an apartment for the daughter of Justice Hortense W. Gabel.


Roots of Western Tradition Lie in the East
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gold Fields' Suit Warns on Oppenheimer Control
LEAD: The hostile $4.9 billion bid by the Oppenheimer mining group of South Africa for Consolidated Gold Fields P.L.C. would create a monopoly in the world gold market and illegally restrain trade in the United States, according to an antitrust suit filed today by Gold Fields and companies associated with it in the United


Rockingham Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rockingham Bancorp
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Net inc
286,000
193,000
Per share
.25
-
Yr net inc
863,000
577,000
Per share
.75
-
The company converted to public ownership July 31, 1987.


EATING WELL
LEAD: IN February 1986, a Brown University student died after eating just two spoonfuls of chili in a Providence, R.I., restaurant.
The chili contained peanuts, a food to which the student, Kate Brodsky, was severely allergic.


Bandag Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bandag Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
125,525,000
109,917,000
Net inc
18,520,000
16,831,000
Share earns
1.25
1.06
9mo sales
352,983,000
303,320,000
Net inc
49,642,000
45,616,000
Share earns
3.31
2.80
Shares outst
14,993,816
16,291,306


Jay Journal; Paper Mill Strike Ends, But the Anger Remains
LEAD: The pickets have left the mill.


U.S. Officials Concede Lapses In Security at Weapon Labs
LEAD: Energy Department officials today conceded that there had been security lapses involving foreign visitors to the United States' nuclear weapons laboratories.
But they maintained that there was no firm indication that classified information had been disclosed as a result.


Meese's Final Slap
LEAD: Look for Attorney General Dick Thornburgh to overturn or severely restrict an order signed by his predecessor, Edwin Meese 3d, that would have resulted in the appointment of special prosecutors to investigate members of Congress.
An announcement of Mr.
Thornburgh's action could come as early as next week.


After the Victory, Lions Raise Sights
LEAD: ''We'll play them one at a time'' was all that Larry McElreavy, Columbia's football coach, would say last Sunday about the rest of the Lions' season.
What he left unmentioned was that Columbia has a chance to win the Ivy League football championship this season.


Campaign Trail; Republican Flattered By the Other Side
LEAD: With absolute delight, Representative Joseph J. DioGuardi told Mr.
Dukakis yesterday, ''I think Joe Biden once said that imitation is the sincerest form of flattery.''


Studies Of Light, Weight And Glass
LEAD: Glass offers the fascinating paradox of being simultaneously transparent while also being the medium of optical illusion.
Glass sculpture that seems obvious in its form, clear in its imagery and firm in its colors may suddenly change when viewed from a different angle, revealing interior shifts that seem to have swum up from another dimension.


Gateway Communications Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Communications Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,498,496
2,405,098
Net inc
177,939
b128,665
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
11,670,074
9,916,716
Net inc
514,725
728,144
Share earns
.11
.15


College Football; The End Will Be a Factor as Penn State and Syracuse Meet
LEAD: One of the East's traditional rivalries will have its 66th and next-to-last game Saturday night when Penn State (4-1) and Syracuse (4-1) meet at Beaver Stadium.
Unfortunately for all concerned, including the fans, the rivalry is going to end abruptly in 1989 at Syracuse with much bad feeling between the schools.


For New and Old Independent Films, An Archive and Exhibition Center
LEAD: If there is a patron saint of independent film making, Jonas Mekas is the man.
After more than three decades of making, exhibiting, reviewing, collecting and preserving avant-garde movies, the 65-year-old Lithuanian-born director of Anthology Film Archives realized a longstanding dream yesterday, when the new home for his archives opened on the Lower East


Report Finds Region's Economy Is Booming
LEAD: A year after ''Black Monday'' on Wall Street, the economy of the New York metropolitan region is bustling, with unemployment dropping and retail sales climbing, according to a report released yesterday by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


Sports People; Clearly, an Overdose
LEAD: David Croudip, an Atlanta Falcons defensive back, ingested a fatal does of cocaine in one dose just hours before his death, according to a Georgia Crime Laboratory report released yesterday.
The report, released to the office of Dr.
Joesph L. Burton, Medical Examiner of several metropolitan Atlanta counties, said that Croudip's death Monday was definitely caused by an overdose of cocaine.


Designers' Saturday: Chairs, Beds, Tables, Tired Feet
LEAD: TOTING their shopping bags, a legion of design professionals - some 25,000, all told - descended upon New York last week for the annual four-day shop-till-you-drop marathon known as Designers' Saturday.
For the event more than 300 manufacturers introduced new furniture designs for home and office in showrooms around the city.


From State Dept., A Stand-In for Bush
LEAD: The State Department says it is perfectly legal, but Abraham D. Sofaer, the department's legal adviser, and a former Federal judge, is in the midst of a quiet controversy anyway.
Mr.
Sofaer is appearing Monday in New York City as a representative for Mr.
Bush, a somewhat unusual move for a legal official.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Sports People; 49ers Settle
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers have agreed to pay the former defensive lineman Charles Krueger more than $1 million after being found liable for fraudulently failing to reveal the severity of his crippling knee injury, it was reported yesterday.
The tentative settlement would dismiss the National Football League team's appeal of a judge's ruling ordering the 49ers to pay Krueger $2.36 million.


TW Rejects Coniston's Bid
LEAD: The board of directors of TW Services Inc., the operator of the Hardee's and Denny's restaurant chains, said yesterday that it had rejected a merger proposal of $28 a share offered recently by Coniston Partners.


Crash That Kills Man Traps Widow 8 Days
LEAD: A 77-year-old woman who survived a car crash spent eight days trapped in a ravine near her dead husband before being discovered by hikers, the authorities said today.


Metro Matters; Taxpayers' Tale: Fighting to Fix A $20,000 Error
LEAD: Jonathan L. Halperin and Michelle Copeland are doctors, which means their financial plight isn't likely to generate automatic sympathy.


In Midwest Hotels, Choose Igloos or Pharaoh's Tomb
LEAD: FROM the outside, the Burnsville Royale Hotel looks like any other example of 1960's interstate-exit motel architecture: a flat roofed, two-story building surrounded by an asphalt parking lot.


Soviets Promise Aid to Help Rebuild Afghanistan
LEAD: The Soviet Union announced today that it would send food and other aid worth about 400 million rubles to Afghanistan, where its armed forces have been fighting for eight years.


Ford Taps Taiwan
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company began exporting its Mercury Sable to Taiwan, making it the first car Ford has exported to that country.
The Sable was selected to tap into the demand for larger cars in Taiwan, where most vehicles are compacts and subcompacts, Bob Day, a Ford spokesman, said.
He said Ford is ''quite optimistic'' about its sales in Taiwan for 1989.


Fine Homes International LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fine Homes International LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
219,716,000
183,998,000
Net inc
16,985,000
7,561,000
Share earns
.57
.25
9mo rev
600,375,000
-
Net inc
41,335,000
-
Share earns
1.39
-


Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
166,966,000
161,268,000
Net inc
25,181,000
23,966,000
Share earns
.51
.49
9mo rev
528,835,000
487,352,000
Net inc
b126,580,000
97,600,000
Share earns
2.53
1.84


Vatican Moves To End a Protest By Jersey Nuns
LEAD: The Vatican has assigned a special delegate to help resolve a dispute between five cloistered Carmelite nuns and their mother superior over modernizing their austere way of life in a monastery in Morris Township.


Neworld Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neworld Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,511,000
2,350,000
Per share
.54
.47
9mo net inc
7,206,000
6,870,000
Per share
1.55
1.37


Couple Get Life for a Murder
LEAD: An 18-year-old man and a 15-year-old girl pleaded guilty to murdering the girl's mother and were sentenced to life imprisonment yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
The man, Mario Garcia, got 15 years to life, and the girl, Andrea Williams, got 7 years to life.
They admitted killing the mother, Adriennne Lomax, 44, with a machete and a knife because of her opposition to the couple's romance.


William Allan, Labor Reporter, 81
LEAD: William Allan, a labor reporter who was jailed as a Communist in the 1950's, died of a heart attack Monday at Kaiser Hospital in Oakland, Calif.
He was 81 years old and lived in Oakland.


Mondale Rules Out the Idea Of Heading U. of Minnesota
LEAD: Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale said today that he had declined an invitation to be interviewed for the post of president of the University of Minnesota, a decision that disappointed his top supporter for the job, Gov.
Rudy Perpich.


Review/Television; Scaling the Peaks of Adventure


Judge Orders Yonkers Parties Back to Court
LEAD: The Federal judge in the Yonkers housing discrimination suit today ordered the parties in the dispute into court on Monday to explain why he should not designate an alternative to a site owned by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York for public housing.


Boeing Jumbo Jet Deliveries Delayed
LEAD: Deliveries of some of the Boeing Company's new 747-400 jumbo jets will be delayed by a month or so, Boeing Commercial Airplanes said.
Dean D. Thornton, president of the Boeing operating company, said that of the 161 747-400's ordered by 21 customers, 20 planes would be delivered an average of one month past the agreed-upon date.


U.S. Court Allows Vote On Official Language
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today bolstered Colorado's effort to place on the Nov. 8 ballot a constitutional amendment declaring English to be the state's official language.


Panel Warns Of Increase In AIDS Cases
LEAD: Warning that 11,000 New Yorkers will have AIDS in 1991 and that up to 100,000 more will be suffering from related illnesses, the New York City AIDS planning agency is calling for a major overhaul and rapid expansion of medical and social services.


F.B.I. ENDS INQUIRY ON BABY SWITCHING
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation has closed its monthlong inquiry into charges of a 1978 baby swap at a rural hospital, having found no evidence that Federal laws were broken.


First National Cincinnati Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Cincinnati Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
13,641,000
12,392,000
Per share
.95
.86
9mo net inc
b44,464,000
b41,777,000
Per share
3.08
2.90
b-After gains from accounting changes of $3,066,000 for the latest period and $4,297,000 for the year-ago period.


European Bloc's Budget
LEAD: The European Community Budget Commissioner, Henning Christophersen, said today that the 1989 draft budget would be some 2 billion European Currency Units, or $2.26 billion, less than projections.
He said the revised budget would be presented in early November to the European Parliament, whose approval is needed, and to the decision-making European Community Council.


Hitler Jokes No Bar to Funds
LEAD: The University of North Dakota says it will accept a $5 million endowment from a Las Vegas hotel owner who threw parties for his employees on or near Adolf Hitler's birthday.
The university said it had concluded the parties were meant only as a joke.


Midlantic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midlantic Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
57,768,000
50,085,000
Per share
1.48
1.31
9mo net inc
163,413,000
123,848,000
Per share
4.20
3.26
The bank company said the prior year income was adversely affected by an $18 million after-tax provision for possible loan losses related to loans to lesser developed nations.


Justices Seem Unswayed by Civil Rights Debate They Sought
LEAD: The Supreme Court heard arguments today on one of the major questions facing the Justices this term: whether to overturn its own 1976 landmark decision giving minorities the right to use a Reconstruction civil rights law to sue for private acts of racial discrimination.


Baseball Notebook; Myers Joins Elite Of Relief Pitchers
LEAD: When the season began, Randy Myers said he was the setup man for Roger McDowell in the Mets' bullpen scheme.
Throughout the season, Myers said he was the setup man for McDowell.
If one were to ask him today, Myers would say he was the setup man for McDowell.


CB&amp;T Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CB&amp;T Bancshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
7,035,000
b6,530,000
Per share
.23
.21
9mo net inc
19,324,000
17,402,000
Per share
.63
.57
b-Included a $4,460,000 after-tax gain on sale of the company's Georgia Co.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Trump's Deal for Shuttle


60th St. Water-Main Break Floods Subway
LEAD: More than five million gallons of water burst through Broadway early yesterday from a 90-year-old high-pressure water main near Columbus Circle and immediately headed for the subway.
The cascade flooded tunnels all the way to Queens with up to nine feet of water and affected virtually every subway line for the morning rush hour.


NO VOTE EXPECTED ON CONTRAS' ARMS
LEAD: The Administration and Congressional Republicans have agreed that there is little point in seeking a vote on rearming the Nicaraguan rebels before Congress adjourns, Marlin Fitzwater, the White House press secretary, said today.


Schoolgirls Killed by Car Are Remembered


Relaxed Bush Camp Is Set for the Debate
LEAD: Barbara Bush wore a Michael Dukakis mask.


Affiliated Banc Corporation of Wyoming reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Banc Corporation of Wyoming (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,368,000
1,307,000
Per share
.35
.33
9mo net inc
3,710,000
3,686,000
Per share
.94
.94
The results for the latest periods reflected the effect of new accounting rules deferring fee income.


Myerson Trial Hears Judge's Daughter
LEAD: Sukhreet Gabel testified yesterday that Bess Myerson offered her a job in the New York City Cultural Affairs Department a week or two after they met at a dinner party in June 1983.


Review/Music; Percussive Flute in 'Salsa Meets Jazz'
LEAD: The flute may seem the least percussive of instruments.
But in the Cuban music that gave rise to salsa, percussion is everywhere, and the flute punctuates songs with quick, sharp riffs and whistles.
At the same time, it can send melody lines whizzing through the rhythm like the shuttle of a high-speed loom.


Erie Lackawanna Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Erie Lackawanna Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
266,958
b1,217,649
Share earns
-
1.38
9mo net inc
3,119,553
4,553,380
Share earns
3.52
5.14
b-Net income  The company said the loss for the latest quarter resulted from the settlement of claims in the amount of $2,400,000, or $1.80 a share, net of tax benefits.


An Arduous Hunt for the Missing in Vietnam
LEAD: At low tide, the beach seems to extend all the way to the submerged wreckage of an American bomber shot down 20 years ago in a raid on this industrial port.





First City Bancorp of Texas Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First City Bancorp of Texas Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
23,618,000
-
Per share
.97
-
5mo net inc
40,848,000
-
Per share
1.67
-
The banking company was recapitalized in a $1.5 billion federally assisted rescue in April; thus, comparable results are not available.


Is 11-Year-Old a Genius, or Just Bright? Either Way, He's a Troubled Child
LEAD: Agustin Eastwood De Mello likes to tell the story of how his son, Adragon, at 7 weeks of age, looked up at him and said hello.
Other signs of Adragon's precocity followed, the father says.
He could read and write at the age of 2.
At 5 he joined Mensa and at 8 he enrolled in a community college near this seaside town, about 80 miles south of San


Cardinal Blocked In Bid for Interco
LEAD: A Federal appeals court Tuesday blocked a hostile $2.66 billion takeover bid for Interco Inc. just hours before the tender offer was scheduled to close.
In ruling against the Cardinal Acquisition Corporation of Washington, the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit did not specify what judges would hear the suit filed by Interco, which argues Cardinal's bid was illegal.


Review/Concert; Robert White's Lyric Tenor
LEAD: Robert White is a singer of taste, subtle artistry and lovely tone whose gifts are consistently thwarted when he appears with orchestra.
The much-recorded lyric tenor sang Monday evening with the New York City Symphony in Alice Tully Hall, and in certain soft phrases of Britten's song cycle ''Les Illuminations,'' for instance the rapturous ''Je danse,'' he was wonderful.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Fires, deforestation, huge agricultural projects, gold mines and predatory development are destroying our flora and fauna.
We must contain the predatory actions of man.''  - President Jose Sarney of Brazil.  [ A6:1. ]


Lawyer May Be Forced to Identify Client
LEAD: The police know many facts about the hit-and-run death of Mark Baltes, whose body was dragged 60 feet when he was struck by a white Buick after midnight on March 9, 1986.


Africans at the U.N. Express Skepticism on Pretoria Moves
LEAD: African foreign ministry officials warned today that a South African withdrawal from Namibia and renewed diplomatic contacts between South Africa and black African nations would not restore stability to southern Africa or improve Pretoria's standing on the continent.


The Editorial Notebook; Blacks and Tawana Brawley
LEAD: It seemed obvious, long before a grand jury said so, that there was no substance to Tawana Brawley's story of gang rape by white law enforcement officers.
Still, even after the grand jury reported last week, many blacks reacted with skepticism that bordered on denial of the panel's findings.


CBS Posts 16.3% Gain in Net And Raises Dividend to $1.10
LEAD: CBS Inc. yesterday raised its divi-dend while reporting a 16.3 percent increase in its third-quarter net income from the period a year earlier.


Farmers' Agency In Stock Offering
LEAD: The Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation, known as Farmer Mac, said yesterday that it intended to raise its initial financing of approximately $20 million through a common stock offering, probably during the week of Nov. 14.


Getty Museum to Sell 8 Ancient Manuscripts
LEAD: The J. Paul Getty Museum is selling eight ancient manuscripts, six of which date from before A.D. 900, at Sotheby's in London on Dec. 6, the auction house announced yesterday.
Most of the manuscripts are Carolingian and all were acquired in 1983 as part of the Ludwig collection of 144 books.


Adtec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adtec Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,269,000
2,565,000
Net inc
122,000
105,000
Share earns
.06
.05


Treasury Prices Continue to Slide
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices weakened in light, nervous trading yesterday, pushed lower by a further drop in the dollar, falling oil prices and the increased prospect that new 30-year Treasury bonds would be sold in November.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; WPP Is Realigning Some Top Executives
LEAD: WPP Group is realigning some of its top management in an effort to better coordinate its diverse holdings and strengthen itself in certain geographic areas, the company said.


Brazil Acts to Slow Destruction of Amazon Forest
LEAD: Faced with growing warnings from scientists and the threat of losing international funds, President Jose Sarney today announced a series of steps aimed at slowing the rapid destruction of the Amazon rain forest.


How Laundering Is Said to Work
LEAD: This is an example of one way money was laundered in the BCCI case, according to Federal officials.
Step 1: Drug dealers in such cities as New York, Detroit, Philadelphia or Chicago contact undercover agents, who are posing as experts on money laundering, and tell them they have a pickup of one million dollars.


US Trust Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US Trust Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
10,327,000
10,134,000
Per share
1.03
.93
9mo net inc
24,970,000
26,417,000
Per share
2.47
2.56


Noriega Political Payments Reported by Indicted Banker; U.S. Trap Is Described
LEAD: By JEFFREY SCHMALZ


Southeast Banking Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southeast Banking Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
30,893,000
28,844,000
Per share
.99
.94
9mo net inc
89,382,000
660,000
Per share
2.88
-
Last year's earnings were negatively impacted by an $85 million special provision for credit losses ($77 million net of tax credits) relating to loans to lesser developed countries.


Quayle, Free of Handlers, Is Going With His Instincts
LEAD: For the first time since the early days of the campaign, Senator Dan Quayle seems to be his own candidate, doing things his way, going with the instincts he developed on his own in a dozen years in public life.
He is suddenly spontaneous, available, confident, natural.


Asset Agency Survives Vote
LEAD: The House today refused to abolish the Federal agency that was created to manage and sell off assets of insolvent savings institutions.


A Corrupted Process
LEAD: By talking with hundreds of voters, R. W. Apple Jr. of The New York Times has confirmed what we feel: Americans are disgusted with this election campaign.
They are fed up with the mud-slinging and the failure to talk about the real issues facing the country.


Liberty National Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liberty National Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
7,392,000
6,459,000
Per share
.70
.63
9mo net inc
20,683,000
18,338,000
Per share
1.99
1.79


E-Z-EM Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Z-EM Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 3
1988
1987
Sales
17,053,000
13,403,000
Net inc
1,638,000
1,557,000
Share earns
.21
.20


A's Not Finished With Their Work
LEAD: One look at the dark, fiery eyes of Tony LaRussa or a view of the Oakland Athletics' workouts is enough to wipe out any notion the American League champions are settling into smugness before the World Series.


MILITARY SUPPLIER FINED $115 MILLION ON FRAUD CHARGES
LEAD: In what the Justice Department described as the largest fraud settlement in history, an Illinois aerospace company agreed today to pay fines and penalties totaling $115 million as it acknowledged a conspiracy to overcharge the Government on military contracts.


Trump City Site May Be Sold, Developer Says
LEAD: In a deal that might seal the fate of one of New York City's largest tracts of prime real estate, Donald J. Trump, the developer, casino operator and corporate financier, has been negotiating the sale of 76 acres along the Hudson River on the Upper West Side.


House Passes Bill Aimed at Lobbying in Congress
LEAD: The House of Representatives today approved a bill that would strengthen existing laws against lobbying by former high-level employees of the executive branch.
The legislation, for the first time, would also place restrictions on lobbying by former members of Congress and former Congressional aides.


First Union Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Union Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
73,269,000
76,936,000
Per share
.69
.69
9mo net inc
226,447,000
215,610,000
Per share
2.10
1.94


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


Warning on 'Couch Potato' Blight
LEAD: ABC and CBS have agreed to broadcast a public-service announcement by a pediatrics group that warns children against watching too much television.


New Delhi Journal; Fantasy or Blasphemy? A Book Is a Burning Issue
LEAD: The banning by Indian officials of a book they apparently had not read, on the advice of Moslem leaders who also had not seen it, has opened a debate troubling to many here about the political limits of free expression and the shallowness of religious peace in India.


The Return of a Computer Star
LEAD: Steven P. Jobs is back.
The personal computer industry's boy wonder, who founded Apple Computer when he was 21 years old, today introduced the new machine on which he hopes to once again ascend to the top of the computer world.
And the machine drew some rave reviews.


Israelis Blow Up Homes of Arabs
LEAD: Israeli soldiers blew up four Palestinian homes and sealed five others today in reprisal for the killing of Arabs who had collaborated with Israel.
Palestinians hurled a grenade at a troop bus but missed.


2 Plead Not Guilty in Killing
LEAD: Two men charged with the 1983 murder of a New York producer who was trying to finance a movie, ''The Cotton Club,'' pleaded not guilty Tuesday in Municipal Court.
The defendants, William Molony Mentzer and Alex Lamota Marti, are accused of shooting to death the producer, Roy Radin.


Newmil Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmil Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,320,000
2,339,000
Per share
.21
.32


Former Church Janitor Admits Abducting Pair
LEAD: A deaf former church janitor pleaded guilty today to charges of kidnapping and molesting two girls, keeping one in a dirt crawl space under the church's altar for as long as six weeks.


Rietveld, an Esthetic Wellspring
LEAD: GERRIT RIETVELD'S Mondrian-like ''Red-Blue'' chair is no longer the only one of his designs that looks familiar.
In a new exhibition, ''Gerrit Rietveld:


Sudan, Racked by Famine, Agrees To $100 Million U.S. Food Airlift
LEAD: The Sudan has agreed to let the United States start a 10-day airlift of food to the famine-afflicted southern region, breaking an impasse between the Government and foreign aid donors.


Gilbert Miller Haas, Investment Adviser, 76
LEAD: Gilbert Miller Haas, an investment adviser and economic consultant, died of liver cancer Oct. 7 at his home in Key West, Fla.
He was 76 years old.


German Firm Is Rescued
LEAD: One of West Germany's leading raw material and fuel trading firms was rescued today by the nation's largest bank after huge losses brought on by the recent oil price slide.


Award Changes a Designer's Life
LEAD: When Rifat Ozbek received the British Fashion Council's Designer of the Year Award from Margaret Thatcher at 10 Downing Street at the start of Fashion Week here, the Prime Minister asked him to make an acceptance speech.
After a whispered consultation, she returned to the microphone. ''He says he just wants to say thank you,'' she reported.


First Boston Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Boston Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
374,905,000
369,636,000
Net inc
41,662,000
40,801,000
Share earns
1.13
1.15
Shares outst
39,196,000
37,685,000
9mo rev
1,079,576,000
1,055,552,000
Net inc
127,346,000
103,792,000
Share earns
3.50
2.95
Shares outst
38,671,000
37,713,000


Review/Music; Percussion in 3 Modes
LEAD: Saturday night's concert at Aaron Davis Hall, at City College - the first event of a month's worth of events sponsored by the Caribbean Cultural Center - resounded with the sounds of drums.
Three different groups, Babatunde Olatunji and his Drums of Passion, a trio of drummers from New Orleans and the Cuban percussionist Daniel


Sports People; Hornets Sign Chapman
LEAD: Rex Chapman, who was the top draft choice of the Charlotte Hornets of the National Basketball Association after scoring 1,073 points in his first two seasons at the University of Kentucky, signed a four-year contract yesterday worth $2.6 million after weeks of stalled negotiations.


Oil Prices Settle Above $14; Gold Rises on Drop in Bonds
LEAD: The prices of energy futures closed higher yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange, as oil settled above $14 a barrel for the first time in two weeks.


Ski Resorts Ready For Coming Season
LEAD: FOR the fifth year in a row, ski resorts in the Northeast have made major investments in lifts and snowmaking equipment.
Resort operators said new and replacement lift expenditures came to more than $21.5 million this year, new snowmaking capability cost $6.6 million and upgrading of current snowmaking equipment totaled $6.4 million.


Cubans Release Cup Yacht
LEAD: The Cuban Government yesterday released the ship that was transporting New Zealand, the unsuccessful America's Cup challenger, from San Diego to New York.
The release came a day after the ship was ordered into a Cuban port by a gunboat.


Sports People; McCallum Traded
LEAD: The San Diego Chargers acquired Napoleon McCallum, a running back, from the Los Angeles Raiders yesterday, completing a July transaction in which the Chargers sent Jim Lachey, a tackle, to the Raiders for John Clay, a tackle, and a draft pick to be named later.
McCallum, 25 years old, a graduate of the Naval Academy, was picked in the fourth round of the 1986 draft after setting the Division I-A collegiate all-purpose yardage record of 7,122.


Capitalizing on Penchant For French Furnishings
LEAD: FOLLOWING the American penchant for things French, Grange, a French home furnishings manufacturer, opens its first retail store in the United States today at 831 Madison Avenue (69th Street).


No Warming Trend, Dukakis Aides Insist
LEAD: No, no, no, no, the Dukakis aides say.
There is no master plan to warm up the Massachusetts Governor, whose performance in the first debate was considered skilled but rather chilly by many reviewers.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: ''I NAGGED him,'' recalled Helene Berinsky, a book designer in Manhattan whose teen-age son was overweight. ''I watched what he ate and died inside every time he ate an extra cookie.''


Georgia-Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia-Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,400,000,000
2,420,000,000
Net inc
114,000,000
118,000,000
Share earns
1.19
1.10
Shares outst
95,820,000
107,564,000
9mo sales
6,940,000,000
6,370,000,000
Net inc
338,000,000
346,000,000
Share earns
3.41
3.16
Shares outst
99,158,000
108,258,000


Giant Defense Is Falling Flat
LEAD: Darryl Rogers, the coach of the Detroit Lions, made an interesting observation this afternoon when someone asked his impressions of the Giants.


Review/Dance; Graham's 'Phaedra' and 'Errand Into the Maze'
LEAD: According to Greek mythology, Pasiphae, wife of Minos, the king of Crete, was seduced by a bull and gave birth to the Minotaur, half man, half beast.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Meese's New Career
LEAD: If you thought you had heard the last of Edwin Meese 3d, who resigned as Attorney General last summer, think again: He is starting a career on the lecture circuit today with an address to the Economic Club of Colorado in Denver.


Southern National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern National Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,972,000
4,714,000
Per share
.47
.37
9mo net inc
15,277,000
12,741,000
Per share
1.20
1.00


New Hampshire Arrests Ex-Firefighter in Arson
LEAD: A former volunteer firefighter was arrested today on suspicion of setting 16 of the blazes that have terrified this town since May, prompting residents to sleep in shifts and patrol the streets at night.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; World Color To Print Life
LEAD: World Color Press Inc., one of the leading magazine and commercial printers, has signed a multiyear contract with Time Inc. to print Life magazine starting in January, 1989.


Teacher, in Reversal, To Testify on Assault
LEAD: A George Washington High School teacher who had declined to testify against a student charged with assaulting him has changed his mind, officials of the United Federation of Teachers said yesterday.


Hilton Hotels Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hilton Hotels Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
236,099,000
198,247,000
Net inc
27,247,000
22,276,000
Share earns
.57
.44
9mo rev
699,172,000
623,443,000
Net inc
95,670,000
81,495,000
Share earns
1.99
1.62


Summit Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
9,043,000
8,117,000
Per share
.61
.55
9mo net inc
24,616,000
22,309,000
Per share
1.67
1.51


Carteret Savings Mortgage Notes
LEAD: The Carteret Savings Bank is offering $85 million worth of mortgage-backed medium-term notes that are due in 1993 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Dissension Faces India Party Just Hours After Formation
LEAD: Within hours of its formation Tuesday, the People's Party, a new opposition grouping in India, faced dissension within its ranks about its name and platform.


5 Television Channels Will Carry the Debate
LEAD: The debate in Los Angeles tonight between Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis will begin at 9 o'clock, Eastern daylight time, and will be broadcast by five television networks: ABC, CBS, NBC, CNN and C-Span.


Geordie Graham, 88, a Dancer With Denishawn Company, Dies
LEAD: Georgia Graham Sargeant, a former leading dancer in the Denishawn company in the 1920's and a sister of Martha Graham, the modern-dance pioneer, died Tuesday in Tucson.
She was 88 years old and had lived in Tucson for the last 10 years.


First Boston Profits Up 2.2%
LEAD: First Boston Inc. reported yesterday that earnings in the third quarter edged up 2.2 percent on a gain in revenues of 1.4 percent.


New Plague For London: Graffiti Tags
LEAD: Would you believe graffiti on the London subways?
The London Underground would like you not to, and will spend $1.7 million this year trying to remove it as fast as it is sprayed on.


The Candidates and the Bomb Alarm
LEAD: America's capacity to build nuclear weapons is disintegrating.
Worried military planners contemplate cannibalizing their components.
Worried members of Congress discover that the capacity to build them safely has eroded.
And what is the response?


Alexander's Announces Another Sale of a Store
LEAD: Alexander's Inc., the New York retailer that is more than 50 percent owned by the real estate developers Donald J. Trump and Interstate Properties, yesterday announced the sale of a second store within a week.


First Federal of Michigan reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal of Michigan (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b6,601,000
c5,709,000
Per share
.60
.51
9mo net inc
b34,164,000
c55,379,000
Per share
3.09
4.98
b-Included a gain of $952,000, or 9 cents a share, from the early retirement of debt for the quarter; the 9 months is after an extraordinary gain of $972,000.


F.T.C. Approves Kroger Store Sale
LEAD: The Kroger Company received Government approval to sell 24 Florida Choice supermarkets and 24 liquor stores to Kash N' Karry for $55 million.
The sale to Kash N' Karry - a supermarket operator based in Tampa, Fla., that Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen Ltd. has agreed to buy from Lucky Stores Inc. - is expected to be completed by Friday.


Plane Too Near Reagan Flight
LEAD: Air Force One, with President Reagan aboard, and a 50-passenger regional airliner passed illegally close to each other yesterday about 50 miles southwest of New York, apparently because of an error by an air traffic controller, according to Government officials.


An Unasked Question, an Insufficient Answer in the Debates; Bush Likable?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about the dedication of the Lawrence A. Wien Center for Dance and Theater in Manhattan misidentified the woman next to Mayor Koch.
She was Enid Morse, a daughter of Mr.
Wien; Mrs.
Peter Malkin is her sister.


Calendar: Folk Art, Tours and Fall Fairs
LEAD:  From East to West, Sponsored by the Museum of American Folk Art; 212-481-3080.


Mets Shut Out; Dodgers Advance to World Series


Shuttle's Value to Trump Tied to Profitability, Not Atlantic City Connection
LEAD: In the 1990's of Donald J. Trump's dreams, a gambler will fly to Atlantic City on a Trump plane, place his wagers at a Trump casino and then move on to New York, also on a Trump plane, where he will stay in a Trump hotel and shop at Trump Tower.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Sports Magazine From ESPN
LEAD: ESPN, the cable-television sports programming network, is getting into the publishing business with an advertiser-supported magazine called TV Sports.


State by State; Bush Has a Slight Lead in Arkansas
LEAD: A rational man or woman would have ample reason to conclude that this state, a conservative bastion in a conservative region, will give Vice President Bush a healthy margin over Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis next month.
Glance around Pine Bluff, for instance.
This is a place that proudly named its main traffic artery the Martha Mitchell Expressway after a favorite daughter, the garrulous wife of John N.


Sports of The Times; Johnson Looks to '89 With the Mets
LEAD: IN the hours before the Dodgers won the National League pennant last night, Davey Johnson spoke openly for the first time of his desire to return as the Mets' manager next season.


LSI Logic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSI Logic Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
93,990,000
68,879,000
Net inc
7,491,000
3,209,000
Share earns
.18
.08
9mo rev
259,501,000
183,873,000
Net inc
19,411,000
5,560,000
Share earns
.47
.14


Holly Expected to Fight Tyson Offer
LEAD: The battle of America's chicken suppliers has only just begun, analysts say.
Tyson Foods Inc.'s $920 million bid for the Holly Farms Corporation would give Tyson a chance to expand as the nation's chicken processing superpower, but a fight is likely.


Century Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,010,000
864,000
Per share
.18
.15
9mo net inc
2,629,000
2,333,000
Per share
.46
.48
Shares outst
5,722,450
4,863,561


Dodgers Win It as Hershiser Shuts Out Mets
LEAD: Six months after they set out to ''dominate'' the National League, the Mets took the final tumble tonight to the Dodgers.
Tommy Lasorda's ''team of destiny'' swept past them and won the National League pennant with yet another classic of shutout pitching by Orel Hershiser.


President Calls G.O.P. a Party For Democrats
LEAD: President Reagan, campaigning through industrial regions of the Northeast, urged conservative Democrats today to ''come home'' this fall and vote Republican.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Air Wis Services Inc., Appleton, Wis., said it would not meet with Cove Capital Associates Inc., to discuss Cove's offer to acquire Air Wis for $16.36 a share.


Koch Gets New Chef With a Flair for Sole
LEAD: Mayor Koch began another chapter yesterday in his love affair with food: He hired a new chef, a 29-year-old who has worked in Manhattan at the Berkshire Place Hotel and Le Perigord-Park restaurant and has degrees from the New York Institute of Technology and the Culinary Institute of America.


ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
41,710,000
31,921,000
Net inc
b7,053,000
c756,000
Share earns
.41
.04
Shares outst
17,180,000
17,666,000
9mo sales
117,368,000
83,663,000
Net inc
b17,200,000
c4,530,000
Share earns
1.00
.23
Shares outst
17,217,000
19,324,000


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: JUSTICE Harry Blackmun of the Supreme Court says there is a ''distinct possibility'' that Roe v.
Wade, which insured a woman's right to have an abortion, will be reversed this term.
During the Presidential debate, George Bush says his credo is adoption, not abortion.
Michael Dukakis wonders aloud whether the Vice


Review/Opera; 'Trovatore' Cast Shifts At the Met
LEAD: Saturday evening's ''Trovatore'' at the Metropolitan Opera served to introduce Dolora Zajick, an Oregonian mezzo-soprano new to the company, in the hard-to-cast role of the gypsy Azucena.
It was immediately apparent that she will be a useful addition to the roster, and one looks forward to her appearances as Amneris in '


Washington Talk: Briefing; Big and Little Spenders
LEAD: Representative Philip M. Crane, an Illinois Republican, is the taxpayer's best friend in the House, while Representatives John P. Murtha of Pennsylvania and Charles Wilson of Texas, both Democrats, are the most profligate with public funds, according to the National Taxpayers Union.


Peoples Bancorp of Worceser reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Bancorp of Worceser (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,438,000
1,041,000
Per share
.48
.32
Shares outst
2,970,374
3,300,000
9mo net inc
4,450,000
3,586,000
Per share
1.40
1.09
Shares outst
3,183,027
3,300,000


Amcast Industrial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amcast Industrial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
79,162,000
66,126,000
Net inc
2,351,000
bc2,337,000
Share earns
.33
-
Yr sales
312,262,000
264,310,000
Net inc
9,337,000
c1,815,000
Share earns
1.30
.26


Third Fire in 2 Years at Los Angeles Library
LEAD: A fire broke out Tuesday in the basement of the downtown Central Library, where hundreds of thousands of books were destroyed in two 1986 blazes that were attributed to arson.


Health; Personal Health
LEAD: Even doctors who treat hundreds of people suffering from migraines find it difficult to fully describe the sickening, throbbing pain associated with the often incapacitating attacks.


Legal Setback Is Seen for Pillsbury
LEAD: In what could prove to be a setback for the Pillsbury Company, a Minnesota state judge is expected to rule Thursday that neither Pillsbury nor the British conglomerate trying to acquire it, Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., can take any action in their takeover battle before Oct. 27.


New Hope for Poverty Law
LEAD: The Legal Services Corporation, created by Congress in 1974 to provide legal representation for the poor, has survived eight murderous assaults by the Reagan Administration.
President Reagan has repeatedly asked Congress to ''zero out'' funding and abolish the program.


Federal National Mortgage Assn (FNMA) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal National Mortgage Assn (FNMA) (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
132,400,000
60,800,000
Share earns
1.66
.74
9mo net inc
354,000,000
181,000,000
Share earns
4.49
2.25


Laclede Steel Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laclede Steel Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
76,950,000
66,057,000
Net inc
5,126,000
882,000
Share earns
1.89
.32
9mo sales
227,700,000
198,118,000
Net inc
13,310,000
3,065,000
Share earns
4.92
1.13


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. We are having a problem with mold and mildew on our bathroom ceiling.
In the past we cleaned those areas with water and bleach, then painted with a latex paint.
We also installed a small ceiling exhaust fan to get rid of steam when using the shower.
Still, our problem with mold persists.
Can you suggest a solution?


Health; Military Testing for AIDS Is Found to Be Highly Accurate
LEAD: The military program to test for evidence of the AIDS virus has been extremely accurate, misidentifying individuals as infected far less often than many critics had predicted, according to a new report.


Sobs in Court Over Horror Of Hijacking
LEAD: One after another, the witnesses take their place at the table in the center of the brightly lit courtroom to wrest from time and trauma the memories of the terrible death of Robert Dean Stethem.


In Boston, a Wasteland Is Now an Oasis
LEAD: ''IT was devastated,'' said Tony Pangaro, an architect and urban planner, describing the Southwest Corridor when he took on the job of development coordinator. ''The houses were barely able to hold themselves up.
There were clearings that looked like Berlin after the war.''


Hershiser Passes Final Exam
LEAD: From the beginning, back when he first signed with the Los Angeles Dodgers as the 17th selection in the 1979 free-agent draft, even back during those minor league dog days in Clinton, Iowa, and San Antonio and Albuquerque before he joined the Dodgers for good in 1983, Orel Hershiser had long been tabbed as a student of the game.


Haight-Ashbury Journal; Love and Hate Linger In Ex-Hippie District
LEAD: It has been 21 years since the ''summer of love,'' when hippies walked the streets of the Haight-Ashbury District wearing flowers in their hair and pink and white buttons bearing the message ''Pooh loves you.''


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  Mayotte Defeats Drewett: Tim Mayotte of Boston beat Brad Drewett of Australia, 6-2, 6-4, yesterday to advance to the second round of the Australian Indoor championships at the Sydney Entertainment Center.
Mayotte, seeded first in the 32-player tournament and the winner of the silver medal at the Seoul Olympics, won the Brisbane Indoor tournament last Sunday.


Jarred by Riots, Algeria Proposes a Vote
LEAD: Responding to economic and political unrest that culminated in a week of riots, President Chadli Benjedid tonight announced a three-point plan that could sharply reduce the ruling party's hold on power.


Big Surplus On Trade In Germany
LEAD: Surging exports helped West Germany's trade surplus in August keep up a record-breaking pace, statistics released today showed.


Allstar Inns LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allstar Inns LP (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
12,440,000
11,940,000
Net inc
97,000
887,000
Share earns
.01
.07
9mo rev
33,732,000
34,078,000
Net loss
530,000
549,000
Year-ago 9-month results are pro forma, representing the combined partnership and predecessor operations.


Astrosystems Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astrosystems Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
13,965,000
13,192,000
Net inc
379,000
2,384,000
Share earns
.07
.40


Stumbling Through New York's Freedom of Information Thicket
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article in some editions yesterday about a debate between Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey and his Republican challenger, Pete Dawkins, misidentified a Rutgers University professor of political science.
He is Gerald R. Pomper.
The article also misidentified a company run by Mr.


Bankworcester Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankworcester Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,042,000
2,816,000
Per share
.41
.35
Shares outst
7,344,000
8,160,000
9mo net inc
7,016,000
7,326,000
Per share
.91
.90
Shares outst
7,691,000
8,160,000


Bard President Adds Chief Executive Title
LEAD: Without ever attending medical school or putting in long hours as a resident, George T. Maloney has a good knowledge of what ails hospital patients and how to treat them.


CBS Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CBS Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
568,800,000
545,500,000
Net inc
69,900,000
c60,100,000
Share earns
2.72
2.31
9mo sales
2,006,200,000
1,989,100,000
Net inc
b1,109,900,000
c200,900,000
Share earns
43.16
7.84


Sinking Dollar Is Erasing Summer's Gains
LEAD: The dollar fell sharply against the yen, the West German mark and other currencies yesterday, continuing a decline that has erased much of the gain from a summer rally.


Peruvian General Ousted
LEAD: A Peruvian general was removed as commander of an important military region and retired for spreading rumors that the armed forces were plotting to oust President Alan Garcia, a senior military spokesman said today.
He said the general, Victor Raul Silva Tuesta, was called to a special meeting of the army chiefs of staff on Saturday and relieved of his command of the First Military Region, which covers some of Peru's prosperous northern provinces.


At Youth's Wake, Questions of Bias
LEAD: As a wake and funeral were held yesterday for Derek Antonio Tyrus, two of his friends said their last memory of the black youth was of him running down Tompkins Avenue in Staten Island on a rainy evening and away from an angry white man, who demanded to know what black people were doing in the neighborhood.


Rangers Put On Another Dismal Show
LEAD: The demotions were made before the game.
That, in a sense, was an advantage for Michel Bergeron, for had the coach of the Rangers waited until after his team played the Whalers last night, he might have never been able to reach a decision.
There were, after all, an awful lot of new candidates to choose from.


Bank of New England Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New England Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
72,300,000
61,500,000
Per share
1.04
.90
9mo net inc
207,700,000
125,700,000
Per share
3.00
1.84


Merrill to Revamp Pensions
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company has decided to recapture capital from its pension fund, a move that will add about $200 million to its earnings in the third quarter, people close to the company said yesterday.


Jersey Car Insurer Fees 'Pulled Out of Air' in '84
LEAD: The fees and commissions that automobile insurance companies were allowed to collect for servicing New Jersey's Joint Underwriting Association when it began in 1984 were ''literally pulled out of the air,'' a member of a state study panel said today.


Health: Fetal Testing; New Tests to Provide Safer Screening for Down's Syndrome
LEAD: Researchers say a set of three blood tests has proved highly successful in identifying women who are likely to be carrying fetuses with Down's syndrome, the leading inherited cause of mental retardation.


First Wachovia Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Wachovia Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
63,900,000
56,800,000
Per share
1.12
1.04
9mo net inc
182,100,000
136,700,000
Per share
3.27
2.51


Indiana National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Indiana National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
14,064,000
13,200,000
Per share
.80
.78
9mo net inc
40,679,000
21,270,000
Per share
2.34
1.25
The year-ago 9 months included an after-tax provision of $15,180,000 for foreign loans.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Computer Data Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Data Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
19,062,500
16,201,300
Net inc
301,300
836,000
Share earns
.10
.30


Ken Murray, 85, Vaudeville Star Who Later Recorded Hollywood
LEAD: Actor and comedian Ken Murray, who spent more than a quarter century in vaudeville and in films, died yesterday in Burbank, Calif.
He was 85 years old and lived in Beverly Hills.


Hafts Seek Approval For Stake in Walgreen
LEAD: The Haft family, the corporate raiders who have frequently gone after companies but have rarely taken them over, are now seeking clearance to buy $15 million or more worth of stock in the Walgreen Company, the nation's largest drugstore company said today.


STRIKES CHALLENGE NEW PARIS PREMIER
LEAD: A wave of strikes is posing one of the toughest challenges yet for France's Prime Minister of four months, Michel Rocard.


These Mets Fans Weren't at Cheers
LEAD: Like many bars and restaurants in the city, P. J. Clarke's on Third Avenue and 55th Street became very quiet last night around 9 o'clock.
Mets fans hadn't even finished their first drink, and their team was already behind, 6-0.


Shailer L. Bass, 82; Headed Dow Corning
LEAD: Shailer L. Bass, a former board chairman and chief executive officer of the Dow Corning Corporation, died Sunday at Provincial House, a nursing home in Midland, after a long illness.
He was 82 years old.


Senate, in Effort to Save Drug Bill, Agrees to Consider 3 Amendments
LEAD: The Senate today reached broad agreement on limiting the amendments that can be offered to major legislation to fight drug use.


The Northern Strategy
LEAD: The great mystery of the 1988 campaign is this: What caused the Great Midsummer Turnaround?


Noriega Political Payments Reported by Indicted Banker
LEAD: The international bank that was indicted on Tuesday for laundering money for drug dealers maintained an account for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega that made payments to Panamanian politicans, according to Senate testimony released today.


Cremona in Texas? Professor Says His Violins Can Rival Stradivari's
LEAD: Could it be that the ravishingly warm and woody brilliance of a well-played Stradivarius results not so much from the craftsmanship of Antonio Stradivari - by common consent the world's greatest violin maker - but from his phenomenally lucky choice of wood and varnish?
And that the real credit for that hauntingly beautiful sound belongs to a bunch of microbes?


Pretoria Fire Hits Anti-Apartheid Catholic Office
LEAD: A fire gutted two floors of a Roman Catholic office in Pretoria early today in what appeared to be a new wave of attacks against anti-apartheid organizations.


Argonaut Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Argonaut Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
116,400,000
116,100,000
Net inc
20,400,000
27,900,000
Share earns
1.91
2.38
9mo rev
345,100,000
309,900,000
Net inc
84,300,000
68,600,000
Share earns
7.69
5.86


Bridge
LEAD: Both American teams gained ground in the qualifying pools of the World Team Olympiad here today.


Using Social Security
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chemical Foresees Horizon Merger
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation said that by Monday it would file for Federal Reserve Board approval of a merger with the Horizon Bancorporation of New Jersey that was announced in May 1986.
Chemical said it expected the deal to be consummated on Jan. 1.
In the announcement more than two years ago, Chemical said that it would acquire Horizon for around $625 million, or 2.5 times book value, under a New Jersey law that allows New York institutions to buy New


Review/Dance; Carolinians and Music Both Swirl
LEAD: The music swirled.
So did the dancers Tuesday night when the North Carolina Dance Theater opened a week's engagement at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street.


Ballet Appointment
LEAD: W. McNeil Lowry, former vice president of the division of the humanities and arts of the Ford Foundation, has been named president of the board of the San Francisco Ballet.
Announcing the appointment Tuesday, Helgi Tomasson, artistic director of the company, described Mr.
Lowry as ''one of the leaders in preserving and promoting American dance across the country and around the world.


Review/Television; 'Durrell in Russia': The Travels of 2 Naturalists
LEAD: Last spring, the Arts &amp; Entertainment cable network carried a charming mini-series called ''My Family and Other Animals,'' based on Gerald Durrell's best-selling account of his somewhat eccentric boyhood.
In addition to being the brother of Lawrence, the novelist, Mr.
Durrell is an internationally renowned naturalist.


Congress Agrees on Closing Bases But Leaves the Choices to a Panel
LEAD: Torn between concern about the Federal deficit and fear of harm to states' economies, Congress today approved and sent to President Reagan a bill that gives a Pentagon-appointed commission the power to decide which obsolete military bases should be closed.


Backing Is Sought For Sale of Zenith
LEAD: Brookhurst Partners, a leading stockholder in the Zenith Electronics Corporation, said it had begun soliciting shareholder consent to sell the company.
Brookhurst, which has a 6.1 percent stake in Zenith, said in the summer that it would seek support to sell the company if Zenith did not develop a plan to improve its profits.


Refinishing Porcelain On Sinks and Tubs
LEAD: ONE solution to improving your bathroom's appearance is to hire professionals who specialize in refinishing porcelain - including bathtubs, sinks, toilets and tile.


An Unasked Question, an Insufficient Answer in the Debates
LEAD: To the Editor:


Poll Shows U.S. Voter Optimism Is Helping Bush in the Campaign
LEAD: Voters are increasingly optimistic about the state of the nation and satisfied with President Reagan's performance, and they continue to be wary of government programs, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.


Tactics That Do and Don't Work
LEAD: ''THE No. 1 mistake parents make when they have overweight kids is focusing only on their child's weight,'' said Dr.
Kathie Jacobson, a psychologist at the Teen Age Medical Service in Minneapolis. ''There's a message that 'I don't love you the way you are.
You'll have to change for me to love you.


First Financial Management Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Management Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
102,550,000
29,378,000
Net inc
7,533,000
3,021,000
Share earns
.47
.30
Shares outst
16,144,000
10,076,000
9mo rev
282,419,000
83,241,000
Net inc
19,235,000
7,203,000
Share earns
1.19
.82
Shares outst
16,127,000
8,827,000


Central Park Has Phone Link to Police
LEAD: A new telephone system in Central Park was dedicated yesterday, and city officials said it should help make the park safer.


E.P.A. IS CHANGING HOW IT REGULATES PESTICIDES IN FOOD
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency announced today that it was changing its rules on pesticide residues in foods in a way intended to reduce the overall threat of cancer to consumers.


Dukakis in California for Debate Preparations


2 More Prison Barges Considered
LEAD: Plans for two new prison barges, expected to house as many as 1,200 city inmates, are being considered by the New York City Board of Estimate.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.20
8.29
7.53
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.28
7.30
7.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.40
7.43
7.62
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.73
8.64
10.04
30-YR.


Mixed Week For Yields
LEAD: Yields for certificates of deposit, bank money-market accounts and money-market mutual funds were mixed for the week ended yesterday.


American Mobile Systems reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Mobile Systems
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,301,066
4,664,498
Net loss
6,721,879
4,399,585


U.S. Bills Chile in Killing of Letelier
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has demanded that the Government of Chile pay $12 million in compensation for the killing of Orlando Letelier, the Chilean exile leader assassinated here in 1976, but Chile recently rejected the request, Administration officials said today.


Peary Notes Said to Imply He Failed to Reach Pole
LEAD: New evidence based on navigational notes by Robert E. Peary indicates that the Arctic explorer fell short of his goal and deliberately faked his claim in 1909 that he was the first person to reach the North Pole, according to an analysis by a Baltimore astronomer and historian.


O'Neill Centenary: Celebrating the Master
LEAD: This Sunday is the 100th anniversary of the birth of the American playwright who wrote ''In the Zone,'' ''Ile,'' ''The Rope,'' ''Where the Cross Is Made,'' ''Diff'rent,'' ''The Straw,'' ''The First Man,'' ''The Fountain'' and ''Welded.''


Burdick of North Dakota Runs Against G.O.P. and Age Issue
LEAD: State Representative Earl Strinden, the 56-year-old challenger for the Senate seat held by 80-year-old Quentin N. Burdick, says he would rather not raise the ''age issue.''


THE PLAYOFFS: How It Happened; For Mets, as Difficult as 1-2-3
LEAD: Throughout history, empires and civilizations crumbled because their defenses collapsed.
Tonight, in the civilized city of Los Angeles, the baseball empire the Mets have been building for five years crumbled because their defense collapsed.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the New York City Police Department's use of computers misidentified the commander of the 67th Precinct in Brooklyn.
He is Capt.
John J. Sullivan.
A picture with the article was published in error.
It showed the computer room at Police Headquarters, into which the precinct's computer is connected.


Darling Bemoans the Missed Chances
LEAD: The cruel truth that Ron Darling had to face tonight went beyond the fact that he was the losing pitcher in the seventh game of the National League Championship Series.


Talking Deals; The Rich Auction For Tenneco Oil
LEAD: DALLAS


Mr. Bush Adopts Youth Service
LEAD: Give Presidential candidate George Bush credit for taking up the colors of youth service, a cause that has waited too long for a champion.


Campaigns Extend Battle to the Sea
LEAD: Laughter reigned in Miami, too, as the Bush and Dukakis forces clashed by sea.
The results were ambiguous.


An Unasked Question, an Insufficient Answer in the Debates; Blank Bumpers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Why Cave Dwellers Could Forgo Dentists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Weicker and Lieberman Clash in Strident Debate
LEAD: Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and Attorney General Joseph I. Lieberman sparred here today over each other's past support for tax increases, the politics of the columnist William F. Buckley Jr. and the legacy of the late Governor Ella T. Grasso in a contentious debate marked most, perhaps, by Mr.
Lieberman's persistent attacks on the three-term


Mountain Apparitions By New Mexico Architect
LEAD: ''LANDSCAPE APPARITIONS,'' drawings, sketches and photographs by Antoine Predock, an architect in Albuquerque, N.M., is at the John Nichols Gallery through Nov. 26.
Above is a model of the American Heritage Center in Laramie, Wyo., conceived by Mr.
Predock as an ''archival mountain in Marlboro Country.


Judge in Case of Child Abuse Dismisses Some of Charges
LEAD: The judge in the long trial of two people accused of sexually abusing children at the McMartin Pre-School dismissed more than a quarter of the charges today because three child witnesses refused to testify for the prosecution.


Notes Totaling $500 Million Are Issued by Pennsylvania
LEAD: Pennsylvania entered the debt market yesterday with a $500 million issue of tax-anticipation notes that were bid for by various securities dealers.


Robin Kinkead, Journalist, 82
LEAD: Robin Kinkead, a New York Times correspondent in Moscow in the early 1930's and later the first bureau chief in the Soviet capital for Reuters, died of emphysema on Tuesday at his home in Sacramento, Calif.
He was 82 years old.


Avon Sees Loss for Quarter
LEAD: Avon Products Inc. said yesterday that it expected to lose money in the third quarter and post a loss for the year, reflecting the cost of divesting its discontinued health-care businesses.


Cortronic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cortronic Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
932,000
-
Net inc
39,000
b624,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
1,258,000
115,000
Net loss
1,095,000
1,672,000
b-Net loss  There were no sales in the year-ago period, because the company was in the development stage.


Public Mistrust Curbs Soviet Nuclear Power Efforts
LEAD: From Lithuania to Armenia, in the press and in the streets, the Soviet nuclear power industry is suffering from a phenomenon that used to be unimportant here: a mistrustful public.


Washington Talk: Government Consultants; Paying Physicists to Write Christmas Greetings
LEAD: It should be no surprise to find a company called R&amp;D Associates doing technical studies for the Government on ways to verify limits on underground tests of nuclear weapons.
But should the company also be paid to write Christmas messages?


Gordon Jewelry Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gordon Jewelry Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
82,845,684
82,731,535
Net loss
1,180,816
b1,343,266
Yr sales
389,558,895
388,913,349
Net loss
14,416,053
b19,223,665
b-After losses from discontinued operations $1,576,501 and $12,782,036 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Voters in the Two Camps: Where They Stand on the Issues
LEAD:
*2*Views of
*2*supporters of:
Total
Dukakis
Bush
Voters
Prefer bigger Government providing
more services
46%
28%
37%
Prefer smaller Government providing
fewer services
35
62
47
Say Government should require
employers to make health insurance
available to all their workers
72


Ecology &amp; Environment reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ecology &amp; Environment (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,988,000
12,966,000
Net inc
764,000
759,000
Share earns
.19
.19
Yr rev
52,667,000
38,194,000
Net inc
2,924,000
2,124,000
Share earns
.74
.64


U.S. and Soviets Plan Joint Research Of Medical Problems
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union plan to sign an agreement Thursday for joint research on AIDS, drug abuse and other medical areas.


Corrections#YES#
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Monday misstated the trading volume for a recent decline in the price of the stock of the Warner-Lambert Company.
The stock fell $1.50, as 15,000 shares were traded.


Lindberg Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lindberg Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
19,805,124
17,657,853
Net inc
614,628
477,853
Share earns
.13
.10
9mo sales
62,073,010
56,177,407
Net inc
2,872,731
b1,639,216
Share earns
.61
-


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: OUTDOOR equipment like patio and picnic furniture, barbecue grills, play items and tools will last longer and be more quickly available in the spring if it is cleaned, repaired and thoughtfully stored in the fall.


Health: Alcoholism; Drinking Problems Rise Among Young Women
LEAD: Specialists say that a growing number of single, well-educated young women are seeking treatment for alcoholism, and that they are at greater risk of developing chronic alcohol-related diseases earlier than their male counterparts.


Pan Am Ends Plan On Latin Routes
LEAD: The Pan Am Corporation said yesterday that its Latin American routes were no longer up for sale now that the airline's largest union had agreed to Federal arbitration on concessions sought by the company.
In August, Pan Am said it would try to sell the routes to raise cash after the Transport Workers Union, representing about 5,000 mechanics and ground crew workers at its Pan American World


Riggs National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Riggs National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
9,100,000
7,200,000
Per share
.62
.49
9mo net inc
27,700,000
5,800,000
Per share
1.89
.40
The year-ago 9 months included $32 million in loan-loss provisions for loans to lesser developed countries.


Tragedy, Comedy, Farce. Then Verdicts
LEAD: Courtroom dramas have always made good plays.
But this fall, the tables have turned and it is in the courtrooms on Centre Street and off Foley Square - not Broadway - where some of the city's best theater can be found.


Joyce Brown Makes Plea Deal in Drug Case
LEAD: Joyce Brown, who successfully fought involuntary hospitalization last winter under Mayor Koch's drive to treat mentally ill homeless people, was conditionally discharged yesterday from Criminal Court in Manhattan after pleading guilty to a reduced charge of disorderly conduct in a drug-possession case.


Entronics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Entronics
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,267,710
477,529
Net inc
120,671
16,832
Share earns
.03
-


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Defendant in Murder of an Officer Describes Queens Scene on Tape
LEAD: One of four young men charged with the execution-style murder of a Queens police officer was heard yesterday on a videotape played in court graphically describing the slaying.


Cherokee Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cherokee Group (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Sales
43,183,000
35,734,000
Net inc
2,457,000
2,958,000
Share earns
.19
.22
The company said non-recurring expenses relating to the proposed acquisition of the company by Green Acquisition Co.


Review/Theater; Exhuming Kafka, by Way of Brazil
LEAD: In his previous work in New York, Gerald Thomas offered his own idiosyncratic interpretations of Samuel Beckett.
Recently, in Brazil, he has been acting as author as well as director.
In ''A Process,'' which opened a three-play repertory of his work last weekend at La Mama (and which will be repeated Oct.


PARIS AND MOSCOW FORGING NEW TIES
LEAD: After three days of talks, the Foreign Ministers of France and the Soviet Union today announced a thawing of relations between the two nations and said negotiations on cutting conventional forces in Europe would start by the end of the year.


Architect's Statements Writ Small
LEAD: THE flock of architect-designed products continues unabated.
The latest entries are from Louis Vuitton, which is introducing a series of watches and pens designed by the Italian architect Gae Aulenti.


Walesa Says He Will Demand That Solidarity Be Legalized
LEAD: Lech Walesa told a United States diplomat today that he would insist in negotiations with Communist authorities that the Solidarity labor movement be made legal again.


Officials Cancel Bluebonnet Bowl
LEAD: The board of directors of the financially strapped Bluebonnet Bowl voted Tuesday to cancel this year's game, scheduled for Dec. 31, and to try to begin again in 1989.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Dr. Bellows Is Called


Grain Pact Is Expected
LEAD: Negotiators from the United States and the Soviet Union are expected this week to extend a multibillion-dollar accord under which the Soviet Union buys American grain, trade sources said today.


Florida National Banks of Florida Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida National Banks of Florida Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
10,586,000
5,317,000
Per share
.40
.20
9mo net inc
29,418,000
24,098,000
Per share
1.11
.91


Barnett Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnett Banks Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
58,300,000
48,300,000
Per share
.96
.80
9mo net inc
167,400,000
138,600,000
Per share
2.77
2.31


Top Officers Are Shifted In Emhart Revamping
LEAD: The Emhart Corporation, a maker of industrial machinery, electronic components and consumer products, yesterday announced a reorganization of its operating units into three sectors corresponding to its three worldwide markets.


Trump Shuttle Head Delighted With Post
LEAD: Bruce R. Nobles takes perhaps a special delight in being chosen to head the East Coast air shuttle operation purchased yesterday by Donald J. Trump from the Texas Air Corporation.
It was only a few years ago that Mr.
Nobles was president and chief operating officer of the Pan Am shuttle, a subsidiary of the Pan American


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Cell Technology Inc., Boulder, Colo., a biotechnology company specializing in immunotherapy, appointed its president and chief executive officer, W. Terrance Schreiber, to the additional post of chairman.


Chip Indicator Posts a Decline
LEAD: The Semiconductor Industry Association's leading indicator dropped to its lowest point in nearly two years today, as chip makers based in the United States, Europe and Japan reported an increase in shipments but a decline in orders.


Sports People; Tyson's Hand Problem
LEAD: Mike Tyson still has hand problems.
His right hand, which he fractured in an August street fight with Mitch Green, was placed in a cast again Monday by Dr.
Richard Rhodes. a physician in Orwell, Ohio.
Rhodes said the August injury to the third metacarpal had not healed properly. ''The reason it hadn't healed,'' said Rhodes, ''was that Mike had taken the cast off on his own before he should have.


Accord Possible On Redskin Park
LEAD: Mayor Marion Barry said today that he would consider letting Jack Kent Cooke, the owner of the Redskins, build a parking lot for a new football stadium on 36 acres of the city's historic Langston Golf Course if a new 18-hole course is created that satisfies the golfers.


Market Place; Wall St. Studying Posner Holdings
LEAD: WALL STREET analysts have long felt that trouble spells opportunity.
And one of the next big opportunities, they say, will be the companies dominated by Victor Posner, the 69-year-old Miami industrialist.


Two Polls Show Bush Is Ahead of Dukakis
LEAD: Two new ABC News/Washington POst Polls released last night showed Vice President Bush with an overwhelming advantage over Michael S. Dukakis in the battle for the Electoral College but a modest lead for the popular vote.


As Nominees Shun Tax Issue, U.S. Panel Quietly Ponders It
LEAD: Conventional wisdom about the 1988 Presidential race holds that after the new President, whoever that may be, takes office he will swallow his campaign oratory and ask Congress for a major increase in taxes, cuts in Social Security benefits and other brutal swipes at the Federal budget to reduce the deficit.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-16  The U.S. will airlift food to the Sudan, breaking a deadlock between the Government and foreign donors of relief for Sudanese famine victims.
The 10-day airlift will ferry wheat into the town of Abyei.
Page A1


Soviet Baseball Taking Its First Steps
LEAD: The players of the D. I. Mendeleyev Institute of Chemical Technology baseball team, which opened a three-game tour of the United States with a game against Johns Hopkins University here this afternoon, have no nickname.
A publicist searching for something suggested Mets, but so far the team has been simply called The Men.


Arrow Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arrow Bank Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,251,000
1,048,000
Per share
.55
.46
9mo net inc
3,448,000
3,008,000
Per share
1.51
1.32


Climate Improves for U.S.-Soviet Pacific Talks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Books of The Times; Behind the Torture-Death of a U.S. Drug Agent
LEAD:  Desperados  Latin Drug Lords, U.S.
Lawmen, and the War America Can't Win  By Elaine Shannon  Illustrated. 499 pages.
Viking. $21.95.


Joel Oppenheimer, 58, A Columnist and Poet
LEAD: Joel Oppenheimer, a poet, newspaper columnist and college professor, died of lung cancer last Tuesday at his home in Henniker, N.H.
He was 58 years old.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Spy Who Got Away
LEAD: In the ''Where Are They Now?'' department, Edward Lee Howard, the man the Central Intelligence Agency trained for clandestine work in Moscow who then told the K.G.B. all he knew, says he has a bit of fresh information on Vitaly Yurchenko, the Russian who betrayed his secret three years ago.


Ruling for Disney
LEAD: A Los Angeles Superior Court judge today ruled in favor of the Walt Disney Company in permitting the entertainment conglomerate to use the MGM/ UA name and the company's lion logotype on a Florida studio tour that is expected to open next year.
The MGM/ UA Communications Company, a unit of the Tracinda Corporation, which is controlled by Kirk Kerkorian, had filed a lawsuit against Disney in May for reportedly violating a 1985 agreement that permitted Disney to use its name, props and film clips for the studio complex and products but barred use of the name on hotels.


Keystone Consolidated Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Consolidated Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
69,637,000
60,196,000
Net loss
1,202,000
b580,000
Share earns
-
.29
b-Net income and includes a $197,000 tax credit.


University Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* University Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,076,000
1,258,000
Per share
.69
.42
Yr net inc
5,979,000
1,744,000
Per share
2.00
.59
Fiscal 1988 included a $299,000 investment banking fee for the pending sale of the bank.


Stuttgart Orchestra To Give Two Concerts
LEAD: Sir Neville Marriner will lead the Stuttgart Radio Symphony Orchestra in a concert at Avery Fisher Hall next Wednesday at 8 P.M., playing Haydn's Symphony No. 96 (''Miracle''), Beethoven's Symphony No. 2 and Elgar's ''Enigma'' Variations.
Tickets are $23, $17 and $12.
Information: 874-6770.


An Unasked Question, an Insufficient Answer in the Debates; Homeless Need More
LEAD: To the Editor:


Caribbean Nations Say Drugs Imperil Stability
LEAD: Caribbean area nations, which have long served as drug trafficking transit points, expressed concern at the United Nations this week about increasing threats to their stability from drug use and crime.


Gateway Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,140,000
3,260,000
Per share
.39
.41
9mo net inc
9,528,000
9,693,000
Per share
1.19
1.22


Poland Names New Officials to Bolster Economy
LEAD: After failing to bring people outside the Communist realm into his Government, Poland's new Prime Minister today presented a new team of ministers to tackle the country's economic problems.


The Season's Over:


Apple Harvest Time Brings Vision of Profits
LEAD: At first glance, the life of a Yakima Valley apple farmer resembles one of those stylized drawings that used to adorn wooden fruit boxes: all sun and color in an orchard that looks like Eden.


Glatfelter Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glatfelter Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
145,670,000
120,719,000
Net inc
19,701,000
13,457,000
Share earns
.81
.55
9mo sales
425,254,000
296,238,000
Net inc
59,065,000
39,907,000
Share earns
2.44
1.62


American Realty Trust Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Realty Trust Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,696,000
5,880,000
Net inc
b3,249,000
c6,495,000
Share earns
.15
.30
9mo rev
18,863,000
18,895,000
Net inc
bb9,711,000
c9,824,000
Share earns
.45
.63
Shares outst
21,727,712
15,557,584


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Aid for Jamaica


Aero Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aero Systems Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,113,249
7,057,516
Net inc
234,319
150,548
Share earns
.03
.02
6mo sales
20,195,321
12,978,456
Net inc
537,015
197,457
Share earns
.07
.02


From 'Balzac of Egypt,' Energy and Nuance
LEAD: Critics sometimes call Naguib Mahfouz the Balzac of Egypt because of the way his works express the pulsating energy of city life and because of their psychologically nuanced characters and broad social concern.


Cadigan Tries to Toughen Up
LEAD: In a maneuver designed to give Dave Cadigan tougher game-like experience, Mark Gastineau today emulated Bruce Smith, the Buffalo Bills' Pro Bowl pass-rushing end who will be matched against Cadigan on Monday night.


Penn Central Wins Republic American
LEAD: The Penn Central Corporation will buy the Republic American Corporation for $249 million.
Penn Central, a telecommunications company and military supplier, which already owns 14.3 percent of Republic American's common shares, said it would pay $15.75 a share in cash to buy the remainder of its 18.4 million shares outstanding.


Nobel Prize in Literature Awarded To an Arabic Writer for First Time
LEAD: Naguib Mahfouz, an Egyptian novelist, playwright and screenwriter, won the Nobel Prize in Literature today, becoming the first Arabic writer to win literature's highest award.


Theodore Ornstein, Banker, 83
LEAD: Theodore Ornstein, a former mayor of Long Beach, L.I., and a founder and former chairman of Central Federal Savings Bank, died yesterday at his home in Long Beach after a short illness.
He was 83 years old.


Klima Reinstated
LEAD: The Detroit Red Wings yesterday reinstated the left wing Petr Klima, who was suspended for disciplinary reasons last month by Coach Jacques Demers.
Klima will report to Adirondack in the American Hockey League, General Manager Jimmy Devellano said in a statement.
Klima, who defected from Czechoslovakia, was suspended without pay Sept.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allied-Lyons P.L.C., the British brewing conglomerate, announced plans for a joint venture with Japanese whisky maker Suntory Ltd. to increase sales of Allied lines in Japan.


Profits Up at 3 Major Banks; Chemical Reverses a Loss
LEAD: Major banks yesterday reported improved earnings that analysts said indicated that the rebuilding from last year's difficult times is continuing.


A Guide to Weekend Walks
LEAD: Here is a guide to weekend walking tours for outdoor explorers.
FRIDAY  A.T.&amp;.T.
BUILDING.
An inside look at Philip Johnson's tower at 56th Street and Madison Avenue, sponsored by the 92d Street Y, at 1 P.M. $10.
Reservations: 996-1100.
SATURDAY  WASHINGTON SQUARE AND GREENWICH VILLAGE.


Review/Dance; An InJoke of Quotations From Choreographers
LEAD: The North Carolina Dance Theater from Winston-Salem has come back to town with its usual complement of strong dancers, and its second program on Wednesday night showed them off to special advantage.


Player Paralyzed
LEAD: One of the Islanders' minor league prospects, Peter McGeough was left partly paralyzed after sliding helmet-first into the boards during an American Hockey League game, the team said yesterday.
The Springfield defenseman suffered a fractured and dislocated vertebra in his back during a game against Cape Breton Tuesday night, according Mark Aldridge, a trainer for the Islanders.


Overhaul of Bank Law Put Off Until Next Year
LEAD: The Speaker of the House and the chairman of its Banking Committee came to an agreement today that marks the death knell for banking legislation this year.


Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
565,200,000
511,200,000
Net inc
b14,300,000
6,000,000
9mo sales
1,600,800,000
1,472,200,000
Net inc
b6,500,000
29,400,000
b-Includes $1.9 million in extraordinary income for both periods; the 9 months also include a provision of $16.3 million for transaction costs related to the company's recapitalization.


Officer's Killing 'a Message to Police'
LEAD: One of four men charged with killing a rookie police officer in Queens said on a videotape played in court yesterday that the order for the execution-style murder came from a jailed drug dealer to ''send a message out'' to the police.


Lockheed Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lockheed Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,407,000,000
2,687,000,000
Net inc
b300,000,000
c101,000,000
Share earns
5.06
1.52
Shares outst
59,300,000
66,400,000
9mo sales
7,607,000,000
8,038,000,000
Net inc
b520,000,000
c287,000,000
Share earns
8.61
4.33
Shares outst
60,400,000
66,200,000


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''After all this research, we do not have any plausible answers to explain how the image of Christ was created.''  - Anastasio Cardinal Ballestrero, Archbishop of Turin, of the Shroud of Turin.  [ A1:3. ]


Bairnco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bairnco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
59,157,000
44,869,000
Net inc
4,875,000
3,576,000
Share earns
.45
.34
9mo sales
165,784,000
136,997,000
Net inc
13,766,000
9,076,000
Share earns
1.29
.86


An Invitation From Mr. Gorbachev
LEAD: In at least one arena of Soviet policy, Mikhail Gorbachev has scored a clear victory.
For months he has struggled with his former number two, Yegor Ligachev, over the ideological underpinnings of Soviet foreign policy.
Mr.
Gorbachev has stressed common interests, Mr.
Ligachev conflict.
Now Mr.
Gorbachev has prevailed.


Review/Concert; David Zinman Steps In
LEAD: David Zinman, whose own Baltimore Symphony is on strike, has become the favored substitute of the moment.
He stepped in with the New York Chamber Symphony last weekend, and this week he replaced Seiji Ozawa at the Boston Symphony's three concerts in Carnegie Hall.


California First Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California First Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
12,689,000
10,052,000
Per share
.92
.75
9mo net inc
35,473,000
28,110,000
Per share
2.59
2.12


Trans-National Leasing reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans-National Leasing
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,695,713
6,469,001
Net loss
211,800
433,424


First Illinois Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Illinois Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
7,826,000
5,970,000
Per share
.30
.23
9mo net inc
21,253,000
16,805,000
Per share
.83
.65


British Jobless Rate Off
LEAD: Unemployment in Britain fell to a seasonally adjusted 8 percent of the work force in September, from a revised 8.1 percent in August, the Government said today.
It was down from 9.8 percent in September 1987.
Total seasonally adjusted unemployment was estimated at 2.26 million people in September, down from a revised 2.27 million in August and 2.77 million in September 1987.


Metro Datelines; 109 Suspects Seized In L.I. Drug Sweep
LEAD: Nassau County police in a pre-dawn raid yesterday arrested 109 people, including a 13-year-old boy, for selling drugs to undercover officers during a four-month investigation in Hempstead, law-enforcement officials announced.


Brooklyn Needs a Friend at Chase
LEAD: Chase Manhattan Bank must choose whether to move its computer operations to Newport City, on the New Jersey waterfront, or to Metrotech, a promising 16-acre office park taking shape on an urban renewal site in downtown Brooklyn.
Brooklyn deserves fair and full consideration.


Comerica Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comerica Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
28,867,000
24,907,000
Per share
1.74
1.45
9mo net inc
83,548,000
47,105,000
Per share
5.06
2.70
The company said the 9 months' comparison is affected by the special $36 million provision recorded during the second quarter of 1987 for Latin American loans.


Chips &amp; Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chips &amp; Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
44,015,000
29,577,000
Net inc
5,710,000
4,691,000
Share earns
.39
.33


Our Towns; He Offers Trash To Town, but Is It Grateful? Nooo!
LEAD: Many fear garbage.
Not Dennis Greenwald, supervisor of this Catskills town of 10,000.
He's looking for tons of high-quality, out-of-town garbage. ''Two years I was going to conferences, everyone was saying, 'Garbage, garbage.' No one knew what to do with it.'' Mr.
Greenwald thought, ''I'll take your money; bring it to Mamakating!


For Some, Shroud Is Still Inspirational
LEAD: The Shroud of Turin has probably received more widespread and intense attention in the last 90 years than in all of its long history as the reputed burial cloth of Jesus.
It was not popular enthusiasm, rumors of visions or reports of miracles that accounted for this modern interest, however.
It was science.


Washington Talk: Briefing; The Bureau's Battles
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation, although part of the Justice Department, has often acted like an independent agency.
The bureau simply does not like to be told what to do, and the relationship has grown particularly testy with the arrival of Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, who seems determined to bring it into line.


First Eastern Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Eastern Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
7,115,000
6,077,000
Per share
.73
.63
9mo net inc
19,163,000
16,084,000
Per share
1.97
1.68
The year-ago figures were restated for the August 1988 merger with Peoples First National Bank &amp; Trust Co (Hazleton).


Auctions
LEAD:  Americana Rarities


Kaydon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaydon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
31,670,000
31,077,000
Net inc
5,074,000
4,186,000
Share earns
.59
.49
9mo sales
101,902,000
102,395,000
Net inc
15,334,000
12,618,000
Share earns
1.79
1.47


Gannett Earnings Rise 6.5%
LEAD: The Gannett Company, which publishes USA Today, said today that its contingency plans helped increase its earnings by 6.5 percent in the third quarter, although advertising linage barely grew.


Computer Task Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Task Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
56,571,000
43,187,000
Net inc
1,627,000
1,315,000
Share earns
.21
.17
9mo rev
161,145,000
123,654,000
Net inc
4,949,000
3,899,000
Share earns
.63
.50


Aspen Ribbons Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aspen Ribbons Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,335,392
4,096,066
Net inc
294,771
234,504
Share earns
.08
.07


Potlatch Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Potlatch Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
273,706,000
246,807,000
Net inc
28,292,000
22,604,000
Share earns
1.02
.81
9mo sales
798,684,000
738,353,000
Net inc
79,325,000
62,707,000
Share earns
2.85
2.23


Security Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b167,900,000
c128,800,000
Per share
1.47
1.16
Shares outst
111,300,000
108,800,000
9mo net inc
b469,400,000
c55,100,000
Per share
4.13
.41
Shares outst
110,600,000
108,000,000


Elcor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elcor Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
39,059,000
33,219,000
Net inc
1,504,000
1,414,000
Share earns
.22
.20


For Dancegoers, A Trip Around The World In Three Days Of Performances
LEAD: SOONER or later, the world comes to New York City.
Or so it seems this weekend, when a far-flung group of dance and dance-theater companies descends upon the city.
Not that there will not be enough home-grown dance to satisfy stalwart hometown boosters.
But the accent is on visiting companies, from the itinerant Korean performing troupes at the Asia Society and the National Dance Company of Senegal at the Cathedral of St.


Miniscribe Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miniscribe Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Sales
177,617,000
103,814,000
Net inc
b15,030,000
c8,429,000
Share earns
.38
.22
9mo sales
486,645,000
246,288,000
Net inc
b40,455,000
c22,093,000
Share earns
1.03
.58


'Explorers' Rescheduled
LEAD: ''The Explorers: A Century of Discovery,'' a National Geographic Society special that was scheduled for broadcast yesterday at 9 P.M. on Channel 13, was pre-empted by the debate between the Presidential candidates.
The program has been rescheduled for tomorrow night at 7 o'clock.


GORBACHEV URGES FREEING OF FARMS FROM COLLECTIVES
LEAD: In an urgent effort to increase food production, Mikhail S. Gorbachev has called for farmers throughout the nation to be freed from the current state-run system of collective agriculture, Soviet television reported tonight.


Bridge
LEAD: The American open team was in top form at the World Team Olympiad here today, scoring 72 victory points out of a possible 75.
It beat Sweden, the reigning European champion, 22-8, and then took maximum points against two low-ranked teams, San Marino and Chile.


Badger Paper Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Badger Paper Mills
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
18,975,000
15,399,000
Net inc
1,448,000
255,000
Share earns
1.46
.26
9mo sales
53,688,000
44,076,000
Net inc
3,091,000
783,000
Share earns
3.11
.79


E-Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Systems Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
380,061,000
302,924,000
Net inc
19,559,000
15,809,000
Share earns
.63
.51
9mo sales
1,050,981,000
911,682,000
Net inc
54,187,000
42,681,000
Share earns
1.75
1.38


Schultz Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schultz Homes
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Sales
28,352,000
30,824,000
Net inc
b584,000
232,000
Share earns
.18
.07
b-Includes a tax credit of $129,000.


2d New Hampshire Man Arrested In Series of Arson Fires in 3 Towns
LEAD: The police today charged a teen-age volunteer firefighter with setting one of a series of fires that have frightened his neighbors for months.
A former volunteer firefighter was charged in the case Wednesday.


Southmark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southmark Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
819,000,000
691,000,000
Net loss
b138,000,000
c25,000,000
Share earns
-
.34
Yr rev
2,838,000,000
2,112,000,000
Net loss
b125,000,000
c85,000,000
Share earns
-
1.09


Review/Concert; Vivaldi, Debussy
LEAD: For the past 19 seasons the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center has made a fetish of rare and unusual repertory.
So what better way to begin its 20th year at Alice Tully Hall Wednesday than with ''The Seasons'' by Vivaldi - perhaps the most relentlessly popular piece of music now making the rounds of public-radio stations and better elevators.


Dynatronics Laser Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dynatronics Laser Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,506,100
950,900
Net inc
b177,500
b101,000
Share earns
.23
.13
Shares outst
7,738,000
7,728,000
b-Includes extraordinary credits of $11,600 for the latest quarter and $32,000 for the year-earlier period.


Raytheon Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raytheon Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,993,000,000
1,855,000,000
Net inc
126,600,000
114,600,000
Share earns
1.91
1.57
Shares outst
66,300,000
73,200,000
9mo sales
5,983,000,000
5,523,000,000
Net inc
362,300,000
327,200,000
Share earns
5.43
4.44
Shares outst
66,700,000
73,700,000


Upjohn Files Suits
LEAD: The Upjohn Company filed lawsuits accusing two companies, California Pacific Research and Pantron, of making false advertising claims that their products can make hair grow or stop hair loss.
Upjohn makes and markets Rogaine, the first prescription medicine cleared by the Food and Drug Administration for treating baldness.


Digital Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Microwave (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
14,771,139
9,222,903
Net inc
2,682,013
1,682,286
Share earns
.22
.14
Shares outst
12,233,698
12,022,863
6mo sales
27,772,023
17,429,969
Net inc
5,095,400
3,019,212
Share earns
.42
.26
Shares outst
12,236,312
11,626,771


Italy's Legislature Moves to End Secret Voting
LEAD: In a procedural change with far-reaching implications for Italian public finances and Government stability, the lower house of Parliament put an end today to a 140-year tradition that had enabled its members to vote in secrecy on virtually all important matters.


Competition In Fashion Magazines
LEAD: MARYBETH RUSSELL loves fashion publishing.
And if she has her way, she will turn Taxi and Model magazines into the same high-fashion successes that she helped create at Elle, where she was publisher during that magazine's first three years.


Tokyo-Pretoria Trade
LEAD: Japan's trade with South Africa declined by 5.5 percent in the first nine months of 1988, as Government efforts to curb activity with Pretoria began to have an effect.
Finance Ministry data released today showed that exports and imports involving South Africa fell to $3.1 billion in the period.


Seven Metro-North Officers Are Dismissed Over Taunts
LEAD: Seven longtime Metro-North policemen who appeared in a 1985 videotape that showed them taunting homeless people while on duty in Grand Central Terminal have been dismissed, the head of their union said yesterday.


Washington Talk: Trade; Ex-Rival Revives Gephardt's Economic Message
LEAD: It was a message of economic nationalism and financial anxiety that Representative Richard A. Gephardt brought to the Presidential campaign last winter, a populist appeal to disenchanted workers and farmers in states like Iowa and South Dakota.


Welbilt to Sell Debt Totaling $75 Million
LEAD: The Welbilt Corporation, a manufacturer of cooking equipment and home furnaces, is offering $75 million of 13 3/4 percent senior subordinated notes due in 1998 at a price of 100 through underwriters led by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.


Top Legal Post Filled At American Exchange
LEAD: The American Stock Exchange said yesterday that it had named Gordon L. Nash, a partner in the New York law firm of Lord Day &amp; Lord, Barrett Smith and longtime outside counsel for the exchange, to the post of senior executive vice president for legal and regulatory affairs.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Sign of the Dove


Some Fear Baker Will Play It Again
LEAD: Perhaps like the Claude Rains character in ''Casablanca,'' James A. Baker 3d says he's ''shocked, deeply shocked'' about chicanery under his nose.


Salvador Army Tied to 10 Peasants' Deaths
LEAD: The El Salvador Attorney General's office contradicted the military today and said army troops were responsible for the slayings of 10 peasants last month.


Mets Are Expected To Retain Johnson
LEAD: When it was over, when they had lost the pennant to the Los Angeles Dodgers, the Mets flew home with heavy hearts and apologies to their fans and with one major piece of pending business: Will Dave Johnson be returning as manager next year?


Mahfouz: Clarity Is Good, But So Is Ambiguity
LEAD: Naguib Mahfouz attributed his winning the Nobel Prize today to hard work, good luck and a French translation of his trilogy about Egypt before and after Gamal Abdel Nasser's revolution.


No Progress Reported as Two Koreas Meet
LEAD: South and North Korean delegations met for the first time since the Olympic Games today, but failed to make progress in their efforts to find ways to reunite their divided land.


Church Says Shroud of Turin Isn't Authentic
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church announced today that the Shroud of Turin, venerated by millions of Christians over the centuries as the burial cloth of Jesus, could not be authentic because new scientific tests show that the linen dates from the Middle Ages.


China Fights Corruption
LEAD: China said today that it planned a review of thousands of state companies as part of a campaign against corruption.
One trading group said it was the subject of a financial overhaul.


Review/Art; The Poetic Renderings Of Howard Hodgkin
LEAD: Howard Hodgkin is a poet in paint who deals with places, with people and with their mutual entanglements.
He is also, in our time, an incomparable colorist.
To walk into his new show at Knoedler &amp; Company is to be wafted high above the grimy, gritty concerns of everyday life in a big city.
We enter, instead, a state of bliss in which the subway never breaks down, the right person answers every telephone call on the first ring, it's never too hot or too cold and nobody ever gets a bad deal.


Bush Is Happy; Singer Is Worried
LEAD: So Mr.
Bush's favorite song is, ''Don't Worry, Be Happy.'' It's at the top of the pop charts, it's a theme at Bush rallies, and it has emerged as the Vice President's campaign song.


Bond Issue For Roads Gets Push
LEAD: It doesn't arrange photo opportunities or kiss babies, and it won't debate.
Yet to many New York politicians, it is the most significant item that will appear on the ballot next month.


Caci International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caci International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
35,522,740
34,071,241
Net inc
1,107,514
989,820
Share earns
.09
.08


Fifth Third Bancorp (Cincinnati, Ohio) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fifth Third Bancorp (Cincinnati, Ohio) (O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
21,913,000
17,050,000
Per share
1.02
.81
9mo net inc
61,282,000
b53,611,000
Per share
2.88
2.54
b-After a gain of $7,455,000, or 35 cents a share, from an accounting change.


Steel Imports Increase
LEAD: Steel imports rose again in August, helping increase total shipments for the first eight months of the year to 14.4 million tons, 12.7 percent above the same period last year, the American Iron and Steel Institute said today.
Exports reached 139,000 tons for the highest monthly total since September 1982.


Learonal Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Learonal Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
40,089,000
39,499,000
Net inc
2,639,000
1,973,000
Share earns
.29
.21
6mo sales
80,361,000
77,205,000
Net inc
5,203,000
3,987,000
Share earns
.57
.43


Gateway Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,324,000
1,197,000
Per share
.42
.38
9mo net inc
3,877,000
3,178,000
Per share
1.23
1.01


Ken Murray, 85, Vaudeville Star Who Later Recorded Hollywood
LEAD: Ken Murray, an actor and comedian who spent more than a quarter century in vaudeville and in films, died Wednesday in Burbank, Calif.
He was 85 years old and lived in Beverly Hills.


Metro Datelines; Woman Admits Guilt In Beating of Boy, 2
LEAD: A 44-year-old woman pleaded guilty yesterday to charges that she endangered the welfare of her 2-year-old grandchild when she beat him for refusing to help her beg in the driving rain.


Topics of The Times; 'Working Late' Again
LEAD: More families in which both parents work mean more families in which one parent works at home - and that has inspired a new product: a tape of office sounds.
Laura Newman, of Kingston, N.Y., made the tape for herself after she began taking calls from business clients at home and felt embarrassed by her children's squalling and other domestic noise.


Continental Illinois Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Illinois Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
73,600,000
60,100,000
Per share
.30
.24
9mo net inc
202,300,000
b373,700,000
Per share
.81
-
b-Net loss  The latest third quarter included $28.7 million in net gains from the sale of certain domestic and foreign operations and $6 million from a release of reserves relating to the sales.


Telemundo Adds WSNS
LEAD: WSNS-TV, Chicago's largest Hispanic station, will defect from the Univision Network when its contract expires at the end of the year and join the Telemundo Network, both parties confirmed yesterday.


Poor Results Bring End to Anti-AIDS Drug Study
LEAD: A study of Ampligen, once widely viewed as one of the most promising new anti-AIDS drugs, has been halted because it failed to show benefit, the drug's developers announced yesterday.


Topics of The Times; Beyond Howard Beach
LEAD: Only last month a judge closed the book on the Howard Beach prosecutions by sentencing Robert Riley, the 19-year-old who cooperated with the authorities in return for leniency, to six months in jail and 400 hours of community service.
Now there has been another incident, apparently similar to Howard Beach, that points up the persistence of racial violence and the


Antiques Center Still Expanding As New Dealers Move Into Shops
LEAD: THE scaffolding has been removed from the entrance and escalators transport as many as 500 visitors a day to the Place des Antiquaires, the two-story maze of antiques shops below the street at 125 East 57th Street.


Chemical Banking Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Banking Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b211,900,000
c66,400,000
Per share
3.43
-
9mo net inc
465,100,000
c1,083,300,000
Per share
7.36
-
b-After nonrecurring gains of $40.4 million from settlement of a portion of the company's pension obligations and a net gain of $23.3 million relating to the divestment of certain non- strategic businesses.


Thomas Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomas Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
89,066,000
82,439,000
Net inc
b4,102,000
c3,760,000
Share earns
.39
.36
9mo sales
262,039,000
241,423,000
Net inc
b14,565,000
c12,319,000
Share earns
1.39
1.18


Universal Health Realty Inome reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Health Realty Inome (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,911,000
3,418,000
Net inc
2,057,000
2,191,000
Share earns
.29
.26
Shares outst
7,183,000
8,366,000
9mo rev
11,333,000
10,260,000
Net inc
6,271,000
6,672,000
Share earns
.87
.78
Shares outst
7,246,000
8,523,000


Treasury Prices Little Changed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds closed little changed yesterday, although the announcement of a larger-than-expected merchandise trade deficit in the morning pushed them sharply lower early in the session.


Merrill Lynch &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrill Lynch &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,800,000,000
2,700,000,000
Net inc
65,600,000
b195,100,000
Share earns
.58
1.78
9mo rev
7,700,000,000
7,500,000,000
Net inc
187,000,000
b387,000,000
Share earns
1.67
3.52


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article yesterday about a debate between Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut and his Democratic challenger, Attorney General Joseph I. Lieberman, misidentified Mr.
Weicker's campaign manager.
He is Jay F. Malcynsky.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  Mickey and Misha


Willamette Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Willamette Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
440,999,000
376,787,000
Net inc
38,962,000
31,954,000
Share earns
1.54
1.25
9mo sales
1,270,339,000
1,052,117,000
Net inc
121,656,000
82,675,000
Share earns
4.79
3.25


Do We Really Want a Pit Bull as President?
LEAD: Come on, George, stick it to him again.
Give him hell, Duke, get in there and mix it up good, knee and elbow.


Analysts International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analysts International (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
20,174,000
16,123,000
Net inc
1,080,000
703,000
Share earns
.30
.20


Morgan Farley Dies; Stage Actor Was 87
LEAD: Morgan Farley, a stage and film actor whose first major role was the protagonist in Booth Tarkington's ''Seventeen'' in 1923, died Tuesday in a San Pedro, Calif., hospital.
He was 87 years old and lived in San Pedro.


Mayberry a Coach
LEAD: He left Kansas City on unfriendly terms with management after the playoffs in 1977, but John Mayberry has been brought back as a hitting coach and to bolster morale in the Royals' clubhouse.
Mayberry, a power-hitting first baseman who was popular with Royals' fans, was hired after management decided that a black coach would be beneficial because of tension that existed between players last season.


U.S. Will Study Corporate Payments of Taxes to Panama
LEAD: The Treasury Department will investigate American companies that are said to be violating a Presidential directive to pay taxes owed in Panama into special United States escrow accounts, senior Administration officials said today.


Economic Scene; The Vulnerability Of the Markets
LEAD: DON'T expect a ticker tape parade to celebrate the anniversary of the stock market crash of October 1987.
On the contrary, Wall Street would like to forget it, consign it to the history books - but it cannot.
The event is still alive, breeding anxieties among investors and securities dealers that it could happen again.


Hawkins a 76er
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers came to terms yesterday on a multiyear contract with Hersey Hawkins, their first-round draft choice.
Hawkins led the nation in scoring at Bradley last season with an average of 36 points, the highest in 11 seasons and the 15th-highest ever.
Coach Jim Lynam of the 76ers is counting on the 6-foot-3-inch Hawkins to take the pressure off Charles Barkley, the All-Star forward, with his long-distance shooting.


Dennison Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dennison Manufacturing Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
176,456,000
173,494,000
Net inc
8,017,000
8,376,000
Share earns
.51
.53
9mo sales
523,775,000
523,255,000
Net inc
22,762,000
23,702,000
Share earns
1.44
1.50


Concerto for Guitar
LEAD: Pepe Romero is to be the guitar soloist in Rodrigo's ''Concierto de Aranjuez'' with the Lausanne Chamber Orchestra tomorrow afternoon at 3 at Carnegie Hall.
The program, which is to be led by Lawrence Foster, also includes Haydn's Symphony No. 95 and Honegger's Symphony No. 4 (''Deliciae Basilienses'').


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Deadpan Doo-Wops


Self-Serving Report Defends Animal Research
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jockey Killed in an Accident at Belmont
LEAD: Michael Venezia, a 43-year-old jockey who was planning to retire at the end of this year, died of massive head injuries yesterday when he was kicked by a horse after a spill in the fifth race at Belmont Park.


Dataproducts Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataproducts Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Revenue
88,170,000
80,638,000
Net inc
1,143,000
b6,686,000
Share earns
.06
-
6mo rev
173,631,000
158,062,000
Net inc
1,953,000
b6,351,000
Share earns
.10
-


PENALTY OF DEATH KEPT IN DRUG BILL
LEAD: The Senate voted today to retain a Federal death penalty provision in new anti-drug legislation.


Weaknesses Show In Rangers' Start
LEAD: The room in the basement of Madison Square Garden, overly bright and barely furnished, looked appropriate for an arraignment.
Michel Bergeron, emerging from a grim locker room Wednesday night, stepped into the room and read off the long list of charges to the gathered reporters.
So broad was his indictment of the


Icahn Said to Have Discussed Deal for Eastern This Week
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn, the chairman of Trans World Airlines Inc., and representatives of the major unions at T.W.A. and Eastern Airlines have held a series of meetings this week about Mr.
Icahn's interest in taking over Eastern, people familiar with the talks said yesterday.


Merrill's Net Slides 66.4% In 3d Quarter
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company reported yesterday that third-quarter earnings had fallen 66.4 percent as higher revenue from investment banking failed to offset lower commission revenue.


Sang Won Park
LEAD: Sang Won Park will play the Korean kayagum, or zither, on Sunday at 2:30 P.M. at the Uris Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Admission is $10, or $7 for students and the elderly.
Information: 206-1050.


Walking Through Time in Lower Manhattan
LEAD: The loss of a half-trillion dollars and the onset of the Great Depression hardly seem like events to commemorate.
But those two dark October days - Oct. 19, 1987, and Oct. 29, 1929 - will be not-so-solemnly noted on Sunday during a walking tour of the multi-trillion-dollar thoroughfare known as Wall


Market Place; Buyout Funds And Hostile Bids
LEAD: SOME Wall Street investment bankers have predicted that the giant pool of capital devoted to leveraged buyouts will not only continue to fuel takeovers indefinitely but will also be used in hostile transactions.


Canterbury Educational reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canterbury Educational
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,451,986
1,638,563
Net inc
39,681
37,818
Share earns
.01
.01
9mo rev
5,460,343
3,329,231
Net inc
157,874
85,214
Share earns
.04
.02
Shares outst
4,416,000
3,894,000


Brenco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brenco Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
12,817,000
6,831,000
Net inc
778,000
b773,000
Share earns
.08
-
9mo sales
36,701,000
22,512,000
Net inc
2,429,000
b539,000
Share earns
.25
-
b-Net loss


Review/Art; Provocative Paintings From Anselm Kiefer
LEAD: THE large and impressive survey of the work of Anselm Kiefer, the widely admired West German artist, has finally arrived in New York.
The Museum of Modern Art is the last stop on a tour that has included the Art Institute of Chicago and the Philadelphia Museum of Art - the show's joint organizers - and the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los


Forget Uncle Milty, It's the New Dukakis
LEAD: Forget that Michael S. Dukakis has a reputation as a chilly, humorless politician.
The new revised Democratic Presidential candidate is exuding dazzling one-liners - the Henny Youngman of American politics.


Tulane Returning To Conference
LEAD: Tulane University, which withdrew from the Metro Conference in 1985 after a point-shaving scandal in its men's basketball program, was reinstated to the conference today.


TCF Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TCF Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b6,542,000
c3,868,000
Per share
.91
.54
9mo net inc
b17,022,000
d1,113,000
Per share
2.37
-
b-After tax credits of $2,730,000 for the quarter and $6,671,000 for the 9 months.


Genlyte Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genlyte Group Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
117,694,000
109,215,000
Net inc
2,621,000
3,128,000
Share earns
.20
.24
9mo sales
367,755,000
329,108,000
Net inc
8,820,000
10,840,000
Share earns
.67
.83


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Sullivan Leads in Texas: Mike Sullivan shot a seven-under-par 63 that included two chip-ins and took a one-stroke lead yesterday after the first round of the $600,000 Texas Open in San Antonio.
Sullivan made seven birdies and an eagle in near-ideal conditions at the Oak Hills Country Club course.


Ethics Panel Plans Hearings And Pressure in Last Weeks
LEAD: Five months before it is due to go out of business, the New York State Government Integrity Commission still has ambitious plans for holding more public hearings, publicizing at least two more areas of potential corruption and active lobbying of the Governor and legislative leaders for laws that would make commission proposals into realities.


Court Overturns British Ban on Spy Memoirs
LEAD: The Government lost a two-and-a-half-year battle today to stop three London newspapers from publishing excerpts from a former intelligence agent's memoirs.


U.S. Witness in Wedtech Case Admits He Concealed Income
LEAD: A Westchester County contractor who testified last summer for the prosecution in the Wedtech trial pleaded guilty yesterday to state charges that he failed to report more than $8.5 million in personal and corporate income from 1984 to 1986.


Candy in Jersey Didn't Contain Strychnine
LEAD: A New Jersey state police finding that a piece of candy contained strychnine was incorrect, the result of a scientist's mistake, the authorities said today.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey yesterday offered a $40 million issue of consolidated notes due to mature on Oct. 1, 1990, through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Court of Appeals Voids Nassau County's Budget
LEAD: The Nassau County budget for 1988 is illegal because it does not take into account a $90 million county surplus, the State Court of Appeals ruled today.


Guarantees on Bailouts Stir Fears in Congress
LEAD: As Congress begins examining the recent string of billion-dollar rescues of insolvent savings institutions, some legislators fear that Federal regulators are committing the Government to debts far larger than imagined.


Barry's Jewelers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barry's Jewelers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
31,138,000
27,798,000
Net inc
145,000
b19,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss


Fries Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fries Entertainment (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,974,000
8,656,000
Net loss
382,000
b137,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Review/Film; Allen Directs Rowlands In 'Another Woman'
LEAD: Woody Allen's ''Another Woman,'' his 17th feature since ''Take the Money and Run'' in 1969, is about the mid-century crisis of Marion (Gena Rowlands), an intelligent, beautiful, esteemed professor of philosophy who, having just passed what a friend describes as ''the big 5-O,'' is re-examining her life.


Auto Sales Rose 31.5% In Period
LEAD: Sales of new American-made cars and light trucks rose 31.5 percent in the first part of October from the comparable period a year earlier, when the market was depressed because the auto makers had dropped their sales incentives.


Sherwin-Williams Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sherwin-Williams Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
547,000,000
512,301,000
Net inc
37,820,000
36,423,000
Share earns
.86
.81
9mo sales
1,501,027,000
1,384,378,000
Net inc
82,366,000
b77,003,000
Share earns
1.87
1.71


Three Bands Whose Rock Is Their Own
LEAD: Some rock bands try to be consistent, forging a group sound and working variations on it as the years pass.
But in the 1980's, when everything from fashion to art to television commercials revels in incongruities, some innovative rockers have demanded just as much flexibility for their music.
They're not waiting for a single style to gel; their styles depend on sudden change and enigmatic juxtapositions, on asymmetry and sonic whiplash.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-11  Private farming in the Soviet Union should be promoted, Mikhail S. Gorbachev said.
In an urgent bid to increase food production, the Soviet leader has called for farmers to be freed from the current state-run system of collective agriculture.
Page A1


Rayonier Timberlands LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rayonier Timberlands LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
18,039,000
14,479,000
Net inc
13,014,000
10,051,000
Share earns
.66
.53
9mo sales
74,797,000
57,553,000
Net inc
56,625,000
40,292,000
Share earns
2.80
1.97


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 451 money market mutual funds increased $305.4 million, to $267.46 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 125 institutional funds were down $490.3 million, to $69.07 billion.
Assets of the 223 general-purpose funds were down $80.80 million, to $85.04 billion.


Eastern Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
18,245,167
15,900,525
Net inc
577,550
b696,383
Share earns
.30
.36
9mo sales
55,193,835
47,482,593
Net inc
2,356,722
b1,995,631
Share earns
1.23
1.01


Service Merchandise Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Service Merchandise Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
596,711,000
525,181,000
Net inc
762,000
b15,827,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo sales
1,796,181,000
1,572,249,000
Net loss
4,130,000
c26,418,000
b-Net loss


First Federal Savings &amp; Loan (Conn) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings &amp; Loan (Conn)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
526,000
572,000
Share earns
.22
.24
9mo net inc
1,528,000
1,467,000
Share earns
.64
-
Year-ago 9-month share earnings are not applicable; the company converted to stock onwership form in Jund 1987.


The Law; At the Bar
LEAD: Divorce lawyers are generally an individualistic breed, but the names Marvin Mitchelson and Raoul Lionel Felder are invariably linked.
The men are about the same age, had the same impoverished childhoods, and enjoyed the same success.
Each is as famous in his own right as many of his celebrity clients.


Molex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Molex Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
138,358,000
112,167,000
Net inc
15,704,000
12,755,000
Share earns
.62
.50


Clowns for Children
LEAD: As part of its series of live entertainment for children, the Triplex performing arts center of the Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street, is to present a program called ''Clowning Around'' tomorrow at 11 A.M. and again at 1 P.M.
Two clowns, Olaf and Flipper, will use pantomime, storytelling and the European circus tradition in their act.


Nicaraguan Faults U.S. but Sees Better Ties
LEAD: The Nicaraguan Foreign Minister denounced American policy in Central America today but expressed hope that his country would have normal relations with the next administration.


Big Trade Pays Off
LEAD: A deal last winter involving the Dodgers and the Athletics, as well as the Mets, had a great deal to with helping Oakland and Los Angeles into the World Series.
Additional articles, scouting reports by last year's pennant-winning managers and facts and figures on the Series begin on page D17.


Prime Computer To Buy G.E. Unit
LEAD: Prime Computer Inc. said it would acquire the General Electric Company's Calma business, which makes computer-aided design and manufacturing systems, for an undisclosed price.
The move will increase Prime's share of the computer-aided design market while getting G.E. out of a money-losing business, which it entered with fanfare in 1981.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Deng Sees Soviet Summit


Review/Film; 'Madame Sousatzka,' Or, Life Through Music
LEAD: Madame Irina Sousatzka (Shirley MacLaine) is a magnificent relic, the kind of creature who can be found only in the memories of her most devoted students, or else on the movie screen.
A woman like this would be at a disadvantage in the real world, but Madame barely acknowledges the real world at all.


Pepsico Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pepsico Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 3
1988
1987
Sales
3,241,400,000
2,903,800,000
Net inc
b241,600,000
c189,900,000
Share earns
.91
.72
9mo sales
8,823,400,000
7,927,000,000
Net inc
b574,500,000
d447,800,000
Share earns
2.18
1.70


Society Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
26,500,000
24,200,000
Per share
1.11
.97
9mo net inc
74,200,000
68,400,000
Per share
3.10
2.79


Solution in Sinai
LEAD: To the Editor:


Piano-Bas Duo
LEAD: The duo of Joanne Brackeen on piano and Cecil McBee on bass is to perform tonight and tomorrow at Bradley's, 70 University Place (228-6440).
Music begins at 9:30 P.M.; there is a $5 cover and an $8 minimum.


Italian Stake By Kidder
LEAD: In an attempt to position itself for the dismantling of trade barriers within the European Community, the Kidder Peabody Group Inc. said yesterday that it had invested in an Italian merchant bank and its investment banking unit.


Nuclear Weapon Test Shakes Tall Buildings in Las Vegas
LEAD: A nuclear weapon test today shook high-rise hotels and apartment buildings here, 80 miles from the test site.


N.F.L. Matchups; Jackson Is Ready To Pursue 'Hobby'
LEAD: A battle cry often heard among the Los Angeles Raiders this season has been, ''If we can just hold on until Bo Jackson gets back. . . . '' Well, Bo's back.
Jackson practiced Wednesday for the first time since ending his baseball season with the Kansas City Royals.
He managed a 10-day break before picking up his ''hobby.


Sihanouk Hints at U.S. Military Aid
LEAD: Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that his Cambodian guerrilla forces were receiving new military aid from ''some countries,'' and strongly hinted that he was referring to the United States.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Jerry Butler, the third-ranked wide receiver in Buffalo Bills history, announced his retirement yesterday after sitting out all of last year with a leg injury and not playing this season because his leg hadn't recovered sufficiently to withstand the stress of the game.
Butler, a former collegiate star at Clemson, finished his pro career with 278 catches for 4,301 yards.


Foreign Policy Fake, Arms Control Poseur
LEAD: How George Bush maintains his campaign pose as a foreign policy and arms control expert is a bafflement.
The fact is, he's more like the marginal baseball player who has a ''cup of coffee'' in the major leagues than the Hall of Famer he'd like voters to think he is.


Owner Will Sell His Nazi Relics
LEAD: Following a public outcry, a hotel owner who has a collection of Nazi memorabilia says he will sell them rather than put them on display.


Font &amp; Vaamonde Wins a Jell-O Account
LEAD: Font &amp; Vaamonde, one of the largest Hispanic marketing agencies in the United States, has been awarded the $2 million Spanish-language account for Jell-O desserts, a General Foods product.


Massachusetts Miracle Is More Than a Mirage
LEAD: To the Editor:


Janet Grice
LEAD: Janet Grice, a bassoonist, will lead a Brazilian jazz group featuring Claudio Roditi on trumpet tonight at 8 at Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street.
Admission is $10; information, 206-1050.


Plant Manager Steps Down
LEAD: The manager of the Savannah River Plant has taken a leave of absence for medical reasons pending his retirement, according to the E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, which operates the nuclear complex.
A company spokesman, Jim Felder, said there was no connection between the departure of the plant's general manager, John T.


Dr Pepper Is Seeking To Change Its Image
LEAD: Dr Pepper is dropping its iconoclastic image to portray itself as a soft drink for conformists.
New commercials by Young &amp; Rubicam, beginning during the World Series Sunday, will keep the two-year-old slogan, ''Just what the Dr. ordered,'' but will feature mainstream characters in mundane situations.


Cooper Agrees to Sell Technicon to Miles
LEAD: The Cooper Companies said today that it had agreed to sell Cooper Technicon Inc., its medical-diagnostics business, to Miles Inc., a health care subsidiary of Bayer U.S.A.


How Carbon 14 Was Used to Fix Date of Shroud
LEAD: The Shroud of Turin was identified as a medieval forgery using a very sensitive dating technique available to only half a dozen laboratories around the world.


Congress's Lid on Lobbying
LEAD: Both the Senate and House of Representatives have passed bills limiting their members' lobbying after they leave government.
But the measure, which would finally make Congress subject to limits it imposed on the executive branch, requires swift compromise between the weaker House bill and the Senate's stronger version.


Emhart to Acquire GardenAmerica
LEAD: The Emhart Corporation reached a conditional agreement to acquire the GardenAmerica Corporation for $28.25 a share, or a total of $84 million.
GardenAmerica, based in Carson City, Nev., designs and manufactures watering systems for the commercial and home markets.
It sells products in the United States, Australia, France, Italy and


Washington Talk: Briefing; McLaughlin Times Two
LEAD: John McLaughlin's PBS television program ''One on One'' will have as a guest this weekend his wife, Labor Secretary Ann Dore McLaughlin.
Mr.
McLaughlin explained: ''We made a deal.
She does 'One on One,' and I have to host a Cabinet spouse tea.''


Gabel Recalls Myerson Aid, Invitations
LEAD: Sukhreet Gabel told a jury yesterday that Bess Myerson befriended her in 1983, helped her write an employment resume and entertained her at several ''casual social occasions.''


19 Firefighters Injured in Blaze At MTV Offices
LEAD: A four-alarm fire in a 25-story office building on Broadway sent 19 firefighters to the hospital early yesterday and caused heavy damage to the offices of MTV: Music Television, the rock music cable television network, fire officials said.


The Law; Federal Court Rules Challenged After 50 Years
LEAD: Dissatisfaction is growing among lawyers, judges and scholars over the 50-year-old rules that make up the foundation of the Federal court system.


A Debate Addendum: Issues of Dollars and Cents
LEAD:  Tax Increases


Completions Of Homes Fall
LEAD: Completions of new homes in the nation fell 1.2 percent in August to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1.51 million after a slim gain of seven-tenths of 1 percent in July, the Commerce Department said today.


Restaurants
LEAD: When you enter the marble and glass lobby of the building at 18 East Broadway in Chinatown, an official-looking woman, wearing a dark blue uniform and holding a walkie-talkie, trots over and inquires, ''Are you here for dinner?'' ''Well, yes, we are.'' ''Take this elevator,'' she beckons, barking orders in Chinese to a command post upstairs.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  BALTIMORE (AL) - Signed Doug Robbins, catcher, to a minor league contract and assigned him West Palm Beach of the Florida State League.
PHILADELPHIA (NL) - Released David Palmer, pitcher.
PITTSBURGH (NL) - Waived Dave Rucker, pitcher.
BASKETBALL  DENVER (NBA) - Announced that Freddie Banks, guard, left training camp.


RPM Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RPM Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
97,239,449
87,154,476
Net inc
8,672,025
7,738,227
Share earns
.39
.34
Share earnings have been restated to reflect a 50-percent stock dividend paid on Nov. 6, 1987.


Square D Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square D Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
431,427,000
401,295,000
Net inc
34,389,000
39,576,000
Share earns
1.30
1.36
9mo sales
1,230,361,000
1,104,641,000
Net inc
92,923,000
90,651,000
Share earns
3.44
3.12


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  NEW FROM JAPAN


Metro Datelines; Murder Is Charged In Shooting of Baby
LEAD: A 21-year-old Brooklyn man has been charged with murder in the fatal shooting of his 13-month old nephew on Tuesday, the police said yesterday.


Best Club Didn't Win Pennant
LEAD: With all due respect to the Los Angeles Dodgers, the best team in the National League isn't playing the Oakland Athletics in the World Series.


Compression Labs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compression Labs Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,428,000
5,096,000
Net loss
b337,000
c799,000
Share earns
-
.10
9mo sales
15,480,000
11,500,000
Net inc
b20,000
d186,000
b-Includes a charge of $145,000, representing the reversal of a tax credit for the first half of 1988 is for the quarter and a tax credit of $6,000 for the 9 months.


Stryker Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stryker Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
44,416,000
36,927,000
Net inc
3,910,000
3,210,000
Share earns
.25
.21
9mo sales
130,948,000
110,927,000
Net inc
11,960,000
9,750,000
Share earns
.77
.63


Maryland to Provide Loans To Assist Small Businesses
LEAD: Two new taxable bond financing programs to provide small businesses in Maryland with interim and long-term financing below commercial rates were announced yesterday by the state's Comptroller, Louis L. Goldstein.


Poe &amp; Associates Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Poe &amp; Associates Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,756,000
7,918,000
Net inc
938,000
b40,000
Share earns
.25
.01
9mo rev
27,193,000
24,068,000
Net inc
3,725,000
1,903,000
Share earns
1.00
.57


Dining Out Guide: Town-House Dining
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
Brive


Portsmouth Bank Shares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Portsmouth Bank Shares
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
910,000
488,000
Per share
.23
-
9mo net inc
2,621,000
1,691,000
The company converted to stock form of ownership on Feb. 17, 1988.


Morton Thiokol Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morton Thiokol Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
601,474,000
503,923,000
Net inc
41,313,000
b26,538,000
Share earns
.86
.56
b-After a loss of $14.1 million from a change in accounting for income taxes.


The Law; An Office on Wheels for Lawyers in a Jam
LEAD: What sends documents over a facsimile machine, has cellular telephones, makes copies and honks?


Mysteries of Finance And of Literary Scandal
LEAD:  At Death's Door  By Robert Barnard  200 pages.
Charles Scribner's Sons. $15.95.
Something in the Air  By Emma Lathen  270 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $16.95.


This Team Flattens Opponents
LEAD: Watching the broadcast of the American League Championship Series, I remember hearing Reggie Jackson sum it up pretty well.
The Oakland Athletics just got rolling, he said, and whoever got in their way was run over.
They were steamrolled.


Data Transmission Network reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Transmission Network (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,143,000
942,000
Net inc
5,000
b335,000
9mo rev
5,521,000
2,057,000
Net loss
197,000
1,095,000
b-Net loss


Great Northern Nekoosa Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Northern Nekoosa Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
937,700,000
664,600,000
Net inc
92,300,000
55,700,000
Share earns
1.67
1.02
Shares outst
55,021,508
54,570,888
9mo sales
2,638,500,000
1,806,400,000
Net inc
255,900,000
143,900,000
Share earns
4.65
2.64


Malfunction Seen as Cause of Zia Crash
LEAD: Experts sent to Pakistan to investigate the plane crash that killed President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq have concluded that the crash was caused by a malfunction in the aircraft, and not by a bomb or a missile, Administration officials say.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Allied Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Bankshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,069,000
913,000
Per share
.20
.18
9mo net inc
b3,332,000
b3,097,000
Per share
.64
.63
b-Included net securities gains of $437,000, or 8 cents a share, for the latest period and $512,000, or 10 cents a share, for the year-ago period.


Golden West Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden West Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
36,016,000
b35,844,000
Share earns
1.15
1.14
Shares outst
31,398,990
31,320,745
9mo net inc
101,852,000
b118,998,000
Share earns
3.25
3.80
Shares outst
31,385,643
31,297,994


Andean Music
LEAD: Sukay will play Andean music on Sunday at 3 P.M. at Prospect Park Picnic House, near Third Street and Prospect Park West, in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn.
Admission is $5; information, (718) 788-0055.


Plant Manager Order Outlook
LEAD: Plant managers' expectations for increased orders and overall demand in the current quarter declined for the second consecutive period, but their longer-term outlook remains strong, a survey released this week showed.


A Star Replays His Greatest Role
LEAD: At a closed meeting yesterday morning, more than 100 Democratic legislators and aides warmly welcomed Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas to the chamber of the House of Representatives.
Since his ''You're no Jack Kennedy'' retort to Dan Quayle in the Vice-Presidential debate, Mr.
Bentsen has emerged as a


Review/Jazz; Re-examining Rhythm
LEAD: Evan Parker, the English saxophonist and early advocate of free improvisation, came to the Knitting Factory on Tuesday night and turned technical exercises into art.
Mr.
Parker is a virtuoso; for his first two pieces, he used a circular breathing technique - where an instrumentalist draws in air and expels it at the same time - to keep compositions going, without a break, for up to half an hour.


Sports of The Times; The Mets' 'Vital Signs'
LEAD: IF this had been a midseason game, it could have been filed away as a ''laugher,'' one of those 60 or 70 losses that even a championship team suffers every season, ''good pitching stopping good hitting'' and all that good old baseball wisdom.


Autumn Festival
LEAD: Square dancing, hayrides and pumpkins will be featured in an autumn festival on Sunday, beginning at noon, at the Central Park Band Shell, in the middle of the park near 72d Street.
Rides and pumpkins are free for children, and cider and dancing are free for adults.
Information: 360-8128.


Futuresat Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Futuresat Industries Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
434,387
545,722
Net inc
10,364
428,805
9mo rev
3,360,957
1,085,636
Net inc
738,698
535,146
Share earns
.07
.06


People
LEAD: *
James Forsythe, senior vice president and circulation director at Essence Communications, has been named director of new business development.


Mahfouz's Unflinching View of His Land
LEAD: When your heart achieves its desire, you will have transcended the confines of time and space.
But you still feel oppressed in this cottage, in the midst of a grassy lawn surrounded by a fence lined with cypress trees.
And you await the day when the cypresses and all they enclose will disappear, the day when the plants will no longer whisper of the night's sorrows, the day when the scuttling of the cockroaches and the croaking of the frogs will fall silent, the day when memory will lose its tyranny and you'll merge into nothingness.


Koch and Victorious Priest Declar Peace
LEAD: The official business yesterday morning was the dedication of Covenant House's new home for 300 runaway youths in Chelsea.
But the unofficial business was a public peace-making between the center's founder and the man who tried to block him from buying the building last year: Mayor Koch.


Review/Film; Animated Works From All Over
LEAD: Any film that sends vicious M &amp; M's candies skittering up a human foot as if they were African ants and that sets Che Guevara twirling in dance with the Statue of Liberty deserves a livelier title than ''The 21st International Tournee of Animation.'' The latest in this annual series of short animated films is full of wit, sophistication and visual energy - the best way to escape the listlessness and self-importance such anthologies are prone to.


Sears Stock Rises On Witter Rumor
LEAD: Shares of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company rose sharply on rumors that it was getting ready to sell its underperforming Dean Witter Reynolds stock brokerage unit, possibly in a deal that includes its Allstate Insurance division.
The Ford Motor Company, which has long expressed a desire to expand in financial services, was said to be interested.


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
273,266,000
237,768,000
Net inc
b96,594,000
c25,771,000
Share earns
18.41
4.60
9mo sales
828,190,000
751,617,000
Net inc
b205,298,000
cd50,651,000
Share earns
38.78
-


Automatic Data Processing Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automatic Data Processing Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
396,137,000
361,305,000
Net inc
34,440,000
30,370,000
Share earns
.45
.39


Finances and the Fear of Serious Accident Prompt Rare Openness on Weapon Plants
LEAD: In a remarkable public admission, the Energy Department has acknowledged over the last two weeks that the Government's mismanagement of the nation's nuclear weapon industry has resulted in many industrial mishaps, chronic safety violations and a legacy of environmental contamination.


The Season Is Not Over:


Gandhi Visits Flood-Ravaged Northern States


Vac-Tec Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vac-Tec Systems Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
849,218
4,284,833
Net loss
1,657,269
b535,450
Per share
-
.01
Yr rev
5,492,489
7,075,678
Net loss
2,532,576
898,424
b-Net income


U.S. CAPTURES 120 IN GANG ROUNDUP
LEAD: Police and Federal agents in 20 states have arrested more than 120 suspected members of Jamaican gangs that are said to be responsible for more than 1,400 murders and the large-scale distributing of illegal drugs.


Gala Raises $4 Million to Fight Cancer
LEAD: A four-year, $1 billion campaign to fight cancer began Wednesday night at a gala black-tie concert-dinner-dance in the glittering new space of the Winter Garden.
The campaign, Stop Cancer, is the creation of Dr.
Armand Hammer, who is chairman of President Reagan's cancer panel.


U.S. Chides Soviets on Rights Talks
LEAD: Confronting renewed Soviet demands, the United States repeated today that the Soviets must improve their performance on human rights before the United States will agree to a human rights conference in Moscow.


Ex-Wayne Mayor Is Arraigned
LEAD: The former Mayor of Wayne pleaded not guilty yesterday to additional corruption charges involving development in the Passaic County township of 50,000 people.
In a revised indictment returned earlier this month, the former Mayor, Louis V. Messercola, was accused of conspiring to extort, on behalf of an unidentified co-conspirator, a below-market price for a town house from a developer, Kingsbridge Heights Associates, in 1986 and 1987.


12 N.F.L. Sellouts
LEAD: Twelve of the 14 National Football League games this weekend were sold out 72 hours in advance, the league said yesterday.
It was the first time that has happened since 1981.
The advance sellouts mean that those games can be televised in the markets of the home team and the visiting team.


Congress Passes Compromise AIDS Bill
LEAD: Congress, in its first comprehensive effort to combat the AIDS epidemic, passed legislation today sharply increasing both money and personnel for research and providing speedier assessment of new drugs.
But the compromise measure deleted a key section assuring confidentiality for patients whose tests for the disease showed they were carriers.


Lawyer Granted Right to Conceal Client's Identity
LEAD: In a case closely watched in legal circles nationwide, a Florida judge ruled today that a lawyer does not have to disclose the identity of a client who may have killed a man in a hit-and-run accident two years ago.
Without the lawyer's cooperation, prosecutors have been unable to identify a suspect and file criminal charges.


Moscow Names Kabul Envoy
LEAD: The Soviet Union appointed a top Foreign Ministry official as Ambassador to Afghanistan today, apparently signaling a determination to assert more control over developments in Kabul as Soviet troops withdraw.


Transcript of the Second Debate Between Bush and Dukakis
LEAD:  PARTICIPANTS IN THE DEBATE  CANDIDATES: Vice President Bush, Republican, and Michael S. Dukakis, Democrat.
MODERATOR: Bernard Shaw, anchor, Cable News Network.
PANELISTS: Ann Compton, correspondent, ABC News; Andrea Mitchell, White House correspondent, NBC News; Margaret Garrard Warner, White House correspondent, Newsweek.


NCNB Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCNB Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
58,882,000
43,767,000
Per share
.69
.52
9mo net inc
188,174,000
152,128,000
Per share
2.22
1.87


Review/Film; The Last of an Empire
LEAD: The film opening today at the Public Theater, titled ''The Last Emperor,'' is a double-decker footnote, to history and to movies, specifically, to Bernardo Bertolucci's Oscar-winning ''Last Emperor.''


Heritage Financial Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Financial Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,704,000
1,691,000
Per share
.53
.50
9mo net inc
4,670,000
4,651,000
Per share
1.45
1.38


Humana Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Humana Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
904,329,000
804,415,000
Net inc
58,212,000
47,468,000
Share earns
.59
.48
Yr rev
3,435,397,000
2,973,643,000
Net inc
227,121,000
182,839,000
Share earns
2.30
1.86


Charles Kuralt's Roadshow Continues
LEAD: Despite a slow start and some sputtering along the way, ''Back on the Road'' rolls along into fresh territory tonight.
In the course of the hourlong special at 10 on Channel 2, the hearty Charles Kuralt, who has made a career out of being a national tour guide for CBS News, introduces us to several old-timers who helped build the Golden Gate


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,907,000
6,115,000
Per share
.38
.45
9mo net loss
2,730,000
b20,990,000
Per share
-
1.47
b-Net income  The company attributed the loss to a one-time writedown of a preferred stock portfolio taken in the second quarter.


Addenda
LEAD: * Wildman Advertising, Boston, has changed its name to Noble &amp; Wecal.


Robert B. Braswell, 57, Financial Analyst
LEAD: Robert B. Braswell, a financial analyst and corporate executive, died of a heart attack on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old.


Gannett Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gannett Co Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
804,314,000
751,139,000
Net inc
75,121,000
70,519,000
Share earns
.47
.44
9mo rev
2,409,202,000
2,244,057,000
Net inc
246,618,000
212,773,000
Share earns
1.52
1.32


Review/Film; Oral Fixation In the Extreme
LEAD: ''The Kiss'' is the story of a jet-setting Cosmo cover girl (Joanna Pacula) who is actually the essence of evil incarnate.
This distinction, it turns out, is not as sharp as one might think.


State II Apparel reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* State II Apparel (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
24,453,000
16,984,000
Net inc
1,008,000
793,000
Share earns
.24
.24
Results of the Apparel division of Sportsotron Inc. are included from its acquisition effective Aug.


A Series Sampler
LEAD: MEMORABLE NUMBERS  3: Number of swings taken by Reggie Jackson to tie a World Series record for home runs in a game, against Los Angeles in 1977.  18: Age of youngest player in Series history, Freddie Lindstrom, New York Giants, 1924.  97: Number of pitches thrown by Don Larsen in his perfect game for the Yankees against Brooklyn in Game 5, 1956.


Reistertown Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reistertown Federal Savings
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
898,349
701,934
Per share
.75
.61
Yr net inc
3,231,876
2,433,759
Per share
2.74
2.24


BUSH AND DUKAKIS QUARREL ON PENSIONS, ABORTION, ARMS AND CAMPAIGN'S SHRILL TONE
LEAD: Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis quarreled last night over which of them was responsible for the shrill tone of the Presidential campaign, while trading sharp words on Social Security, abortion, military policy and the basic values that each would bring to the White House.


Southington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southington Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
705,000
639,000
Per share
.39
.35
9mo net inc
1,880,000
1,970,000
Per share
1.03
1.08


Russell Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Russell Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
149,702,000
139,067,000
Net inc
16,514,000
14,712,000
Share earns
.42
.37
9mo sales
379,708,000
347,233,000
Net inc
36,297,000
31,570,000
Share earns
.92
.80


Congress Completes Action On Medical-Waste Measure
LEAD: The House completed Congressional action on legislation to control the kind of infectious medical waste that fouled Atlantic Coast beaches this summer.


Burnham Pacific Properties Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burnham Pacific Properties Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
617,000
b31,000
Share earns
.15
-
9mo net inc
495,000
114,000
Share earns
.17
.08
b-Net loss  The latest 9-month includes a one- time charge of $221,000 for merger expenses.


Thousands in Haiti Protest Reported Transfer of Priest
LEAD: About 6,000 people demonstrated here today against an order reportedly issued by Roman Catholic Church leaders to transfer a popular radical priest out of Haiti.


Chiat/Day and Yamaha End Their 11-Year Tie
LEAD: Chiat/Day Los Angeles and the Yamaha Motor Corporation will end their 11-year relationship at the end of the year.


How to Turn Oxford Into a Moneymaker
LEAD: To the Editor:


Compromise Is Nearer on Tax-Corrections Bill
LEAD: Leaders of the House and Senate tax-writing committees said today that they had made good progress at reaching a compromise on legislation that will make technical corrections and other changes in the 1986 tax law.


Savings Bonds In Sales Drop
LEAD: Sales of United States Savings Bonds dropped for the fifth time in six months in September, falling 10.8 percent, to $519 million, the Treasury Department said this week.


Metro Datelines; Landlord Assessed $15 Million for Repairs
LEAD: More than $1 million in repairs will be made at 15 Manhattan apartment buildings owned by a landlord whose tenants compared life in his structures to living in hell, a New York City official said Wednesday.


S.E.C. Investigates Pillsbury Trading
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating trading in the stock of the Pillsbury Company prior to the announcement that Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. was bidding for the company, Pillsbury said.
On Oct. 4, Britain's Grand Met bid $60 a share for the food and restaurant conglomerate in a transaction that values Pillsbury at $5.23 billion, causing a one-day rise of more than $18 in Pillsbury's shares.


Review/Theater; 'Obscurity' Dishes The Dirt
LEAD: At ''A Chorus Line,'' audiences quickly come to hate Zack, the faceless director who must decide the fates of the nice, vulnerable, talented performers begging him for work.
At the new play presented by Playwrights Horizons, the audience learns what it's like to be the dread Zack. ''Saved From Obscurity'' is a 90-minute ''Chorus Line''-style confessional monologue in which an obscure New York actor, Tom Mardirosian, tells all about his life and career.


Thaddeus Dulski, 73, an Ex-Congressman
LEAD: Thaddeus J. Dulski, an accountant and a former eight-term Congressman from the Buffalo area, died of leukemia Tuesday at the Roswell Park Institute in Buffalo.
He was 73 years old and lived in Buffalo.


Banctec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banctec Inc
Qtr to Sept 25
1988
1987
Revenue
26,853,000
23,763,000
Net inc
1,713,000
1,569,000
Share earns
.28
.27
6mo net inc
3,322,000
b2,236,000
Share earns
.54
.42
b-After an extraordinary charge of $711,000 from an accounting change.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  The nation's trade deficit climbed sharply in August, to $12.2 billion, as both imports and exports reached record levels.
The Commerce Department's trade report, which was somewhat worse than expected, was the last one to be issued before Election Day.
It came on the day of the Presidential debate between Michael S.


Massachusetts Miracle Is More than a Mirage; Sick Picture
LEAD: To the Editor:


National Education Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Education Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
102,986,000
94,675,000
Net inc
12,458,000
6,359,000
Share earns
.44
.25
Shares outst
28,053,000
25,074,000
9mo rev
295,181,000
261,878,000
Net inc
26,040,000
12,490,000
Share earns
.93
.50
Shares outst
27,938,000
24,953,000


Dollar Plunges on Trade Data
LEAD: The dollar, continuing on its downward course this week, plunged yesterday on the report of a widening United States trade deficit in August.
Some traders and economists said they expect further declines before the election and the new year.


Pentagon in Favor of Starting Reactors of Energy Agency
LEAD: A prolonged delay in restarting nuclear weapon reactors could jeopardize national security, Pentagon officials said Wednesday.
They expressed relief at an announcement by the Energy Department that it planned to resume production of tritium early next year.


On Stage
LEAD:  'Bledsoe' Is on the Way


Felix Wankel, Inventor, Is Dead; Creator of Rotary Engine Was 86
LEAD: Felix Wankel, the inventor of the rotary engine for automobiles that bears his name and of other automotive and aeronautical equipment, died Sunday at his home in Lindau, West Germany, on Lake Constance.
He was 86 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Thursday about a gain that Merrill Lynch &amp; Company is expected to take because of a change in its company pension plan misstated the timing.


Calton Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calton Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
36,957,000
42,016,000
Net inc
2,814,000
6,624,000
Share earns
.08
.17
Shares outst
35,016,000
38,141,000
9mo rev
101,341,000
84,359,000
Net inc
10,924,000
10,367,000
Share earns
.31
.28
Shares outst
35,062,000
37,491,000


Sundstrom to Miss Devil Home Opener
LEAD: The Devils will appear before their home fans Friday night for the first time since the euphoria of last spring.


Talman Home Federal Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Talman Home Federal Savings &amp; Loan (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
6,575,000
5,709,000
Share earns
.68
.59
9mo net inc
20,912,000
16,800,000
Share earns
2.16
1.76


Reagan Signs Welfare Revision Bill
LEAD: President Reagan with Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, left, and Representative Dan Rostenkowski after signing into law a bill overhauling the nation's welfare system.
The President said the law, which will require states to offer people on welfare a broad variety of education, training and work programs, will ''lead to lasting emancipation'' for those on public benefit rolls.


Vermont American Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vermont American Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
74,156,000
67,228,000
Net inc
2,657,000
3,493,000
Share earns
.27
.34
9mo sales
253,532,000
219,097 000
Net inc
12,950,000
14,203,000
Share earns
1.29
1.39


Parents Night: Show-and-Tell and a Message
LEAD: Once a year, in two hours, parents suddenly find out what their children do at school all day.
At the H. C. Crittenden Middle School here tonight, mothers and fathers squeezed into small desks in classrooms fitted with American flags and fluorescent lights and learned, 10 minutes per teacher, what their sixth, seventh and eighth graders were studying: the War of 1812, Pascal, diphthongs, the electoral college, field hockey and listening skills.


A Murder Trial That Shocked England
LEAD: Public television's ''Mystery'' begins a new season this weekend not with a standard whodunit, but with the recounting of a murder trial that scandalized England in 1935. ''Cause Celebre'' was written a decade ago by Terence Rattigan, a playwright long taken with the dark underside of British gentility (''The Deep Blue Sea,'' ''Separate Tables'').


Princess Picks Lintas: U.S.A.
LEAD: Princess Cruises, the world's largest cruise ship company, has taken its account, worth more than $30 million in advertising and direct marketing billings, from Tracy-Locke's Los Angeles office and delivered it to Lintas: U.S.A., an Interpublic Group subsidiary.


Sun Microsystems
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc., based in Mountain View, Calif., said it was raising the prices on its computer work station and server products an average of 7 percent because of the increased cost of memory chips.
Sun, which had raised prices by about 10 percent earlier in the year, increased prices on newer models by about 6 percent, while older models were raised by 10 to 15 percent.


MAN IN THE NEWS: Slobodan Milosevic; The Serb Who's Giving the Orders
LEAD: Yugoslavia's man of the hour, Slobodan Milosevic, appears to be a bundle of contradictions: He wears banker's pinstripes, smokes cigarillos and drives a Yugo car.
But in his rise to absolute power in Serbia, he has also displayed a rough tongue and a ruthless willingness to instigate mobs to achieve his political ends.


No Buyout for Winfield
LEAD: The Yankees notified Dave Winfield's agent yesterday that they would not exercise the $2 million buyout clause of the outfielder's 10-year contract, which has two years left.
The action means that the right fielder cannot become a free agent, but it does not mean that the Yankees might not attempt to trade him.


Clayton Homes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clayton Homes Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
59,438,000
50,374,000
Net inc
3,754,000
3,224,000
Share earns
.23
.20
Share earnings are adjusted for a 5-for-4 split on Sept. 28.


THE U.N. TODAY
LEAD:  General Assembly


Washington Talk: Briefing; Community Growth
LEAD: After doubling its membership to 12 countries, the European Community is again turning expansionist, this time in the United States.


Investment in the Poor Prevents Problems and Makes Sense
LEAD: To the Editor:


Special-Effects Show
LEAD: Industrial Light and Magic, the visual-effects branch of George Lucas's film company, Lucasfilm, will blow its own horn tomorrow and Sunday with special-effects demonstrations and lectures at Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street.
Technicians will demonstrate the effects used in the transformation scene in the movie ''Willow,'' and the techniques used to merge live action and animation in ''Who Framed Roger Rabbit.


Ad Official Retires at Time; New Marketing Post Filled
LEAD: Time Inc. yesterday announced the retirement of Richard B. Thomas, the senior vice president of advertising for its magazine group, and the appointment of Donald M. Elliman Jr. to the new post of executive vice president for marketing.


U.S. TRADE DEFICIT SURGED IN AUGUST TO $12.2 BILLION
LEAD: The nation's trade deficit climbed sharply in August, to $12.2 billion, as both imports and exports reached record levels, the Commerce Department reported today.


Poll Finds Antipathy Toward Some AIDS Victims
LEAD: The public overwhelmingly expresses general sympathy for people who have AIDS, but for many Americans that sympathy does not extend to AIDS victims who are homosexuals or intravenous drug users, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll.


Genetics Institute reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genetics Institute (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,259,000
5,538,000
Net loss
4,457,000
2,449,000
9mo rev
15,312,000
15,176,000
Net loss
8,358,000
6,331,000
The latest 9-month includes a gain on the sale of an equity investment of $5,732,000.


H.C.A. Management Makes A Buyout Offer of $4 Billion
LEAD: The management of the Hospital Corporation of America yesterday made a formal offer of $51 a share, or roughly $4 billion, for the Nashville-based hospital chain.


Bank of New York Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New York Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
54,236,000
45,201,000
Per share
1.51
1.32
9mo net inc
158,295,000
57,558,000
Per share
4.52
1.62


Crestar Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crestar Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
21,900,000
b15,000,000
Per share
.74
.51
9mo net inc
64,400,000
c44,700,000
Per share
2.20
1.52
b-Reflects an $8.1 million pre-tax charge for severance and retirement benefits.


Intergraph Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intergraph Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
207,158,000
157,087,000
Net inc
22,494,000
18,381,000
Share earns
.40
.32
9mo rev
585,339,000
445,761,000
Net inc
63,007,000
45,146,000
Share earns
1.11
.79


Imperial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,499,000
3,046,000
Per share
.52
.29
9mo net inc
12,520,000
8,236,000
Per share
1.19
.79


Lucian C. Warren, Journalist, 75
LEAD: Lucian C. Warren, a Washington journalist, died of cancer Wednesday at his home in Issue, Md.
He was 75 years old.


Walbro Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walbro Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
30,352,000
24,970,000
Net inc
961,000
b805,000
Share earns
.24
.15
Shares outst
4,073,718
5,204,154
9mo rev
102,076,000
85,707,000
Net inc
4,934,000
b6,242,000
Share earns
1.20
1.20
Shares outst
4,115,388
5,201,138


Review/Film; Silence, Crime and Complicity
LEAD: ''The Accused,'' written by Tom Topor and directed by Jonathan Kaplan, makes a persuasive case for the proposition that witnesses who encourage a crime are as guilty as the perpetrators.
In this case, the crime is a gang rape, committed in the back room of a crowded bar late on a boozy night.
The victim is a sexily dressed young woman, not entirely sober and a little high on marijuana, who, as everybody says, ''asked for it.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing on Synday in the Long Island Weekly gave an incorrect day for the season premiere of the Long Island Philharmonic.
The concert is Saturday at 8:30 P.M. at Hauppauge High School.


Texas Pacific Land Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Pacific Land Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,062,629
1,335,878
Net inc
526,433
643,054
Share earns
.14
.17
9mo rev
3,740,686
4,367,283
Net inc
1,934,190
2,275,181
Share earns
.53
.60


Weather-Proofing


Dams vs. Indians: The Battle Calls for War Paint
LEAD: For much of his life as a Kaiapo Indian chief, Totoi has seen his tribesmen struggle with whites, chase out lumbermen, argue with gold diggers and even kill farmers who invaded their lands.
But the latest problem is confounding for him and the chiefs of neighboring Amazon villages.


Dodgers vs. Athletics: Big Trade Pays Off for Both
LEAD: In the aftermath of the Mets' loss to the Los Angeles Dodgers in the final game of the National League pennant playoff, Joe McIlvaine stood in the Mets' clubhouse and recalled a moment 10 months earlier. ''I was standing between Fred and Sandy thinking this is a great trade for these teams,'' the Met executive related.


Bruno Annoyed
LEAD: Frustrated by a seemingly unending string of postponements of his heavyweight championship bout against Mike Tyson, Frank Bruno said yesterday in London that he was ''getting fed up with all the delays.'' ''Tyson is either breaking his hands, smashing his car or having a divorce and I can tell you it's getting me down a bit,'' said Bruno, 26 years old, the challenger, who has weathered three official postponements because of Tyson's physical and personal problems.


Navy Trial for Woman Who Defied Drug Test
LEAD: A Navy admiral has ordered a court-martial for a lieutenant who refused to provide a sample of her urine for a drug test ''under the direct observation'' of another woman.


Art People
LEAD:  Things-in-Themselves


For Children
LEAD:  Shows, Nature, Museums  ''STORY SOUP,'' a musical by Maxmillian Productions, 1 and 3 P.M.
Sunday, at the Third Street Music School, 235 East 11th Street.
Admission: children and the elderly, $2.50; others, $5.
Information: 777-3240.  ''THINGS THAT GO BANG,'' a Lolli-Pops Concert, for ages 3 to 5, by the Little Orchestra Society, directed by Dino Anagnost, 10:15 and 11:30 A.M.


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
760,000,000
753,000,000
Net inc
b51,000,000
c35,000,000
Share earns
1.21
.84
9mo sales
2,127,000,000
2,177,000,000
Net inc
b131,000,000
c162,000,000
Share earns
3.14
3.91


Spain Fund Inc reports earnings for As of Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spain Fund Inc (NYSE)
As of Aug 31
1988
1987
Assets
105,738,820
-
Per share
10.56
-
Assets represent net assets.
The fund began operating on June 28.


FUTURES/OPTIONS Orange Juice Prices Surge On Talk of Brazil Problem
LEAD: Orange juice futures prices surged yesterday on the New York Cotton Exchange amid rumors that Brazil, the world's largest orange juice producer, may have problems meeting its delivery commitments.


Weapons Tests That Don't
LEAD: When Congress votes millions, perhaps billions, of tax dollars for a new weapons system, does it have a clear idea of what it's buying?
Does it have at hand the information necessary to make that kind of judgment?
Can the information it does have be relied upon?


Bank Sets Plan To Help Stock
LEAD: The Continental Illinois Corporation, the Chicago bank rescued from collapse in 1984, announced a series of moves today aimed at increasing its stock price.
The company proposed a 1-for-4 reverse stock split and plans to raise its dividend, establish an employee stock ownership plan, broaden its stock option plan and change its name to the Continental Bank Corporation.


Massachusetts Miracle Is More Than a Mirage; Sick Economy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Farmer-Jordan Group
LEAD: Art Farmer, who plays fluegelhorn, and Clifford Jordan, who plays tenor saxophone, are to lead a quintet tonight through Sunday at Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street (242-1785).
Sets are at 10 and 11:45 P.M. and 1:30 A.M; there is a $12 cover and a $6 minimum.


A Nominee For C.F.T.C.
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he would nominate William Albrecht, an economics professor and an associate dean of the University of Iowa, to a vacancy on the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.


Lockheed Net Rises
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation said today that its earnings had nearly tripled in its third quarter because of an unusual $176 million gain.


Horse Racing Notebook; Alysheba-Bet Twice, Round 9
LEAD: Alysheba and Bet Twice, Bet Twice and Alysheba.
It doesn't have quite the ring of Affirmed and Alydar, and neither does their long rivalry, which will go into its ninth round tonight at the Meadowlands.


Review/Pop; A Balladeer With Quips And Tunes
LEAD: ''Nashville is the only place in the world where you can eat escargots and gravy,'' Paul Williams remarked during Tuesday's opening night show of his weeklong engagement at Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street).
The diminutive singer and songwriter's remarks came by way of introducing a country ballad he had written with Willie


Goodrich ,B F Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goodrich ,B F Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
640,400,000
527,400,000
Net inc
b60,800,000
c42,400,000
Share earns
2.32
1.71
9mo sales
1,799,000,000
1,492,000,000
Net inc
b158,500,000
c84,500,000
Share earns
6.02
3.33


Dime Savings Bank of Wallingord reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dime Savings Bank of Wallingord (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,757,000
1,724,000
Per share
.33
.33
Shares outst
5,344,000
5,290,000
9mo net inc
5,342,000
5,280,000
Per share
1.00
1.00
Shares outst
5,335,000
5,290,000


Independent Bank Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank Group
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,088,000
831,000
Per share
.55
.42
9mo net inc
2,825,000
2,100,000
Per share
1.42
1.05


Sundstrand Destroyed Cost Data
LEAD: In 1984, employees of the Sundstrand Corporation destroyed an internal report and memorandums suggesting that the Illinois aerospace company knew that its billing of the Pentagon for cost overruns was illegal, according to the company's plea agreement with the Government.


Salerno, Now Serving 100 Years, Gets 70 More in Bid-Rigging Case
LEAD: Anthony (Fat Tony) Salerno, the reputed former boss of the Genovese crime family who is already serving a 100-year sentence, was sentenced yesterday to another 70 years in prison on a racketeering conviction.


Dividend at Ford
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would maintain its dividend of 60 cents a share despite analysts' expectations that it would raise it to as much as 75 cents.
A Ford spokesman had no comment on when the company might increase its payout.
Analysts said the auto maker, which has $10 billion in cash on hand, could easily afford 70 or 75 cents.


Review/Music; Adelaide Hall Opens Weill Cabaret Bill
LEAD: A four-night festival of cabaret songs and singers at Weill Recital Hall began on Wednesday evening with a concert by Adelaide Hall, who established the rich background on which today's cabaret singers can build.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.11
8.22
7.76
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.32
7.28
7.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.41
7.40
7.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.70
8.73
10.10
30-YR.


CHINA SEES SUMMIT WITH SOVIETS IN '89
LEAD: Deng Xiaoping, China's foremost leader, said today that China and the Soviet Union are likely to hold a summit meeting next year, diplomats reported.
It would be the first such meeting in 30 years.


U.S. Consul in Mexican Port Is Said to Be Taken Hostage
LEAD: A gunman complaining of mistreatment by Mexican authorities entered the United States Consulate today and took the consul hostage, officials said.


Levine, Huntley Wins An Eveready Account
LEAD: The Eveready Battery Company of St.
Louis has called on Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver to introduce Lithium-plus, a new AA-sized battery scheduled to go on sale early next year.
The budget has been estimated as high as $15 million.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1988
From '87
Automatic Data Processing $ 34,400,000 + 13.2 E-Systems Inc.  19,600,000 + 24.1 Gannett Co.  75,100,000 + 6.5 B.F.
Goodrich Co.  60,800,000 + 43.4 Great Northern Nekoosa 92,300,000 + 65.7 Humana Inc.


Pepsico's Earnings Jump 27.2%
LEAD: The cola and snack business, as far as Pepsico Inc. is concerned, has never been better.


Centerre Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centerre Bancorporation (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
9,345,000
11,128,000
Per share
1.20
1.43
9mo net inc
24,164,000
b14,970,000
Per share
3.10
1.93
b-After a credit of $4,469,000 for an accounting change.


Delchamps Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delchamps Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Sales
221,834,000
212,639,000
Net inc
2,772,000
b3,074,000
Share earns
.40
.48
b-Includes a gain of $1,046,000 from a tax adjustment.


Special High Schools: Prized Goal for Students
LEAD: Martha Snider said she often couldn't sleep for worry over where she would attend high school next year.
Elvia Pazmino, who remembers seniors' crying in the hall of her middle school in Brooklyn last year when they were not accepted at their first choices, is confused and worried now that it is her turn.


Traffic Note
LEAD: Fifth Avenue between 62d and 82d Streets will be closed today from 11 A.M. until 3:30 P.M. for a New York Road Runners Club one-mile race.
Second Avenue between 14th and 34th Streets will be closed tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Autumn Jubilee street fair.


MELVIN FRANK, PRODUCER, DIRECTOR AND WRITER OF MOVIES, DIES AT 75
LEAD: Melvin Frank, half of a prolific team that wrote, produced and directed some of Hollywood's wittiest romantic comedies, including ''Mr.
Blandings Builds His Dream House,'' died of complications from open-heart surgery on Thursday in Los Angeles.
He was 75 years old.


Constitution Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constitution Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,303,000
986,000
Per share
.39
.29
9mo net inc
3,553,000
2,915,000
Per share
1.05
.87


Dover Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dover Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
493,125,000
393,520,000
Net inc
33,113,000
27,536,000
Share earns
.51
.40
9mo sales
1,450,437,000
1,151,356,000
Net inc
108,452,000
80,284,000
Share earns
1.65
1.18


Nichols Research Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nichols Research Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,095,461
10,610,111
Net inc
630,654
556,063
Share earns
.18
.16
Yr rev
42,576,129
38,262,906
Net inc
2,302,336
1,753,259
Share earns
.68
.56


Legislators Leave For West Germany
LEAD: A dozen New York State legislators and several top government officials left yesterday for a weekend trip to West Germany, courtesy of the New York Air National Guard and the Air Force.


Tainted Food Is Linked to Northwest Flights
LEAD: Hundreds of Northwest Airlines passengers have been stricken with an illness that state health officials said today might be linked to contaminated food served aboard at least four flights.


L.I. Man Sentenced In Wedding Deaths
LEAD: A man convicted for an automobile crash that killed three members of a wedding party on Long Island last year was sentenced yesterday to a maximum of two and one-third to seven years in prison.


Alysheba Wins by Neck
LEAD: Alysheba became only the second horse ever to earn $5 million and set his second straight track record tonight when he scored a surprisingly narrow victory over Slew City Slew in the $600,000 Meadowlands Cup at Meadowlands Race Track.


Review/Music; Karen Mason, Cabaret Singer, at Carnegie
LEAD: Although Karen Mason, a cabaret singer with a devoted cult following, moved to New York from her hometown of Chicago many years ago, she still betrays an ingenuous enthusiasm over being caught up in the swirl of Manhattan. ''I'm a white, Catholic suburban girl,'' she announced on Thursday evening at Weill Recital Hall, where she was the second of four performers to appear in the four-evening Cabaret Comes to


Repairs Continue on Ruptured Water Main


Fairness Was Sought in Vietnam Reports
LEAD: To the Editor:


Arizona Instrument Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arizona Instrument Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,509,000
2,272,000
Net loss
214,000
b167,000
Share earns
-
.07
9mo rev
7,566,000
6,275,000
Net loss
199,000
b416,000
Share earns
-
.18
b


Rowan Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rowan Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
62,374,000
42,813,000
Net loss
8,754,000
14,890,000
9mo rev
161,838,000
96,346,000
Net loss
42,061,000
51,117,000


Laidlaw Transportation reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laidlaw Transportation (OTC)
Year to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,182,974,000
892,850,000
Net inc
147,406,000
92,272,000
Share earns
.76
.53
Shares outst
176,974,000
154,547,000
Results are in U.S. dollars.


Two 'Angels' Arrested in Midtown on Robbery and Drug Charges
LEAD: Two Guardian Angels were arrested yesterday on robbery and drug charges after a man said the Angels punched him and stole $90 from him on a midtown sidewalk.


Partition of Tiny Burundi Is Not the Answer; Don't Call Them Tribes
LEAD: To the Editor:


I.B.M. Net Rises 3.3% In Quarter
LEAD: Reflecting strength in the middle and the top of its product line, the International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that its third-quarter net income rose 3.3 percent, to $1.25 billion.
Analysts predicted that the worst was now behind the computer maker after its struggle to restructure itself and control costs.


Congressional Negotiations On Tax Bill Are Broken Off
LEAD: Congressional negotiations on a compromise tax bill broke off today after Senators and House members could not even approach agreement on how large a tax increase they should approve.


Pennwalt Sells Unit
LEAD: The Pennwalt Corporation said it had agreed to sell its Sharples-Stokes division to Alfa-Laval A.B .of Stockholm for $119 million.
Some analysts had expected the division would fetch only $80 million.
Pennwalt stock rose $2 today, to $93 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Centaur Partners, a New York investment group, holds a 7.6 percent stake in Pennwalt and has said it mayt consider a takeover.


C.I.A. Aide Sees Soviet Economy Failing to Gain
LEAD: A senior C.I.A. official said today that Mikhail S. Gorbachev's efforts to transform the Soviet economy did not have a good chance of succeeding.


Companies' Consumer Offices Gain Leverage and Respect
LEAD: One day last summer, 10 consumer advocates entered the offices of the American Express Company in New York on a most unusual mission: to evaluate the work of the company's consumer-affairs office.


Society for Savings Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society for Savings Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
8,740,000
8,031,000
Per share
.81
.75
9mo net inc
23,619,000
b23,245,000
Per share
2.19
2.16
b-After a tax credit of $1,008,000.


Five Nuns Decline to Speak With Priest Sent to Negotiate
LEAD: Five nuns who have locked themselves in a wing of their monastery's infirmary refused today to meet with a priest that their bishop said was a Vatican representative sent to help resolve the dispute over changes in their style of living.


Partition of Tiny Burundi Is Not the Answer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Aluminum Co of America (ALCOA) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aluminum Co of America (ALCOA) (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,561,300,000
1,933,600,000
Net inc
b226,300,000
109,000,000
Share earns
2.56
1.24
9mo sales
7,148,700,000
5,708,600,000
Net inc
642,700,000
c67,300,000
Share earns
7.27
.75


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.06
8.15
7.55
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.32
7.32
6.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.40
7.41
7.47
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.69
8.70
10.07
30-YR.


2 Carolina Indians Acquitted in Hostage Taking
LEAD: Two Tuscarora Indians who took over a newspaper office and held hostages for 10 hours in what they said was a protest against local corruption were found not guilty of all charges today.


Chattem Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chattem Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,260,000
10,858,000
Net loss
754,000
905,000


Stephanie Salzman Marries Jean-Louis Carbonnier
LEAD: At the Brooklyn Ethical Culture Society, Stephanie Beatrice Salzman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric Salzman of Brooklyn Heights and East Quogue, L.I., was married yesterday to Jean-Louis Carbonnier, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Claude Carbonnier of Rheims, France.
Lois Kellerman, a leader of the society, officiated.


A Visual Arts Exchange Developed With Soviets
LEAD: An agreement signed by the United States and the Soviet Union this week will enable visual arts specialists from the two countries to share their archives, conservation workshops and museum collections.


Fifth Oyster Festival Comes to Oyster Bay
LEAD: The town of Oyster Bay, L.I., will dispel any doubt about its name this weekend, when it conducts its fifth annual Oyster Festival from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. today and from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. tomorrow.
Some 25,000 oysters are expected to be consumed - on the half shell, in chowder and stewed and in a variety of homemade foods.


Lockheed Gets Navy Contract
LEAD: In a move that could mean $5 billion in business for the Lockheed Corporation, the Navy today selected the company to develop a successor to the P-3 Orion anti-submarine aircraft.


Drug Charges for Banks
LEAD: Chip Banks, a linebacker with the San Diego Chargers, was arrested last night on charges of possession of cocaine and marijuana, the police said.
An Atlanta police spokesman, Sgt.
G.E.
Smith, said Banks was arrested at a routine police roadblock after a search of his car turned up about half an ounce of marijuana and four packets of crack cocaine.


Charlotte Buzzing Over the Hornets
LEAD: George Shinn is a self-made millionaire and had no trouble putting together $32.5 million for a National Basketball Association expansion team.
He also delivers inspirational talks and writes motivational books, and his positive approach helped him just as much as his money in realizing his dream of owning a sports franchise.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Resumes That Work
LEAD: Autumn is a peak time for job hunting, and a well-prepared resume is the first thing you need.
Several formats are now popular.
A chronological resume lists experience by dates; a functional resume describes areas of job experience and skill and a targeted resume states a job goal and describes achievements and capabilities.


International Business Mahines Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Business Mahines Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
13,396,000,000
12,727,000,000
Net inc
1,247,000,000
1,208,000,000
Share earns
2.10
2.00
Shares outst
592,100,000
604,200,000
9mo rev
38,744,000,000
36,206,000,000
Net inc
b3,459,000,000
3,171,000,000
Share earns
5.83
5.25
Shares outst
593,000,000
604,100,000


Seoul Seeks U.N. Help in Rift With North
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea said today that he would ask the United Nations and its member countries to help bring about a reconciliation with North Korea that would ease tensions between the neighbors.


2 Rescued From Fire In Brooklyn Building
LEAD: A man and a pregnant woman were rescued from a burning building early yesterday after they were found unconscious in a smoky room, authorities said.


The Nixon Prediction: Bush, by a Landslide
LEAD: In a letter to his friends, former President Richard M. Nixon said this week that Vice President Bush would win in a landslide unless he became overconfident or there was ''dramatic improvement'' in Michael S. Dukakis's ''pathetically amateurish campaign.''


Man Facing Ouster for War Crimes Flees U.S.
LEAD: A former pro-Nazi Latvian police commander long facing deportation from the United States in connection with World War II atrocities has secretly fled to West Germany, apparently with false documents, Government investigators said yesterday.


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
208,072,124
176,458,324
Net inc
10,519,819
8,178,843
Share earns
.51
.40
9mo sales
552,874,838
488,952,387
Net inc
27,163,609
21,895,929
Share earns
1.33
1.08


Iomega Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iomega Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
26,178,000
22,167,000
Net inc
1,868,000
b2,207,000
Share earns
.11
-
9mo sales
85,026,000
60,259,000
Net inc
7,597,000
b39,109,000
Share earns
.45
-


Missile Blast Called Deliberate
LEAD: The Air Force has denied an assertion by the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee that a safety officer destroyed a Navy Trident 2 submarine missile by mistake.


Yale Given Letters Written by Gandhi
LEAD: Fifty letters and postcards written by Mahatma Gandhi to a woman he grew to treat like a daughter have been donated to Yale University.


Reagan Sends Warning To Managua on Rebels
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he ''would not hesitate'' to call a special session of Congress to release $16.5 million in stockpiled United States aid for the Nicaraguan rebels if the Sandinista Government should attack them.


LaRouche and 6 Aides Charged With Mail Fraud
LEAD: Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., the political extremist, and six of his associates were charged today in a Federal conspiracy and mail fraud indictment that accused them of borrowing more than $30 million that Mr.
LaRouche apparently had no intention of repaying.


Producer Prices Up Last Month A Modest 0.4%
LEAD: Prices at the producer level rose a moderate four-tenths of 1 percent in September as higher food prices were offset by a big drop in energy costs, the Labor Department reported today.


James W. Kynes, Executive, 60
LEAD: James W. Kynes, a lawyer, business executive and former Attorney General of Florida, died of stomach cancer Thursday at his home in Tampa.
He was 60 years old.


National Micronetics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Micronetics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
12,293,000
8,751,000
Net inc
b848,000
b156,000
Share earns
.09
.02
b-After tax credits of $332,000 for the latest first quarter and $53,000 for the year-ago period.


Grandparents to Keep Baby
LEAD: The paternal grandparents of a baby born and abandoned in an airplane restroom will be allowed to keep the child in their New York home but the court will retain legal custody of the infant, a court ruled today.


Chicago Crimes Raise Conflicts on Witness's Duty
LEAD: Four times in the last month, riders on Chicago's transit system have witnessed singularly brutal acts of violence: two murders, a rape and a slashing, each of them carried out in full view of horrified onlookers.


Pharmacontrol Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pharmacontrol Corp (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
23,473,000
7,683,000
Net loss
11,303,000
3,014,000


Rates Little Changed by Economic Data
LEAD: Interest rates were little changed yesterday as a welter of fresh statistics on inflation, retail sales and industrial production did not clarify the outlook for the economy.


MNC Financial Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MNC Financial Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
48,522,000
40,101,000
Per share
1.68
1.40
9mo net inc
132,987,000
105,286,000
Per share
4.61
3.68


Hunt, J B Transport Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hunt, J B Transport Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
103,890,000
74,903,000
Net inc
9,879,000
5,560,000
Share earns
.42
.24
9mo rev
290,369,000
206,320,000
Net inc
24,538,000
b21,169,000
Share earns
1.04
.90


Landmark Bank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Bank for Savings
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
438,000
373,000
Per share
.34
.29
9mo net inc
1,108,000
1,097,000
Per share
.86
.85


Helix Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helix Technology Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
13,742,000
12,469,000
Net inc
884,000
937,000
Share earns
.35
.37
9mo sales
40,365,000
36,209,000
Net inc
2,635,000
2,361,000
Share earns
1.05
.94


Western Micro Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Micro Technology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
25,877,000
17,608,000
Net inc
840,000
82,000
Share earns
.29
.03
6mo sales
50,733,000
31,657,000
Net inc
1,569,000
95,000
Share earns
.54
.04


90 Co-ops Suffering Through a Strike
LEAD: A strike by a major building maintenance union has left thousands of cooperative apartments in Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island without heat or hot water.
Deliveries, garbage pickup and other services have also been disrupted.


Time to Start on High-Speed National Rail
LEAD: To the Editor:


Altera Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altera Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
10,109,000
5,513,000
Net inc
2,020,000
635,000
Share earns
.10
.04
9mo sales
27,199,000
14,124,000
Net inc
4,947,000
1,255,000
Share earns
.27
.08


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''I think Bush can start measuring the curtains in the White House.'' - Gov.
Michael Castle of Delaware, a Republican.  [ 1:2. ]


77 Aliens, in Debt to Smugglers, Found in Captivity in California
LEAD: A three-bedroom house here became a debtors' prison for 77 illegal aliens who could not afford to pay the smugglers who brought them into the United States from Mexico, the authorities said Thursday.


New Lubricant Permits Use of a CFC Substitute
LEAD: Allied-Signal Inc., based in Morris Township, N.J., has developed a lubricant that it says will allow refrigeration systems to use a substitute for chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's.


Bush-Dukakis Debate: For Workers in Texas, Little to Cheer
LEAD: They had spent the early part of the evening assembling lawn signs for state and local candidates, arguing and joking and drinking beer as they worked, but when the Presidential debate came on the staple guns and the power saws fell silent, and so did the rank-and-file union members gathered on Houston's southeast side


Answers to Quiz
LEAD: Questions appear on page 36.


Tolland Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tolland Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
309,000
313,000
Per share
.27
.27
9mo net inc
758,000
854,000
Per share
.66
.74


To the Tories, Thatcher Stays to Rule
LEAD: Will the Conservative Party rule Britain into the 21st century?
If you asked that question here this week during the annual conference of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Conservative Party, the answer was yes, and why not?


Banks Children Can Call Their Own
LEAD: A bank in a toy store, or in a caboose, may be hard to take seriously.
But banks for children seem to be more than a novelty.


Noland Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noland Co
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
122,823,468
119,072,260
Net inc
1,923,685
2,423,363
Share earns
.52
.65
9mo sales
344,853,160
321,366,937
Net inc
5,175,005
5,109,687
Share earns
1.40
1.38


Pilot Seized in Paris Flights
LEAD: The police have arrested a man suspected of being the pilot who evaded them for months while making low-level nighttime flights over the capital, news reports said today.
The Air and Border Police arrested Albert Maltret, 53 years old, when he landed Thursday at Saint-Cyr, a private airfield in a Paris suburb, Agence France-Presse reported.


And Now Even E.P.A. Backs Waste Reduction
LEAD: To the Editor:


Andover Togs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andover Togs Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
25,847,000
22,643,000
Net inc
605,000
871,000
Share earns
.19
.26
9mo sales
54,385,000
47,856,000
Net inc
1,081,000
1,186,000
Share earns
.33
.36


Your Money; No Simple Rules On Deferments
LEAD: Many executives and management-level employees must soon decide whether to defer year-end bonuses, and perhaps some salary, into future years or to take the compensation now in expectation that tax rates will increase.


Head of Group At GTE Quits
LEAD: The GTE Corporation has said that James L. Broadhead resigned on Thursday as president of the company's Telephone Operating Group, which last year accounted for about $12 billion of the company's $15.4 billion in sales.
Mr.
Broadhead had held the post for two years.


Dime Bank Dividend
LEAD: The Dime Savings Bank of New York, which converted to stock ownership from mutual ownership two years ago, declared its first quarterly cash dividend of 15 cents a share.
The dividend was declared despite weaker earnings than bank officials expected.
Earnings in the third quarter of $18.3 million, or 80 cents a share, were down 29.1 percent from $25.8 million, or $1.13 a share, a year earlier.


Gay Theater Ordered Closed
LEAD: A judge yesterday ordered shut the Cinema 14 Theater, which featured gay pornographic movies and tolerated sex on the premises.
The judge, Acting Justice Karla Moskowitz of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, called the theater at Third Avenue and 14th Street a public nuisance and an AIDS risk.
She cited the finding of four city inspectors who reported ''high-risk'' sex there.


Smith, A O Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith, A O Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
236,605,000
222,320,000
Net inc
997,000
b735,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
753,111,000
734,227,000
Net inc
12,566,000
c16,421,000
Share earns
1.18
1.61


Review/Pop; Cello With Pots and Pans
LEAD: Tom Cora, a cellist, and Peter Hollinger, a percussionist, presented two short, intense sets at the Knitting Factory on Wednesday night; though the music was freely improvised, the two musicians moved nimbly from groove to groove, from dense noise to spacious melodies.


Estimate Board Votes Second Prison Barge
LEAD: The New York City Board of Estimate voted early yesterday to spend more than $17 million to buy a second floating prison barge, which the Koch administration hopes will help relieve jail overcrowding by housing about 400 inmates starting next spring.


At Core of Dodgers' Ascent Is Gibson's Intensity
LEAD: The game was over, the pennant was won and the Dodgers' celebration was in full and foamy fury Wednesday night.
One of the star players, though, the spiritual and often the batting leader, the man given huge credit for helping lift the team from fifth place last season to the National League championship, was nowhere to be found.


U.S., FOR DECADES, LET URANIUM LEAK AT WEAPON PLANT
LEAD: Government officials overseeing a nuclear weapon plant in Ohio knew for decades that they were releasing thousands of tons of radioactive uranium waste into the environment, exposing thousands of workers and residents in the region, a Congressional panel said today.


58% of Television Viewers Watched Presidential Debate
LEAD: About 58 percent of those watching television during the time period of Thursday night's Presidential debate were tuned into the event, the A.C.
Nielsen Company reported today.
The findings were based on overnight figures from the 16 largest markets.


Miami News May Be Closed
LEAD: Cox Enterprises Inc. said today that it would close The Miami News at the end of the year if it did not find a buyer for the money-losing afternoon newspaper.


Inquiry on Offshore Accounts Disclosed in Pentagon Case
LEAD: Federal investigators looking into fraud and bribery in the Pentagon's procurement of weapons have learned about the existence of ''foreign or offshore accounts.'' Such bank accounts, a Federal law-enforcement official said, are frequently used to hide the source and ownership of money.


Dime Savings Bank of NY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dime Savings Bank of NY (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b18,278,000
c25,765,000
Per share
.80
1.13
Shares outst
22,784,000
22,617,000
9mo net inc
b65,081,000
c80,069,000
Per share
2.86
3.55
Shares outst
22,772,000
22,530,000


Desoto Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Desoto Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
98,001,000
99,203,000
Net loss
2,602,000
c1,854,000
Share earns
-
.47
9mo sales
317,476,000
308,243,000
Net inc
b4,801,000
10,850,000
Share earns
1.20
2.74


Bank of San Francisco Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of San Francisco Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
377,000
304,000
Per share
.20
.17
9mo net inc
1,039,000
b117,000
Per share
.56
-
b-Net loss


Designcraft Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Designcraft Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,803,000
12,930,000
Net loss
54,000
b204,000
Share earns
-
.08
6mo sales
22,718,000
30,717,000
Net loss
221,000
b1,494,000
Share earns
-
.60


White House Welcome for Space Shuttle Astronauts  From left were Capt. Frederick H. Hauck of the   Navy, John M. Lounge, Col. Richard O. Covey of the Air Force, Mr. Reagan, Lieut. Col. David C. Hilmers of the Marines and George D. Nelson. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
19,399,000
16,771,000
Per share
.91
.77
9mo net inc
55,051,000
45,702,000
Per share
2.58
2.11


Health &amp; Rehabilitation Properies Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health &amp; Rehabilitation Properies Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,773,000
2,721,000
Net inc
1,823,000
1,502,000
Share earns
.18
.22
Shares outst
9,998,000
6,835,000
9mo rev
13,981,000
6,837,000
Net inc
5,904,000
4,498,000
Share earns
.59
.66


Williams, W W Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Williams, W W Co
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
26,728,000
26,766,000
Net inc
514,000
413,000
Share earns
.53
.43
9mo rev
78,970,000
82,077,000
Net inc
1,132,000
744,000
Share earns
1.16
.77


New York's Highest Court Rejects Family's Plea in Right-to-Die Case
LEAD: New York's highest court ruled yesterday that an elderly woman who has suffered debilitating strokes must be kept alive through artificial feeding, even though her daughters insist that she would prefer to die.


U.S. HOLDING BACK PART OF U.N. DUES OVER BUDGET ISSUE
LEAD: The Reagan Administration has told Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar that it plans to keep withholding part of its United Nations dues this year until the organizationapproves a new austerity budget and other administrative changes, American and United Nations officials said today.


More Honors for Ritter
LEAD: Louise Ritter shared her Olympic gold medal with the townspeople who stood behind her through years of frustration.


Merchants Bank of NY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants Bank of NY
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,763,650
2,468,090
Per share
1.67
1.49
9mo net inc
7,803,443
7,010,903
Per share
4.72
4.24
The per share earnings were adjusted for a 5-for-4 stock split paid July 20, 1988.


IMC Fertilizer Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IMC Fertilizer Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
268,600,000
226,400,000
Net inc
31,500,000
b27,100,000
Share earns
1.26
-
b-Includes a gain of $2.4 million from the disposition of assets.
The company went public in July.


Hearing Aid Implanted in Middle Ear
LEAD: Many people with hearing problems have found hearing aids to be almost as frustrating as the impairment itself.
They complain of irritating feedback and distorted sound.


No Plan Yet on Pullout, Cuba and Angola Say
LEAD: Angolan and Cuban diplomats have denied reports that they have agreed with South Africa on a schedule for the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola.


Bush, Fighting Back Glee, Vows Tough Battle to End
LEAD: Vice President Bush's campaign began a battle against over-confidence today, with the Presidential nominee pledging to run hard over the remaining three weeks and aides publicly predicting a close race.


2 More Palestinian Deaths Tied to Uprising
LEAD: Two Palestinians wounded in clashes with troops in the occupied West Bank died today, Arabs and hospital officials said.


Post-Debate Rally
LEAD: Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate, greeting supporters at a rally in Houston Thursday night after the broadcast debate between Presidential candidates. (AP)


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
73,267,000
60,452,000
Net inc
1,776,000
1,298,000
Share earns
.33
.24
6mo sales
146,166,000
118,113,000
Net inc
3,650,000
2,100,000
Share earns
.68
.39


Reservoir Levels Fall After Torrid Summer
LEAD: After a summer and early fall of skimpy rainfall and heavy demand for water, reservoirs throughout the metropolitan region have fallen to below normal levels.


Lemieux Leads Canadiens Past Devils
LEAD: The seventh opener at Byrne Meadowlands Arena will be remembered for two reasons by the Devils and their fans.


CXR Telecom Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CXR Telecom Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,500,000
3,500,000
Net inc
411,000
301,000
Share earns
.10
.08


ISC Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ISC Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 23
1988
1987
Revenue
39,807,000
44,122,000
Net inc
1,147,000
2,223,000
Share earns
.08
.14
Shares outst
14,481,000
15,944,000


EX-JACKSON GROUP TO SETTLE CLAIMS
LEAD: The educational program formerly headed by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson agreed today to pay $550,000 to the Government to settle long-standing civil claims that the group had not lived up to the terms of several grants and contracts awarded in the late 1970's and early 1980's.


Castle &amp; Cooke Head Offers Allegheny Plan
LEAD: David H. Murdock, the chairman of Castle &amp; Cooke Inc., today joined the list of potential suitors who want to obtain control of Allegheny International Inc., the consumer products company that is in the midst of Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings.


Final Effort by Icahn and Union Seen
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn and the head of the machinists' union at Eastern Airlines plan to meet over the weekend in a final effort to determine whether they can come up with an offer to acquire Eastern, union sources close to the talks said yesterday.


Meridian National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian National Corp
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,038,743
6,773,516
Net loss
34,199
b176,180
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
29,578,645
13,198,501
Net inc
145,916
c501,079
Share earns
.03
12
b-Net income


Another Billion-Dollar Savings Rescue in Texas
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Bank Board today announced its sixth billion-dollar rescue of insolvent savings institutions in Texas this year.


Management Drops Bid for Wickes
LEAD: The Wickes Companies said a $573.8 million takeover offer from a management group led by its chairman, Sanford C. Sigoloff, had been dropped today because of the company's deteriorating earnings.


Temple-Inland Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Temple-Inland Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
454,600,000
419,100,000
Net inc
53,000,000
38,200,000
Share earns
1.90
1.24
Shares outst
27,870,000
30,679,000
9mo sales
1,328,800,000
1,204,800,000
Net inc
151,700,000
107,700,000
Share earns
5.40
3.50
Shares outst
27,859,000
30,763,000


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, OCTOBER 15, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Atlantic Express reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Express
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
63,593,867
41,197,785
Net inc
b1,652,049
394,356
Share earns
.31
.08
b-Includes a $1,027,317 gain from an accounting change.


Finns Clarify Deng Remarks On a Chinese-Soviet Summit
LEAD: Revising an earlier statement, the Finnish Foreign Minister says Deng Xiaoping told a visiting delegation that a Chinese-Soviet summit meeting is possible, but not necessarily likely, in 1989.


Cleveland-Cliffs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cleveland-Cliffs Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
105,800,000
110,000,000
Net inc
b13,800,000
d100,000
Share earns
1.19
-
9mo rev
296,000,000
297,000,000
Net inc
b32,300,000
cd26,900,000
Share earns
2.25
-


U.S.-Soviet Grain Talks
LEAD: The latest round of American-Soviet talks on a new long-term grain agreement ended abruptly in London today without an accord, but the American side said a deal was still possible.


Occupation Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Occupation Medical
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,908,143
1,373,398
Net inc
401,216
b285,290
Share earns
.16
-
b-Net loss


2 Premieres
LEAD: The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center is to open its 20th season at 5 P.M. tomorrow at Alice Tully Hall with a program that includes premieres of works by Ned Rorem and Leon Kirchner.
Mr.
Rorem's work, ''Hail and Farewell,'' is scored for two trumpets, two trombones and organ and was composed as a tribute to Charles Wadsworth, who is leaving his post as director of the society after this season.


At New Docklands, a Tale of 2 Cities
LEAD: The wall, a brick sentinel that shields one world from another, stands as a symbol of sweeping change and resultant bitter divisions in London's once-derelict dock area.


Incstar Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Incstar Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,603,100
3,464,800
Net inc
505,300
b120,900
Share earns
.15
.04
6mo sales
9,470,500
5,875,500
Net inc
1,011,600
b244,000
Share earns
.31
.08
b-After extraordinary charges of $30,100 for the quarter and $8,500 for the 6 months.


NBD Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBD Bancorp Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
58,024,000
48,992,000
Per share
1.24
1.05
9mo net inc
165,638,000
112,544,000
Per share
3.52
2.39
The company said net income in 1987 was negatively affected by a special $54 million provision for possible credit losses on Latin American loans, which reduced after-tax income by $32.4 million, or 69 cent a share.


Superior Industries International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Superior Industries International Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
45,140,000
37,404,000
Net inc
2,530,000
1,655,000
Share earns
.40
.25
9mo rev
143,484,000
122,208,000
Net inc
8,801,000
6,757,000
Share earns
1.38
1.03


Redman Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Redman Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
94,542,000
97,254,000
Net loss
619,000
b380,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo sales
191,099,000
196,793,000
Net inc
1,348,000
2,497,000
Share earns
.14
.26


Health Images Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Images Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,082,303
4,193,588
Net inc
559,387
378,079
Share earns
.08
.05
9mo rev
19,334,647
9,967,062
Net inc
1,570,641
b1,087,601
Share earns
.23
-


Hibernia Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hibernia Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
452,988
290,755
Per share
.56
.36
9mo net inc
1,043,310
1,023,862
Per share
1.30
1.28


Yankee Companies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Yankee Companies Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,811,000
3,832,000
Net inc
b1,282,000
c26,099,000
Share earns
.13
-
Yr rev
19,306,000
16,244,000
Net inc
b9,381,000
c50,253,000
Share earns
1.45
-


Excerpts From the Court of Appeals Decision on a Patient's Right to Die
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the New York State Court of Appeals decision on the right of a patient to refuse life-sustaining measures.
The majority opinion was written by Chief Judge Sol Wachtler, joined by Associate Judges Judith S. Kaye, Vito J. Titone and Joseph W. Bellacosa.
A concurring opinion was written by Associate Judge Stewart F.


Senate Approves 11 Federal Court Nominees
LEAD: The Senate today approved 11 of President Reagan's judicial appointments, but at least 15 others have virtually no chance of approval before the chamber adjourns for the year.


Dukakis Returns to Stump As Aides Paint Rosy Picture
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis returned to the campaign trail today with a barrage of new assaults on Vice President Bush, while his aides fought the notion that the Democratic Presidential nominee had lost a critical opportunity in Thursday night's debate.


Jazz at Cooper Union
LEAD: Cooper Union will have a free jazz concert at 8 P.M.
Oct. 26 in the Great Hall, 7 East Seventh Street, at Third Avenue.
John Lindberg, a bassist, and his Revolving Ensemble will perform.
Information: 353-4195.


Drug Arrests Near Schools
LEAD: In a crackdown on drug dealing near schools, police officers have arrested 83 people, seized 10 firearms including an AK-47 assault rifle and confiscated five and a half ounces of rock cocaine, or crack.
In the sweep Wednesday 250 police officers posed as drug buyers near elementary and junior high schools.


More Presidential News Conferences Urged
LEAD: The Presidential news conference has fallen into ''a serious state of disarray'' under President Reagan, who has held relatively few such conferences, a Harvard commission says.
But a Reagan spokesman said Thursday that the report gave too much emphasis to the number of news conferences.


Senate, in Vote of 87 to 3, Adopts Anti-Drug Measure
LEAD: The Senate today passed legislation that would gradually shift priorities in the fight against illegal drugs from law enforcement to education, rehabilitation and other efforts to reduce demand.


Intech Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intech Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 16
1988
1987
Sales
3,067,000
2,961,000
Net inc
1,000
b29,000
6mo sales
6,845,000
6,706,000
Net inc
104,000
131,000
Share earns
.03
.04
b-Net loss  Shares earnings reflect a 5 percent stock dividend paid in August.


Ponce Federal Bank FSB reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ponce Federal Bank FSB
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,955,515
2,465,641
Per share
.40
.45
Shares outst
4,910,219
5,452,568
9mo net inc
6,459,471
9,219,930
Per share
1.30
1.69
Shares outst
4,966,000
5,440,100


Koch Says City Is Expanding Minority-Group Hiring Effort
LEAD: The number of minority-group people working for New York City has increased 14 percentage points in the last 10 years, Mayor Koch said yesterday as he announced plans to expand the number of female, black, Hispanic and Asian managers.


Review/Theater; In a Rameau Opera-Ballet, A French Baroque Challenge
LEAD: In spite of Jean-Philippe Rameau's high repute in music history as a theorist and composer, his operas have proved extremely resistant to revival in modern times.
The French Baroque style, with its interweaving of singing and ballet, has not found the wide audience that scholars believe is due it, possibly because too many productions have been hampered by a deadly combination of amateurish singers and ill-trained dancers.


College Football Notebook; Many Points Likely at Army
LEAD: When Army played Lafayette in 1986 and 1987, a total of 27 touchdowns and 190 points were scored, and 1,945 yards were gained.
The Cadets won both games, by 56-48 and 49-37.
Everyone expects more of the same today at West Point, and Bill Russo, Lafayette's coach, can explain why.


Quayle Says Dukakis Isn't Courteous, Either
LEAD: Senator Dan Quayle complained today that Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis did not have ''the common courtesy'' in Thursday night's Presidential debate to say a kind word about Vice President Bush.


The A's Revolve Around Canseco's Excellence
LEAD: So much has been spoken and written that it has already begun to sound like legend, as if Jose Canseco is somehow more myth than man.
They say he is the strongest player in baseball, that he has the greatest natural gifts, the swiftest and the smoothest swing, the most fearsome arm.
Exactly where the truth lies is difficult to tell.


United Investors Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Investors Management (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
71,264,000
56,810,000
Net inc
b11,252,000
c9,020,000
Share earns
.30
.24
9mo rev
207,823,000
170,003,000
Net inc
b30,739,000
c26,924,000
Share earns
.80
.71


In Winner's Circle, Jockey Is Mourned
LEAD: The Belmont Park bugler, who calls the horses to the post nine times a day, blew taps yesterday morning as 200 race-trackers gathered in the winner's circle to mourn the death of Michael Venezia, the 43-year-old jockey who was killed in the fifth race Thursday.


Review/Dance; New Graham Work Revisits American Indian
LEAD: The world of Martha Graham is a creative universe and in her wondrous new ''Night Chant'' she has delved into the American Indian experience and produced a work of magic theater.


Brinkmann Instruments Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brinkmann Instruments Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
16,981,000
18,230,000
Net inc
994,000
1,319,000
Share earns
.27
.36
9mo sales
56,172,000
50,661,000
Net inc
3,174,000
2,543,000
Share earns
.86
.69


Japan Concern Bankrupt
LEAD: Nippon Tochi, a real estate company noted for stock speculation, filed for bankruptcy Thursday, citing debts equivalent to $1.2 billion, a court official said.
Nippon Tochi asked the Osaka District Court for protection from 256 creditors.
Nippon Tochi's petition, which declared 156 billion yen in liabilities, was the third-largest bankruptcy filing ever made in Japan.


Koch Nominates Transit Adviser For Taxi Post
LEAD: Mayor Koch yesterday nominated his transportation adviser, Jack S. Lusk, for a seat on the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission, and if the City Council approves that appointment, Mr.
Koch said he would then make Mr.
Lusk the commission's new chairman.


Torchmark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Torchmark Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
411,773,000
405,819,000
Net inc
b46,827,000
c60,874,000
Share earns
.82
.93
Shares outst
54,968,000
63,149,000
9mo rev
1,246,017,000
1,197,570,000
Net inc
b140,910,000
c158,223,000
Share earns
2.42
2.32
Shares outst
55,861,000
66,939,000


Retail Sales Show Decline For Second Straight Month
LEAD: Retail sales in September dropped for the second consecutive month, the Government said today, confirming the view of some economists that the confidence of American consumers is slipping.


Review/Theater; This Florence Nightingale Knew How to Fight a War
LEAD: As Lytton Strachey made clear in his book ''Eminent Victorians,'' Florence Nightingale was not the delicate ''Lady With the Lamp'' of Victorian legend but a medical pioneer who was both ''fierce and passionate.'' In the real Florence Nightingale, he said, there was ''more that was interesting'' and also ''less that was agreeable.


Honeywell Sues Unisys on Units
LEAD: Honeywell Inc. has filed a $350 million lawsuit against the Unisys Corporation, accusing the giant computer maker of artificially inflating the financial strength of four aerospace operations that Honeywell bought for more than $1 billion in 1986.
In September, Unisys charged that Honeywell had failed to pay $565,000 it said was due under the sales agreement.


Evert Plans to Play
LEAD: Chris Evert, who spent last summer in uncertainty about whether 1988 would her last year of competitive tennis, has apparently decided to continue playing.
Evert, 33 years old, told The Stuttgarter Nachtrichten, a West German newspaper, that she plans to continue in competition. ''I will play for at lest another year, perhaps not so many tournaments as before, but certainly the important ones,'' she said.


Boise Cascade Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boise Cascade Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,037,250,000
997,940,000
Net inc
71,900,000
50,390,000
Share earns
1.58
1.02
9mo rev
3,059,810,000
2,845,160,000
Net inc
212,670,000
125,770,000
Share earns
4.64
2.50


International Minerals &amp; Chemcial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Minerals &amp; Chemcial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
217,600,000
199,600,000
Net inc
b28,800,000
6,000,000
Share earns
1.03
.07
Shares outst
24,309,000
27,338,000
b-Included an after-tax gain of $17.5 million, or 72 cents a share, related to IFL's sale of shares to the public in July 1988 and the subsequent redemption of IFL's exchangeable preferred stock, series A.


A Device to Correct Rhythm of the Heart
LEAD: Todd J. Cohen, a cardiology fellow at the Stanford University Medical Center in Palo Alto, Calif., won a patent this week for a device to correct the rhythm of a malfunctioning heart.


Robert Gross, 83, Heart Surgeon
LEAD: Dr.
Robert E. Gross, a cardiovascular surgeon who did pioneering work in the field of cardiac surgery, died Tuesday at the Newfield House Nursing Home in Plymouth, Mass.
He was 83 years old.


Craig Raupe, 63, Dies; Aide to House Speaker
LEAD: Craig Raupe, a former top aide to House Speaker Jim Wright, died of a burst aorta today at Washington Hospital Center.
He was 63 years old.


West Mass Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Mass Bankshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
253,000
454,000
Per share
.19
.32
9mo net inc
652,000
1,191,000
Per share
.49
.84
The bank said the latest quarter reflected the one-time start-up costs of a new computer system.


Bush vs. Bush on the Environment
LEAD: Though you would never know it from the Presidential ''debates'', the environmental question is as significant as any now facing the American voter, and more significant than most.
The cumulative destruction and corruption of the earth's resources on the land, in the seas, and throughout the atmosphere present as much of a challenge to the survival of the human race as nuclear war.


Aim Telephones reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aim Telephones
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
12,642,000
7,623,000
Net inc
309,000
331,000
Share earns
.06
.08
Shares outst
5,521,000
3,985,000
6mo rev
22,237,000
14,568,000
Net inc
549,000
b839,000
Share earns
.11
.21
Shares outst
5,159,000
3,947,000


Campbell Soup
LEAD: The Campbell Soup Company said it had acquired a Belgian seafood processor for an undisclosed amount of cash.
Morubel N.V., based in Ostende, Belgium, is a privately held supplier of frozen prawns to major retail chains and food service customers in Belgium, Britain, France, Germany and Italy.
It had 1987 sales of $44 million.


Vehicle Output Rises
LEAD: Domestic auto makers were scheduled to produce 234,027 cars and light trucks this week, up from 233,484 last week, Ward's Automotive Reports said.
This week's output is higher than the week a year earlier, in which 231,759 cars and light trucks were produced, the trade journal said.


Dollar in Another Decline; Weeklong Momentum Cited
LEAD: The dollar continued its steady decline yesterday and some traders said it might take central bank intervention to stop the fall.


Fresh Air and Flowers in Manhattan


Brothers Come of Age With New Bid
LEAD: Because of their youth, the Rales brothers were known as ''raiders in short pants'' when they came out of nowhere and began to take over a string of manufacturing companies nearly a decade ago.
Now, with their $2.6 billion bid for Interco Inc., the brothers have joined the big boys in the front ranks of the hostile takeover game.


Lojack Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lojack Corp
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,176,100
458,804
Net inc
b55,526
c248,323
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
2,179,931
1,057,247
Net inc
b164,570
c279,437
Share earns
.02
-
b-Includes tax credits of $12,000 and $38,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Genocide Treaty Backed


Unimpressive Showing
LEAD: Keith Hernandez and Gregg Jefferies of the Mets, who were coached as teen-agers in California youth baseball games by Tony Santora, may not be looking forward to seeing their old coach soon, after the way they performed in the final game of the National League playoff series against the Los Angeles


Nixon-Era Plan for Children Didn't Include Concentration Camps
LEAD: To the Editor:


Speculation Pushes Price Of Oil Higher
LEAD: Oil futures prices soared again yesterday in reaction to speculation that OPEC members would reach an agreement on oil production cuts at meetings this coming week.


Park Communications Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Park Communications Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
39,112,000
37,207,000
Net inc
3,947,000
3,886,000
Share earns
.29
.28
9mo rev
117,377,000
108,089,000
Net inc
12,703,000
11,006,000
Share earns
.92
.80


Polaroid Loses Shamrock Motion
LEAD: Shamrock Holdings Inc.'s hostile takeover bid for the Polaroid Corporation gained ground today when a Delaware court denied the photo products company's motion to halt Shamrock's $2.4 billion offer.


Easy Finish on Fifth Avenue
LEAD: For two dozen world-class runners, the long track-and-field season, which took some of them to the Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, will end today at the intersection of 62nd Street and Fifth Avenue, the finish line of the Mercedes Mile.


First Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn of Larange, Ga reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn of Larange, Ga
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
429,141
353,775
Share earns
.53
.44
9mo net inc
1,461,769
1,143,726
Share earns
1.82
1.42


First Indiana Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Indiana Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,588,000
1,161,000
Per share
.71
.53
9mo net inc
3,487,000
3,424,000
Per share
1.56
1.55


Bridge; American open team remains in second place after two victories.
LEAD: The American open team held steady in qualifying play today at the World Team Olympiad.
It tied 15-15 with Panama and then defeated Turkey 19-11 and Kenya 25-2, retaining second position in its pool behind the Greek team.
The leaders were: first, Greece, 366; second, the United States, 358; third, Austria, 351.5; fourth, Norway, 330.7; fifth, Sweden, 323, and sixth,


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 2-5, 32  Washington will withhold some dues to the United Nations this year until a committee approves a new austerity budget and other administrative changes, the Reagan Administration said.
Page 1  Mikhail Gorbachev may not succeed in his efforts to transform the Soviet economy because ''the downward spiral of the Soviet economy'' has not slowed, said Robert M.


All-California World Series Poses Difficulties for NBC
LEAD: When the New York Mets lost the National League Championship Series Wednesday night, they gave the Los Angeles Dodgers a pennant and the National Broadcasting Company a headache.


Sure Loser in the Debate: The Format
LEAD: Overnight polls show, some by nearly 2-to-1 margins, that Vice President Bush got the better of Governor Dukakis in Thursday's Presidential debate.
Mr.
Dukakis's forces concede nothing.
There was, however, one certain loser: the public, which could have learned more about both men in a less rigid format, one offering the chance of spontaneity.


Protesters Attack U.S. Building in South Korea


Dash Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dash Industries Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,831,157
4,553,137
Net inc
61,570
16,044
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
13,642,559
13,200,376
Net inc
83,914
58,753
Share earns
.01
.01


Bank of Delaware Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Delaware Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,647,000
4,405,000
Per share
.74
.59
9mo net inc
14,207,000
12,353,000
Per share
1.87
1.65
The latest third quarter and 9 months included a pre-tax gain of $1,430,000, or 12 cents a share, after tax, from the sale of its portion of the Local Bank Credit Bureau.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Cannon Group Inc., Los Angeles, a film company, said it would build about 30 multiscreen movie theaters in Britain in the next five years.


Battle of Algiers, Revisited
LEAD: A week of deadly rioting against austerity measures in Algeria has shaken the complacency of a regime inclined to live on the myths of a revolutionary past.
President Chadli Benjedid has responded sensibly with a program of accelerated political and economic reforms.
Americans and all others who value stability in this strategically situated country ought to root for the success of his attempts at perestroika,


In Yugoslavia, a Charge of 'Stalinist!'
LEAD: The President of one Yugoslav republic accused the party leader of another today of aspiring to strong leadership based on a Stalinist concept.


About New York; For Old Liberals, Harry's the One, But Mike'll Do
LEAD: Meyer Haspel, 77-year-old youngster and son of the hosiery and underwear king of Orchard Street, has his convictions.
As a teen-ager, he organized workers in his father's two stores into a union, nearly provoking filicide.


Enviropact Inc reports earnings for 1988
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enviropact Inc (AMEX)
1988
1987
Revenue
9,553,074
4,389,641
Net loss
620,110
190,629
Yr rev
35,154,619
14,062,740
Net inc
225,564
284,411
Share earns
.07
.11
Shares outst
3,278,802
2,566,737


First Alabama Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Alabama Bancshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
15,199,000
13,930,000
Per share
.46
.42
9mo net inc
43,189,000
41,744,000
Per share
1.31
1.26


M.T.A. and Abrams Merge Metro-North Investigations
LEAD: A two-year state investigation into the troubled Metro-North railroad police force has been expanded and merged with an internal inquiry by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the parent of the railroad, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.


Tyson Files for Divorce
LEAD: Mike Tyson contended in divorce papers filed in Trenton yesterday that his wife, Robin Givens, had no intention of making their marriage successful and married him for his money and fame.


Biogen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biogen Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,800,000
2,692,000
Net inc
361,000
b6,990,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
23,846,000
9,572,000
Net loss
1,440,000
19,211,000
b-Net loss


All the Comforts In Dress Shoes
LEAD: The crisp autumn weather should bring the walk-to-work brigade back to the streets.
But what will it take to get them to give up their athletic shoes?


Interspec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interspec Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,867,000
11,221,000
Net inc
b955,000
c516,000
Share earns
.15
-
9mo sales
43,808,000
33,518,000
Net inc
b2,710,000
c546,000
Share earns
.44
-
b-Includes tax credits of $328,000 for the quarter and $531,000 for the 9 months.


Servico Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Servico Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
56,784,000
44,932,000
Net loss
b2,426,000
568,000
Yr rev
195,031,000
180,801,000
Net loss
b6,029,000
c1,418,000
Share earns
-
.37
b-After a $2,666,000 credit from the repurchase of bonds for the both periods.


Focus on Game 1
LEAD:  Dave Stewart  The Oakland starter will be making his first World Series appearance.
He is the only pitcher to win 20 or more games in each of the last two seasons.
Stewart, who once pitched for the Dodgers, started twice in this year's playoff, winning once.
Regular Season
$
W
L
IP
H
SO
BB
ERA
21
12
275Z
240
192
110
3.23


National Commerce Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Commerce Bancorporation (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,337,000
4,592,000
Per share
.59
.52
Shares outst
9,046,000
8,900,000
9mo net inc
14,962,000
13,005,000
Per share
1.65
1.46
Shares outst
9,047,000
8,882,000


Defiance Precision Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Defiance Precision Products Inc
Qtr to June 25
1988
1987
Revenue
13,322,000
12,643,000
Net loss
b580,000
c2,729,000
Yr rev
54,029,000
35,333,000
Net loss
b4,697,000
c2,960,000
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $310,000 and $1,498,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Third TV Debate Brings Change in Commentary
LEAD: The final Presidential debate produced a significant change in coverage by network television: After deliberately not picking a winner in the two previous debates, the networks declared George Bush the victor Thursday night.


Operator for Bryant Park Restaurant Named
LEAD: The operators of the Gotham Restaurant &amp; Bar in Greenwich Village were chosen yesterday to build and run at least one of two restaurants in Bryant Park as part of a restoration project.


Fairfield-Noble Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fairfield-Noble Corp
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
14,800,000
12,951,000
Net inc
538,000
1,726,000
Share earns
.23
.75


Ross Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ross Industries Inc
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,162,453
1,492,785
Net inc
76,133
b258,407
Share earns
.06
-
Yr sales
6,284,855
5,147,377
Net inc
74,864
b386,752
Share earns
.06
-
b-Net loss


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 58.


Teco Energy Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teco Energy Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
291,200,000
277,100,000
Net inc
41,800,000
40,100,000
Share earns
.74
.71
9mo rev
784,500,000
732,500,000
Net inc
98,700,000
93,300,000
Share earns
1.74
1.65


System Uses Seawater To Make Methanol Fuel
LEAD: John H. Perry Jr., founder of Perry Oceanographics Inc., in Riviera Beach, Fla., won patent approval this week for a system to produce methanol fuel from seawater.


Review/Dance; 3 Stages of Young Love, In New Work at the Joyce
LEAD: Rick McCullough's ''By Lamplight'' received its world premiere on Thursday in a performance by the North Carolina Dance Theater at the Joyce Theater.
The dance - or ones like it - has been seen before in countless excursions into the gauzy ballet dreamland of young contemporary lovers.
But the piece makes that familiar genre seem newly fresh and vivid.


St. Martin-in-the-Fields
LEAD: The Academy of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields, directed by its concertmaster, Iona Brown, is to perform a Purcell Chaconne (Z. 730), Schoenberg's ''Verklarte Nacht,'' Britten's ''Simple'' Symphony and a chamber version of Beethoven's ''Grosse Fuge'' (Op. 133) at 3 P.M. tomorrow at Avery Fisher Hall.
Tickets are $20 to $11.


American Brands Pursuit Is Cleared
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission will not block Brooke Partners, an entity controlled by Bennett S. LeBow, from buying more than $15 million of shares of American Brands or from possibly seeking control.
A 30-day waiting period ended yesterday in which the F.T.C. could have requested additional information on the stock purchases.


Franklin Electric Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Electric Co Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
42,031,000
39,841,000
Net inc
b3,165,000
c3,150,000
Share earns
.88
.85
9mo sales
127,521,000
111,458,000
Net inc
b9,173,000
c8,109,000
Share earns
2.52
2.19


Infotron Systems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Infotron Systems Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
24,166,000
21,949,000
Net inc
1,033,000
656,000
Share earns
.20
.13
9mo rev
69,635,000
59,018,000
Net inc
2,872,000
b2,261,000
Share earns
.55
-


Daughter Tells Of Phone Call Over Myerson
LEAD: Sukhreet Gabel provided dramatic testimony yesterday about confronting her parents after learning that her mother was the judge handling the divorce case of Bess Myerson's companion.


Hyatt Waggoner, 74, Author and Professor
LEAD: Hyatt H. Waggoner, an author and professor emeritus of English at Brown University, died of emphysema Thursday at Hanover Terrace Health Care in New Hampshire.
He was 74 years old and lived in Rochester, Vt.


Charles J. McCarthy, 94, Aircraft Designer
LEAD: Charles J. McCarthy, an aircraft designer and pioneer in the development of naval aircraft, died of heart failure Thursday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 94 years old.


Review/Pop; Jazz Quintet and Cello Choir
LEAD: The action is in the low register in the Ron Carter Nonet, which is appearing through tomorrow at Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street.
Mr.
Carter, a bassist, has supported some of the best jazz ensembles since the 1960's, turning rhythmic underpinnings into consistently inventive countermelodies.


Review/Music; Shostakovich, With Boisterous Bernstein
LEAD: If international orchestras have lost their individual voices, the best of them have become wonders of adaptability.
The New York Philharmonic spent a good deal of Thursday's program at Avery Fisher Hall dealing with the quiet, dignified manner of Shostakovich's A minor Violin Concerto, yet elsewhere it bashed away convincingly at Leonard


A Public Phone Aid For Hearing Impaired
LEAD: Ultra Tec Inc., a manufacturer of telecommunication devices for the deaf, known as called TDD's, has invented a product to help people with hearing impairments to use public telephones.


Many Courts Have Upheld Right to Die
LEAD: Courts have long recognized that ''every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what shall be done with his own body,'' as Judge Benjamin Cardozo wrote in a 1914 New York Court of Appeals decision.
This right is based in the common law and, according to some courts, the constitutional right to privacy.


U.N. Settles Dispute On Korean Speeches
LEAD: It took weeks of high-level negotiations, but finally a compromise was worked out allowing both South and North Korea to address the General Assembly next week, diplomats say.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about a study by Contact Center, a nonprofit organization, on furloughs granted to Federal and state prisoners included a misstatement, taken from the study, on South Carolina's program.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Lasorda Serves Pasta With Baloney
LEAD: In the hours before the main event, Tommy Lasorda fed a linguine supper to his players and their families to celebrate their victory over the Mets, made an evangelical appearance on the Johnny Carson show, shed crocodile tears in a dozen news conferences and announced that he would pitch his star rookie, Tim Belcher, against Dave Stewart of the favored Oakland Athletics in the opening game of the World Series.


Vampire Kingdom's Fate Hangs in the Balance
LEAD:  The Queen of the Damned  By Anne Rice  448 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Sports of The Times: THE WORLD SERIES; Howell and the Bash
LEAD: In recent days, J. Canfield Howell of the Los Angeles Dodgers Inc. has worn a cloud over his head like a hat.


DPL Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DPL Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
217,261,000
209,050,000
Net inc
17,311,000
30,137,000
Share earns
.42
.72
9mo rev
725,696,000
692,869,000
Net inc
106,955,000
120,046,000
Share earns
2.58
2.89


FNW Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FNW Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,162,000
2,792,000
Per share
.69
.60
9mo net inc
9,283,000
8,079,000
Per share
2.03
1.74
The bank said the figures have been adjusted where applicable to reflect a 100 percent stock dividend paid June 1, 1987.


Chambers Development Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chambers Development Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
35,373,000
15,633,000
Net inc
4,781,000
2,641,000
Share earns
.21
.11
9mo sales
100,706,000
42,662,000
Net inc
b15,636,000
6,805,000
Share earns
.68
.32


Peoples Heritage Fincl Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Heritage Fincl Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,841,000
5,051,000
Per share
.69
.54
9mo net inc
16,271,000
14,450,000
Per share
1.92
1.56


Keystone Heritage Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Heritage Group Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,472,000
1,081,000
Per share
.81
.60
9mo net inc
3,661,000
3,045,000
Per share
2.02
1.68


Ford Incentives
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company became the latest American auto maker to offer cash incentives on some 1989 models.
Ford said it would offer rebates of $300 on 1989 model F-series trucks, with the same amount of cash back still available on 1988 models.
The offer will run through Dec. 5.
Last week, the Chrysler Corporation began a cash incentive program.


This Drug Bill Deserves to Die
LEAD: The 100th Congress appears determined not to leave town without serving up a tough-sounding bill on drugs.
While the Senate has offered sensible new thinking, any final version now will include an expansion of the death penalty that renders the whole bill unacceptable.


Review/Theater; From New Zealand, a Breakfast Fantasy
LEAD: Party talk, snapshots, breakfast -commonplace events - take on new resonances, comic and poignant, in the performance art of the Front Lawn, a superb duo from New Zealand that played its first United States engagement for two nights at Dance Theater Workshop.
In the two-part program on Tuesday, ''The Story of Robert'' and ''The Reason for Breakfast,'' Don McGlashan and Harry Sinclair acted, sang, danced, played guitar and made toast, never taking ordinary activities for granted.


A's Come to Los Angeles Relishing Role of Heavy Favorites
LEAD: They are the favorites here, and they seem to like it.
The Oakland Athletics, a team still being carried by its sweeping momentum in the American League playoff, rolled into Dodger Stadium today and announced plans to make the 85th World Series a brief one.
Meet the heavies. ''Look around,'' said Jose Canseco, the A's right fielder and leading slugger.


Industry Output Fails to Rise For First Time in 7 Months
LEAD: Industrial production in September failed to rise for the first time in seven months, suggesting to economists that the overheated manufacturing sector is cooling a bit.


Rodney Markley, 75, Ex-Lobbyist for Ford
LEAD: Rodney W. Markley Jr., former vice president for governmental relations at the Ford Motor Company, died of bladder cancer Wednesday at the Sunny Bank Anglo-American Hospital, Cannes, France.
He was 75 years old and lived in Theoule sur Mer, France.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Washington Redskins have signed Greg Coleman, 34 years old, a former punter for the Minnesota Vikings and a brother of Vince Coleman, the star base stealer for the St.
Louis Cardinals, as a free agent and released Garey Waiters, a rookie punter. . . .
The Houston Rockets signed first-round draft pick, Derrick Chievous of Missouri, to a three-year contract.


Adams Express Co reports earnings for As of Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adams Express Co (NYSE)
As of Sept 30
1988
1987
Assets
465,837,088
569,770,665
Share earns
17.36
23.45
Assets represent net assets.
The company said net assets per share at Sept. 30, 1988 is after a capital gain distribution of $2.48 a share paid in the preceding 12 months.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Ireland Upsets U.S.: Curtis Strange's hopes of following up his United States Open triumph by leading his country to victory in the $1 million Dunhill Cup in St.
Andrews, Scotland, were dashed yesterday when his top-seeded team was upset by Ireland.
Ronan Rafferty set the eighth-seeded Irish on course for victory when he edged Mark McCumber by one stroke with a one-under-par 71.


Trion Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trion Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
12,023,000
8,310,000
Net inc
844,000
557,000
Share earns
.20
.14
9mo sales
32,840,000
25,354,000
Net inc
2,302,000
1,773,000
Share earns
.56
.44
The latest 9 months included a one- time gain of $366,000, or 9 cents a share, for a reduction in accumulated deferred income taxes.


Review/Pop; Frenetic English Reggae
LEAD: UB40, the English reggae pop group riding the success of its hit ''Red Red Wine,'' played to a sold-out audience at Madison Square Garden on Thursday night.


New Help for the Coroner's Office
LEAD: For years under the direction of Dr.
Elliot Gross, the New York City Chief Medical Examiner's Office was plagued by doubts about its competence and management.
The selection of Dr.
Charles Hirsch to replace Dr.
Gross can begin to restore the office's reputation.


Intermagnetics General Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermagnetics General Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,465,000
6,373,000
Net inc
401,000
b286,000
Share earns
.06
.04
b-Includes about $285,000 of non- recurring income associated with the formation of a joint venture.


Stage II Apparel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stage II Apparel Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
24,453,000
16,984,000
Net inc
1,008,000
793,000
Share earns
.24
.24
Shares outst
4,283,000
3,302,000
Both periods included the results of the apparel division of Sportsotron Inc.


Pension Vesting Change
LEAD: To the Editor:


Suspect Denies Killing Pratt Student
LEAD: A Brooklyn man charged in the shooting death of a Pratt Institute student from Arkansas pleaded not guilty yesterday at his arraignment at State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.


L'Oreal Buys Rubinstein in Shrouded Deal
LEAD: L'Oreal, the French cosmetics conglomerate, has bought Helena Rubinstein Inc., the company named for the famed business executive who built an international cosmetics empire that until 1985 was a major force in the United States industry.


Microcom Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microcom Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
14,260,000
7,637,000
Net inc
1,756,000
b1,330,000
Share earns
.43
.34
6mo sales
26,623,000
15,011,000
Net inc
3,322,000
b2,425,000
Share earns
.81
.66


Giants Hope They Can Feast on Lions
LEAD: Bill Parcells won't admit it, his players won't acknowledge it, and his opponent isn't about to concede it.
But after six straight games against playoff-caliber opponents, the Giants are hoping to have a momentum-building game against the struggling Detroit Lions at Giants Stadium on Sunday.


Senate Votes to Carry Out Treaty Banning Genocide
LEAD: The Senate gave final legislative approval tonight to a change in American laws that will permit the United States to join 97 other countries in an international treaty outlawing genocide.
The treaty was first proposed 40 years ago by President Truman.


Courtyard of the Louvre Opens With Its Pyramid
LEAD: Thousands of visitors streamed into the refurbished courtyard of the Louvre today for their first close look at a giant glass pyramid destined to be the museum's new entrance.


Democrats, on the Day After, See a Long Hard Road Ahead
LEAD: Democrats tried to put as good a face as possible today on the second Presidential debate.
But they didn't seem happy in their work.


First Colonial Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Colonial Bankshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,745,600
2,513,400
Per share
.32
.29
9mo net inc
7,427,500
7,182,900
Per share
.87
.83


Chile Coalition to Back One Candidate
LEAD: The 16-party coalition that led opponents of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet to victory in last week's plebiscite announced today that it would back a single candidate in the presidential elections next year.


Networks Shift on Debate
LEAD: In a significant shift in coverage of the Presidential debates, the television networks declared George Bush the victor Thursday night.
Page 8.


2,550 in Jersey Program Leave Welfare and Find Jobs
LEAD: Governor Kean presented wristwatches to 10 women today, not to mark their retirement but to mark their entry into the work force after years on welfare.


Adaptec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adaptec Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 23
1988
1987
Revenue
15,603,000
15,288,000
Net inc
201,000
1,346,000
Share earns
.03
.18
6mo rev
29,642,000
30,295,000
Net inc
495,000
2,675,000
Share earns
.06
.35


Kentucky Utilities Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kentucky Utilities Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
158,539,000
156,573,000
Net inc
27,339,000
18,770,000
Share earns
.69
.44
9mo rev
431,176,000
428,262,000
Net inc
66,470,000
59,963,000
Share earns
1.64
1.40


Cuomo's War, Lilco's Deal
LEAD: BACK in the spring of 1986, when it appeared Governor Cuomo was destined to be the 1988 candidate for President, Sam Donaldson observed on the David Brinkley show that the Governor could be especially mean-spirited toward those who opposed him on major issues.
Nothing so substantiates Mr.
Donaldson's view as the present controversy looming over the


Fly Me to the Mall
LEAD: THE PERSONAL AIRCRAFT - it's a little noisy, but it does fit in your garage.
The Merlin 200 (above), which has recently been rechristened the Moller 300 (for its inventor, Paul S. Moller), is just about ready for takeoff after nearly $20 million worth of on-again off-again research.
Mr.
Moller, who is president of Moller International, a research and development company in Davis, Calif., has been experimenting with designs for VTOL (vertical takeoff and landing) aircraft since the early 1960's.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 16, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE DARK TOWER: The Gunslinger, by Stephen
King. (Plume/NAL, $10.95.) Volume One of a
series about a young man's pursuit of an evil force.
2
4
MURDER IN THE CIA, by Margaret Truman.
(Fawcett, $4.95.) A C.I.A.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.52
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
7.75
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.05
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.43
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
16.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
16.90
Bank of America, San Francisco
21.25


OLD POSSUN'S POSTBAG
LEAD:  THE LETTERS OF T. S. ELIOT  Volume I, 1898-1922.
Edited by Valerie Eliot.
Illustrated. 639 pp.
San Diego:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $29.95.


MIX OF MATERIALS: PATRICK NAGGAR
LEAD: Patrick Naggar carries pictures of vintage airplanes in his sketchbook. ''The composition and the structural complexity of these early flying machines, as well as the metals they were made of, have always been an inspiration to me,'' says the architect.


A Stylish Tribute
LEAD:  ALICIA  Starring Alicia Alonso (in photo) and dancers of the National Ballet of Cuba.
Directed by Victor Cassaus. 1976.
Video Artists International  70 minutes. $49.95.


Whose Way on the Economy?; Paying the Bill for Present Prosperity
LEAD: Are you better off than you were in 1980?
With George Bush running on the Reagan record and Michael Dukakis running against it, the answers may prove decisive.
But there's a more relevant question: Which candidate is better equipped to build on the strengths of the Reagan economy and shore up its weaknesses?


North Carolina Bridal For Donna Lee Moore
LEAD: Donna Lee Moore, a program administrator at the Department of Education in Washington, and Garrett Raymond McMullin, a senior systems analyst at the Bureau of Labor Statistics in Washington, were married yesterday at the nondenominational Old Church at Tanglewood near Winston-Salem, N.C., by the Rev.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  2 Countries Ease Refunds On V.A.T.


Vic Raschi, Star Yankee Pitcher From 1946 to 1953, Dead at 69
LEAD: Vic Raschi, the big right-hander who joined Allie Reynolds and Eddie Lopat in pitching the Yankees to six World Series championships over eight seasons in the 1940's and the 1950's, died of a heart attack Friday at his home in Groveland, N.Y., outside Geneseo.
He was 69 years old and had lived in the rural upstate area on the shore of Lake


The Tyranny of Things
LEAD: EVERYONE complains of too much technology in modern life.
I say there is not enough.
At least I said this until recently, when I turned over my mattress and discovered my blue sweater, wedged between the footboard and the dust ruffle.
For weeks I had searched for that sweater.


Local's a Dirty Word at Fish Stores
LEAD: AS far as many residents of towns near the Sound are concerned, the farther away a fish was when last it swam, the better.
Fish store customers all seem to have the question ''Where did this fish come from?'' in common.


BEST SELLERS: October 16, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
11
THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom
Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
races to the rescue of an American secret agent.
2
2
4
BREATHING LESSONS, by Anne Tyler.


Dr. Lee E. Morrone Is Wed To Joseph Fierro, a Banker
LEAD: Dr.
Lee Ellen Morrone, the chief resident in obstetrics and gynecology at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, and Joseph Fierro, a vice president of Resource Mortgage Banking in White Plains, were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
The Rev.
John Driscoll performed the Roman


Are Gremlins Causing Those Nasty Spots?
LEAD: SOMETIMES photography seems like an endless chain of things that can go wrong.
Your pictures can be too light, too dark or too contrasty.
They can be out of focus, or blurred because the subject moved, or fuzzy because the camera moved.
They can be too blue or too green.


Can Values Be Taught in Schools?
LEAD: VALUES education has become so fashionable in the last year that it is rapidly overtaking cultural literacy, computer literacy, process writing and critical thinking as the educational fad of choice.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The glazing compound on the windows on the south and west sides of our house deteriorates rapidly, with the compound cracking and curling up.
We have tried several types of compound, but none seems to last more than a couple of years on those windows.
This is especially noticeable along the bottom of each pane on the windows that get the most sunlight.


Which Candidate Understands a Mother's Fear?; Woodstock to Wall St.
LEAD: To the Editor:


Plane to the Game
LEAD: Donald J. Trump has acquired an air carrier that could, among other things, shuttle people back and forth between pieces of Trump-owned real estate.
Mr.
Trump agreed last week to pay $365 million in cash for the Eastern Airlines shuttle.
The highly profitable service now runs between New York City, Washington and Boston, and Mr.


Thomas F. Power, 72; Led U.N. Development
LEAD: Thomas F. Power Jr., a career diplomat with the United Nations and director of the United Nations Development Program for 26 years, died of lung cancer Thursday at the Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N.Y..
He was 72 years old and lived in Somers, N.Y.


Home Design/Magazine Part 2
LEAD:  Special reports in this issue include:  *
Inspirations: Where designers get their ideas.  *
How Medieval and Rennaisance furnishings are emerging from the dark ages.  *
Why architects today borrow from the past.


Iran Is Said to Close Its Border to Iraqi Kurds
LEAD: Iran has closed its border to Kurdish refugees fleeing Iraq through Turkey, a Turkish official says.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  ANTHONY BURNS  The Defeat and Triumph of a Fugitive Slave.
By Virginia Hamilton.  193 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $11.95.  (Ages 10 and up)


Creating the Look
LEAD: Whether it is basket-weave sisal or striped fabric, a piece of blue-and-white porcelain or a Regency chair, each designer uses certain objects on a regular basis - accessories that have become part of his or her signature look.


ABOUT THE ARTS: NEW YORK
LEAD: When someone is described as worldly, it isn't always easy to decide whether he is being praised or blamed.
An ambiguous term, worldliness, nicely poised between vice and virtue.
On the one hand it suggests the world, the flesh and the devil; on the other, the broadly desirable qualities of experience and urbanity.


Use of Alcohol On Yale Campus
LEAD: I would like to correct an error that crept into Robert A. Hamilton's article ''174 Laws Taking Force This Week'' (Sept. 25).
Mr.
Hamilton states that at Yale ''a young man died after having been locked in a car trunk and told to drink a large quantity of alcohol.''


An Election's Approach Brings Out the Indian in India
LEAD: THE formation of a new Indian political party last week was a reminder that sometime in the next year -maybe as early as February - the people of India will go to the polls to cast their votes in a national parliamentary election and in so doing make some important decisions about the country's future.


For Slovenia, Even Protests Are Orderly
LEAD: In this capital of Slovenia, a tranquil and orderly Central European city north of Balkan Yugoslavia, pedestrians wait for the green light before crossing.
Graffiti ask existential questions like, ''Now where to?''


Traffic Note
LEAD: Second Avenue between 14th and 34th Streets will be closed today from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Autumn Jubilee street fair.


An Old Hospital Moves to Meet The Needs of a New Generation
LEAD: The New York Foundling Hospital, a 119-year-old charity that cares for handicapped, abused and neglected children, has moved to a new $50 million building that reflects both the hospital's evolution and its success in the real-estate market.


Geri Lynn Friedlaender Marries Edward A. Band
LEAD: Geri Lynn Friedlaender and Edward Alan Band were married last evening at the Hampshire Country Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y., by Rabbi Ari Fridkis.


Game Wtih a Bit of an English Flair
LEAD: ANYONE who does not think the English eccentric, will reconsider when it comes to the shooting season.
After Aug. 12 and until Feb. 1, those privileged with large country houses start the round of shooting lunches and house parties, ''walking up'' grouse, ''pegging and unpegging'' dogs, getting out their shooting sticks and cartridge bags and hoping that their guests will not bring back birds that have been ''badly shot.


Negative Ads in Senate Race Are Putting Off Many Voters
LEAD: THE race for United States Senate in New Jersey, as framed by the two candidates, is asking voters to choose between the ''lesser of two evils.''


Game Wtih a Bit of an English Flair
LEAD: ANYONE who does not think the English eccentric, will reconsider when it comes to the shooting season.
After Aug. 12 and until Feb. 1, those privileged with large country houses start the round of shooting lunches and house parties, ''walking up'' grouse, ''pegging and unpegging'' dogs, getting out their shooting sticks and cartridge bags and hoping that their guests will not bring back birds that have been ''badly shot.


STREETSCAPES: 45 East 66th Street; For a Jewel on the East Side, A Loving Facade Restoration
LEAD: IN the middle of a three-year, $900,000 restoration and still swathed in scaffolding, the 80-year-old apartment house at 45 East 66th Street has undergone a cleaning that has removed decades of grime that hid its unusual red-and-white French Gothic design.


Canada Looks Inward as Johnson's Troubles Grow
LEAD: Just as Canadians started to believe that the Ben Johnson affair was receding, the sprinter was back on their television screens last week.
But this time, instead of dodging questions about the positive drug test that caused his disqualification as the 100-meter winner at the Olympic Games, the 26-year-old athlete was pictured coming out of a police station where he had been charged with assault and possession of a dangerous weapon.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Actually they are dead.
We were told there was an outbreak of measles and they died in July.''  - Dr.
Taban Nelson,  of the Sudanese Red Crescent,  explaining absence of children  at famine center.  [ 1:4. ]


Modest Laureate
LEAD: Just as well that Naguib Mahfouz, an Egyptian writer, never wrote the advertising blurbs for his 40 novels and collections of short stories or his more than 30 screenplays.
He once called himself ''a fourth- or fifth-rate writer.'' Last week, the Swedish Academy of Letters took a different view and awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature to the 77-year-old Mr.


Handling Infamy In Dallas
LEAD: FOR years, civic leaders in Dallas wrestled with a painful issue: what to do with what has been called the city's most infamous site - the sixth floor of the building where Lee Harvey Oswald fired the shots that killed President John F. Kennedy.


Mary McClellan, Executive, Weds
LEAD: Mary Katherine McClellan and Patrick Antoine Longmire were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church on Nantucket, Mass.
The Revs.
Douglas G. Tompkins and Joyce U. Tompkins performed the ceremony.


THERAPY STUDIED FOR SURVIVAL RATE
LEAD: A study of elderly and gravely ill hospital patients who were revived after the heart had stopped found that none of them lived to leave the hospital, researchers have reported.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Zurich
LEAD: Visitors to Zurich will be struck by a new awareness of prosperity's threat to the environment.
Posters and newspapers cry for cleaner air and water as well as respect for greenery.
The city has started a $50 million program to recover 50 streams that used to run from the hills east and west into the lake that it hugs and the two rivers - the Limmat and the Sihl - that enclose its core.


A Faulty Date Misled the Detective
LEAD: A censored cover mailed from Italy to Torrington, Conn., led to some detective work, and then humbled the detective when he overlooked the obvious.


CAROLINA ON HER MIND
LEAD:  FEEDING THE EAGLES  By Paulette Bates Alden.  176 pp.
St.
Paul, Minn.:  Graywolf Press. $16.


Slaney Ends '88 With a Victory
LEAD: A man with a microphone approached Mary Slaney and asked to interview her.


Miss Healey Wed To J. D. Watson
LEAD: Hilary Brooke Healey, the daughter of Mrs.
Reginald Roome Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., and Dr.
William V. Healey Jr. of San Antonio, was married yesterday to Joseph Dunlap Watson, a son of Mrs.
William L. Power of Athens, Ga., and the late J. Durward Watson Jr.
The Rev.
Leo J. Gorman performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.


Patrick Jay Brown Marries Delia Anne O'Brien on L.I.
LEAD: At St.
Brigid's Roman Catholic Church in Westbury, L.I., Delia Anne O'Brien, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. O'Brien of Westbury, L.I., and Little Apple Bay on Tortola in the British Virgin Islands, was married yesterday to Patrick Jay Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur H. Brown of Wyckoff, N.J., and Naples, Fla.


Miss Kaye Is Wed To David McKean
LEAD: Kathleen Mary Kaye and David McKean were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Chapel in Cambridge, Mass., by the Rev.
John MacGinnis, a Roman Catholic priest.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a production error, a portion of an article on ''Star Wars'' research on page 4 of The Week in Review, section 4, was covered by an advertisement.
The passage, in the third column of the article, concerned Congressional testimony last week by Gen.
Robert T. Herres of the Air Force, the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs.


THE WORLD SERIES: Evangelist vs. a Calm Analyst; LaRussa's Method Is Scholarly
LEAD: There are similarities between the men, between Tony LaRussa and Tom Lasorda, that will not go unnoticed as the World Series unwinds this week on the California shores.
They are of Italian descent, for instance, and they are managers who motivate.
They believe that players win games, that coaching staffs help, that making moves from the dugout can sometimes be an overrated thing.


Allison Giffen, Student, Weds T. E. Houghton
LEAD: Allison Ann Hopkins Giffen and Thomas Edward Houghton were married yesterday at the New York Academy of Art by Judge Dorothy Chin Brandt of the Criminal Court of the City of New York.
The bride is the daughter of James H. Giffen of New York and June Hopkins of Los Angeles.
Her husband is a son of Mr.


Nina Machlin Is Bride
LEAD: Nina Shayne Machlin, the daughter of Josephine M. Grose of Hatfield and Amherst, Mass., and the late Sheldon Merritt Machlin, who was a photojournalist, printmaker and sculptor, was married yesterday at the Plaza in New York to Trevor Rand Dayton, a son of Joan A. Dayton of Kettering, England, and Lincoln, Neb.


U.S. Bridge Teams Advance
LEAD: Both American teams pursuing world contract bridge championship titles seem to have a good chance of clearing the first hurdle.


Wild-Game Time In New England
LEAD: IN churches and American Legion halls, in fire stations and community centers throughout New England, the curious and the carnivorous gather each autumn to partake of a time-honored rite: the wild-game supper.





Whither Westwood?
LEAD: VIVIENNE WESTWOOD, the prophet of punk, is still trying to serve as a fashion seer, but her message now is murky.
At her show in London last Monday night there were many manic styles, along with a few neat ones, and the show ended the spring and summer opening season with all the exuberance of a high-school pageant.


Camille Duvall to Be Married
LEAD: Announcement has been made of the engagement of Carole Camille Duvall to Byron A. Hero Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Hero of New York and Southampton, L.I., by the future bride's mother, Dianne Duvall of Windermere, Fla.
Miss Duvall also is the daughter of the late Samuel E. Duvall Jr. of Dallas.


Miss Moynahan Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At St.
Catherine's Roman Catholic Church in Spring Lake, N.J., Patricia Anne Moynahan, the daughter of Theodore J. Moynahan of New York and the late Rosemary T. Moynahan, was married yesterday to Richard Clarence Rice, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald H. Rice of Marietta, Ga.
The Rev.
Jeremiah V. McGinley performed the ceremony.


Court Rules 2 Divers at Fault for Paralysis
LEAD: Two men from western New York were at fault for the serious injuries they suffered by diving headfirst into shallow, above-ground pools, New York State's highest court has ruled.


AIDS Test for Suspect Splits Experts
LEAD: Health experts, public officials and civil rights advocates are divided in their reaction to a Connecticut judge's ruling that a rape victim is not entitled to have the suspect tested for AIDS.


Reviews/Dance; The Forces of Nature Choreographer Modernizes Traditional African Forms
LEAD: There are performances when everything goes right.
And one of those performances occurred on Wednesday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, when the Forces of Nature Dance Company presented works by Abdel R. Salaam, the group's director and a choreographer with an unmistakable and sure voice of his own.


A Year After the Crash, Climbing Back; Resilient Economy Puts Home Buyers Back into Market
LEAD: A YEAR after Wall Street quaked last Oct. 19, tumbling much of the real estate market with it, most residential properties have sprung back smartly.
But those closest to the epicenter - houses and apartments destined for buyers with incomes earned from the financial markets - are still slithering around in a slough of weakness.


An Attempt to Pirouette Into a Dream Role    The School of American Ballet in Manhattan held auditions for boys and girls aged 9 to 14 for the traditional holiday production. (NYT/Neal Boenzi)


Question Of the Week; Once and For All, What About The D.H. in The Series?
LEAD: Keep the d.h. out of the Series.
If you give in to the A.L. on this, they'll next copy football's platooning and put d.h.'s in every position.
Hitters won't field and fielders won't hit.
Baseball's unique emphasis on all-round athletes will be replaced by specialized freaks talented in only one area.


POSTINGS: Landmarks Book; Preserving a City
LEAD: Twenty-five years ago, Pennsylvania Station was demolished before an outraged public had mobilized effectively to stop it.
What rose from its rubble was not only Madison Square Garden, but also an outcry that gave birth to New York City's Landmarks Preservation Commission in 1965.
In the years since, the commission has designated and protected 800 buildings, 52 historic districts, 70 interiors and nine scenic sites.


Museums: For the Few or the Many?
LEAD: To have, or not to have, a museum of one's own?
The question - a hot one in the art world as more and more wealthy collectors choose private ways of making their holdings public - struck sparks the other evening at a panel at the Guggenheim Museum, with some lively exchanges about feminist politics and public financing for museums.


End of Partnership Forged in Birth of Atomic Age
LEAD: One of the strangest, longest relationships between the Federal Government and a private contractor is coming to a bitter end, but its beginning is enshrined as part of the lore of the nuclear age.


A Fire Island Enclave For Snobs and Bigots
LEAD: ''Achtung - You are leaving the American Sector,'' to quote a sign posted in the early 50's by three teen-agers in Ocean Bay Park, the Fire Island community adjacent to Point O' Woods (commonly referred to by P.O.W. as ''Fort Apache'').


Women Writers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brooke J. Kamin Is Engaged
LEAD: Brooke Judith Kamin and Richard Arthur Rapaport plan to be married Nov. 20, the parents of the bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Z. Kamin of Fair Haven, N.J., have announced.
Mr.
Rapaport is a son of Elizabeth Schnell Rapaport of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Howard Goodman Rapaport.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Midwest; Indiana Remains Unbeaten
LEAD: Anthony Thompson rushed for 139 yards and 3 touchdowns and became Indiana's career scoring leader as the Hoosiers beat Minnesota, 33-13, in a Big Ten Conference game today.


Question Of the Week; Once and For All, What About The D.H. in The Series?
LEAD: Elimination of the d.h. in the World Series essentially means that: (a) the player who is usually a team's m.v.p. offensively sits out, and (b) pitchers who never hold a bat or run the bases must now learn to read signs, bunt in critical situations and replace the sluggers.
The concept is absurd; its implementation is patently unfair.


Norwalk Symphony Hall is Redone
LEAD: AFTER three and a half years in a temporary auditorium, the Norwalk Symphony wil return to its acoustically refurbished concert hall on Saturday in the renovated Norwalk City Hall.
The occasion marks the symphony's 50th season and 300th concert.


New Ordeal
LEAD: To the Editor:


LAW SCHOOL V. REALITY
LEAD: I am now in my third week at Harvard Law School.
I have found the school has made a broad pitch to all One L's to become involved in clinical or public-interest work during our three years here.
In addition to offering courses in the lawyering process and professional responsibility, our professors engage us routinely in examinations of the tensions between jurisprudence and justice.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  CAROUSEL EXHIBIT


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: East; 615 Yards for Pitt in 42-7 Rout
LEAD: Darnell Dickerson completed 15 of 21 passes for 287 yards and a touchdown and ran for another score as Pittsburgh gained a school-record 615 yards in trouncing Temple, 42-7, today to end a three-game losing streak.


Rivals for Jersey Senate Seat Promise to Stay Costly Course
LEAD: As the United States Senate fight in New Jersey moves into the final rounds, both the Democratic incumbent, Frank Lautenberg, and his Republican opponent, Pete Dawkins, have enough money to keep swinging hard until Election Day, reports filed with the Federal Election Commission indicate.


Steinbrenner Myth Debunked
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Gail Wilkinson Married
LEAD: Gail Ann Wilkinson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank McF.
Wilkinson of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Thomas Francis Roby, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles K. Roby of Clemson, S.C., were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of Saints John and Mary in Chappaqua by the Rev.
Richard J. Colgan.
The bride, a graduate of the University of Michigan, received a master's degree in rehabilitation counseling at the University of North Carolina.


Pentagon Considers a Suspension Of Contract Ties With Sundstrand
LEAD: The Pentagon has begun to consider further steps against the Sundstrand Corporation after the company's settlement of criminal fraud charges with the Government earlier this week, Defense Department officials say.


Rutgers' Running Stops B.C. Eagles
LEAD: Scott Erney set a career passing yardage record for Rutgers today.
But it was the Scarlet Knights' running game and defense that were primarily responsible for a 17-6 triumph over Boston College.


Librarians' Salaries In Connecticut
LEAD: In reference to the information presented in the article ''Survey to Examine Librarian Shortage,'' (Sept. 11), two clarifications are important.


Robinson Leads And Rams Follow
LEAD: John Robinson can tie Chuck Knox's team record of 54 regular-season coaching victories when the Los Angeles Rams (5-1) take on the San Francisco 49ers (4-2) on Sunday in Anaheim Stadium.
From the Rams' first coach, Hugo Bezdek, in 1937, when the franchise was in Cleveland, to Sid Gillman in 1955 to George Allen in 1966 and on to Knox in 1973, no one has left more of an imprint than


'Luminous' Drama on Black Woman's Struggle
LEAD: &gt;VEN though Zora Neale Hurston's novel, ''Their Eyes Were Watching God,'' published in 1937, which is generally considered to be the end of the Harlem Renaissance, is a classic, by critical and scholarly acclamation, it has yet to make a necessary universal dent.
But it is sinking into popular consciousness, thanks to college courses on Afro-American literature, changing women's roles or just plain great books, and there is something renewing about hearing how students are so taken by


Six Recipes for Raising Federal Taxes
LEAD: Cutting the deficit has become an issue in the Presidential campaign.
But unlike the candidates, most economists who have examined the deficit problem agree that it can be significantly reduced only by raising taxes.
Where they disagree is on how to do it.
The Business Forum editor, Joel Kurtzman, spoke with six economists about which taxes they would raise to balance the budget.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: South; Ga. Tech Stuns S. Carolina
LEAD: Andre Thomas scored on a 51-yard interception return and set up another touchdown with a 10-yard return as Georgia Tech ended a 15-game losing streak against Division I-A opposition by stunning previously unbeaten South Carolina, 34-0, today.


To Dukakis, It's All Too Clear Where George Is
LEAD: AFTER three months and two debates against Vice President Bush, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's challenge remains what it has been since the Democratic convention in July: How to get past two forces that keep leaping into the ring on the side of his rival.


DATA BANK: October 16, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'88
I Q'88
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,988.1
$3,915.4
$3,796.0
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
3.0
3.6
2.6
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'88
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
162.7
$149.4
$136.4


Stadium in West Haven Held Between 2 Visions
LEAD: ITS stands, built 41 years ago with secondhand lumber, are gone as are the minor league baseball games that made Quigley Stadium West Haven's most famous landmark.
But the memories and dreams of the thousands of games played at there are still quite alive among most of the 60,000 town residents.


Floor Coverings
LEAD: COVERING wood floors with carpeting, asphalt tile or resilient flooring makes sense when restoring the floor is impossible or when the qualities of a particular floor covering are desired.
However, simply installing the new covering over the old floor can invite trouble.


LOAN SHARK BLUES
LEAD:  CUT NUMBERS  By Nick Tosches.  233 pp. New York:  Harmony Books. $17.95.


Politics And Reality
LEAD: Has a political campaign ever been so divorced from the realities confronting this country?
That was the question that came to mind as I watched the second debate between George Bush and Michael Dukakis.


Name-Calling
LEAD: Reggie Lawrence of Huntingdon, Tenn., has trouble with the name Dukakis. ''It sounds like somebody in Indonesia or Greece or someplace overseas,'' he told some political reporters he'd run into at a local cafe. ''It just doesn't sound American.''


Women's Group Libeled Man In Assault Charge, Jury Says
LEAD: A jury has found that the group Women Against Rape libeled a man when it circulated a flier falsely accusing him of assault and attempted rape.


Long Island Interview: Victor Shulman; Packaging Glasnost: From Russia With Talent
LEAD: VICTOR SHULMAN is a Russian-born impresario who has produced more than 30 concert tours in the United States for a wide variety of Russian poets, writers, comedians, singers and theater groups.


Gandhi Assassins Get Time to Petition for Mercy
LEAD: Two men convicted of assassinating Prime Minister Indira Gandhi four years ago have been given until next Wednesday to petition for mercy or face execution by hanging.


St. Francis Coach Thwarted By Farrell
LEAD: Vinnie O'Connor, the St.
Francis Prep football coach, returned to the scene of his 100th victory yesterday and tried to get his 200th, but the Monsignor Farrell team turned him away, 27-14.


Lifting the Lid From Eastern Europe's Bubbling Caldron of Nationalities
LEAD: THE warmer climate of increased political tolerance that has swept Eastern Europe this year has helped bring a blossoming of ethnic and national feeling in a region burdened heavily by historic rivalries and feuds.


Brothers Are Foes in Miller's Drama
LEAD: IN all of Arthur Miller's plays, the playwright addresses to what extent humans are willing to take responsibility for the choices they make.


SUBLIME LOGIC
LEAD:  ARCHIMEDES' REVENGE  The Joys and Perils of  Mathematics.
By Paul Hoffman.
Illustrated. 285 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $17.95.
THE MATHEMATICAL TOURIST  Snapshots of Modern  Mathematics.
By Ivars Peterson.
Illustrated. 240 pp.
New York:  W. H. Freeman &amp; Company.


Drawing From a Distant Past
LEAD: Not so long ago, antiques from the Middle Ages and Renaissance were about as welcome in American homes as that other emblem of those eras -the Black Death. ''I hate to think of how many New York butchers are cutting meat on the stuff,'' says Alan Stone, a Manhattan print and drawing dealer and antiques enthusiast who notes that many early European tables, made of heavy slabs of oak or walnut, were chopped up into blocks for just that purpose.


From Brooklyn, A New Spin on Egypt
LEAD: With ''Cleopatra's Egypt,'' a pioneering survey of the art of Ptolemaic Egypt, the Brooklyn Museum has broken new ground of a kind that has a consistent fascination.
The title helps, of course. ''The Egypt of the Ptolemies'' would not be a grabber, but Cleopatra is one of the most charismatic women in history.


Lauren Feinsot Weds Robert E. Riordan Jr.
LEAD: At the Lotos Club in New York, Lauren Patricia Feinsot, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Aaron Feinsot of New York and East Hampton, L.I., and Robert Emmet Riordan Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Riordan of New York and Miami, were married yesterday by Don Johnson, the senior leader of the Ethical Culture Society of New


SONY AND CBS RECORDS
LEAD: Peter J. Boyer's article on the sale of CBS Records to Sony demonstrates, in a nutshell, what is wrong with the United States economy today (''Sony and CBS Records: What a Romance!'' Sept. 18).


FICTION
LEAD:  BORROWED TIME.
By Amnon Jackont.
Translated by Dorothea Shefer-Vanson. (Hamish Hamilton/David &amp; Charles, $19.95.) Amnon Jackont's compelling first novel is a hybrid, a thriller inhabited by people and ideas that are supposed to be taken seriously.
This is a perilous task for a writer: the plot must move with the narrative overdrive of high adventure, but the people threaten to slow the action as the author develops their ideas, strengths and flaws.


WOMEN AND THE IDEAL FAMILY
LEAD: The thinking woman's and man's reaction to the cautions raised in Jane O'Reilly's essay ''Talking About Women, Not to Them'' (Hers, Sept. 11), should be a loud Brava!
I refer, in particular, to her observation that our politicians are presenting their version of the ''ideal'' woman, ever so subtly ensconced in the confines of the ''ideal'' family.


Susan F. Curry Is Wed To Paul E. Fulenwider
LEAD: Susan French Curry, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Howard Curry of Dresher, Pa., and Paul Earle Fulenwider, a son of Mrs.
Lane Earle Fulenwider of Jacksonville, Fla., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Charles A. Carter 3d performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Chestnut Hill, Pa.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The glazing compound on the windows on the south and west sides of our house deteriorates rapidly, with the compound cracking and curling up.
We have tried several types of compound, but none seems to last more than a couple of years on those windows.
This is especially noticeable along the bottom of each pane on the windows that get the most sunlight.


Small-Company Stocks Out of Favor
LEAD: Earlier this year, investors eagerly bought stocks of smaller companies - those with stock market values of less than $500 million.
The prices of the securities of these companies soared in the first quarter.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The glazing compound on the windows on the south and west sides of our house deteriorates rapidly, with the compound cracking and curling up.
We have tried several types of compound, but none seems to last more than a couple of years on those windows.
This is especially noticeable along the bottom of each pane on the windows that get the most sunlight.


NIGHTMARES OF THE POLES AND THE LESNIKS
LEAD: THE KING OF THE FIELDS  By Isaac Bashevis Singer.
Translated by the author.  244 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $18.95.


Who Are They?
LEAD: The election isn't over.
But the second and, Vice President George Bush made clear, final confrontation of Presidential candidates left Governor Michael Dukakis well short of the breakthrough he needs.


June Cleaver Without Pearls (Annie Leibovitz)
LEAD: ''Good men,'' says the comedienne Roseanne Barr, ''don't just happen.
They have to be created by us women.'' Ms.
Barr, who crunches on Cheetos during her stand-up routine and delights in dumping on doltish husbands, should know.
Self-dubbed ''America's favorite domestic goddess,'' she is the star of ABC's much-talked-about situation comedy, ''Roseanne,'' which has its debut on


6 Connecticut Bishops Urge Better Education on AIDS
LEAD: Six Roman Catholic bishops from Connecticut issued their first unified statement on AIDS Friday, releasing a pastoral letter that urges followers to learn about the deadly disease and minister to those afflicted with the virus.


Driesell Back On the Court
LEAD: Midnight madness was new to James Madison University in Harrisonburg, Va.
It wasn't to the school's new basketball coach.


Miriam D. Stokes Planning to Wed Francis Brown 3d
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John Whittemore Stokes Jr. of Memphis have announced the engagement of their daughter Miriam Dean Stokes to Francis Cabell Brown 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brown Jr. of New York.
A December wedding is planned.


Stacey Lynn Glass Married To Anthony Joseph Scarpa
LEAD: The wedding of Stacey Lynn Glass, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Glass of Oyster Bay Cove, L.I., to Anthony Joseph Scarpa, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Adolph Scarpa of Bay Shore, L.I., took place last evening at the Windows on the World restaurant at the World Trade Center in New York.
Rabbi Arthur


City Urged to Hire More Minorities at Hospitals
LEAD: Saying New York City has failed to hire and promote enough minority-group members at its municipal hospitals, the hospitals' community boards called yesterday for more stringent affirmative action goals.


It's a Corker
LEAD: SOME YEARS AGO, IN A pleasant Stockholm restaurant, I ordered a bottle of Chablis to complement a good Swedish fish.
The wine was fine; so was the fish.
Still, something was wrong.
It was the wine bottle.
The Chablis had been imported by the Swedish Government monopoly and bottled with, of all things, a screw cap.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: THE secret, according to experts in the art of city survival, is to avoid eye contact.
This does not mean that one is oblivious to what is going on, where it's going on and, most important of all, who else is around.
It merely means that acknowledging the presence of anyone else - friend, acquaintance or stranger - is optional.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Saved by a Story


First Swarms of Africanized Bees May Reach South Texas in 1990
LEAD: Swarms of aggressive, Africanized bees will reach the United States within one and a half years, and they appear to be a more formidable threat than originally expected, according to scientists who attended the American Bee Research Conference here this week.


Condo Spoken Here
LEAD: IF your parents are retired and living in a condominium community in Florida, you won't be vacationing in Acapulco or Aruba anymore.
You'll be using your vacation time to visit your folks in Florida . . . or else.
Before heading south again, you should learn to speak Condo, the official language of Florida retirees.


CRIME
LEAD: Timothy Waverly, in former careers a college professor and a convicted murderer, currently works as a professional gambler.
Or as he delicately puts it in Tom Kakonis's terrific first novel, MICHIGAN ROLL (St. Martin's, $16.95), ''I play certain selected games for a living.
With cards.''


Finding Ways to Beat the Book at Its Own Game
LEAD: THE right way to take advantage of a tome on openings is to argue with it and win the argument.


Catcher Without a Job Winds Up in the Series
LEAD: One of the more emotional scenes from the Dodgers' victory last Wednesday in the National League playoff was this one: Fred Claire, the Los Angeles general manager, hugging Rick Dempsey, the veteran catcher who was without a job and apparently at the end of his career last winter.


Environment Is Abused By Overpopulation
LEAD: Mary T. L. Bannon claims ''It's Time for Us to Stop Abusing the Environment'' in her article in the Connecticut section of Sept. 11 (Opinion page).
It is a reasonable plea and one we should each dedicate ourselves to accomplishing.
However, in every article of this nature I wonder why authors don't take it a step further to the basic cause, which is obviously overpopulation.


Ms. Strauss Wed To Eric Schmidt
LEAD: The wedding of Susan Martha Strauss, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Strauss of West Orange, N.J., to Eric Morris Schmidt, a son of Mary M. Schmidt of Princeton, N.J., and Amagansett, L.I., and the late Philip E. Schmidt, took place yesterday at the Stronghold Mansion in Bernardsville, N.J.
Judge Leo Yanoff of New Jersey Superior Court in


Darby Mengel Marries
LEAD: Darby Denton Mengel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Denton Mengel of Cincinnati, was married yesterday at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York to Eric Robert Van Heyst, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jan Van Heyst of Rochester.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenneth Jones performed the ceremony.
The bride, a graduate of the School of Design and Architecture at the University of Cincinnati, is a merchandise manager for Anne Klein II in New York.


Game Wtih a Bit of an English Flair
LEAD: ANYONE who does not think the English eccentric, will reconsider when it comes to the shooting season.
After Aug. 12 and until Feb. 1, those privileged with large country houses start the round of shooting lunches and house parties, ''walking up'' grouse, ''pegging and unpegging'' dogs, getting out their shooting sticks and cartridge bags and hoping that their guests will not bring back birds that have been ''badly shot.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ending Oct. 1  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $345,000  423 West 22d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; large kitchen, balcony off master bedroom, 2 fireplaces, high-ceilings; maintenance $580, 72% tax-deductible (Broker: Wells &amp; Gay)


Crispo Jury Recesses Again
LEAD: The jury in the kidnapping, assault and sodomy trial of Andrew Crispo finished its fifth day of deliberations yesterday without reaching a verdict.
The jury quit for the day at 5:30 P.M. and planned to resume at 11 A.M. today.
Mr.
Crispo, a 43-year-old art dealer, is accused of humiliating, beating and coercing sex from a college English teacher from Montreal during an orgy at his art gallery at 41 East 57th Street in 1984.


Papal Audience
LEAD: If it requires a special kind of nerve to heckle a pope, the Rev.
Ian Paisley has it.
Mr.
Paisley, a leader of the hard-line Protestants in Northern Ireland, last week disrupted a speech to the European Parliament by Pope John Paul II, who Mr.
Paisley implied was somehow sympathetic to the Irish Republican Army.


CORRECTION
LEAD: An article on page 1 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the comedienne Roseanne Barr misidentifies the co-star of the ABC series ''Roseanne.'' He is John Goodman, not John Parker.


Jersey Conflict Over a Rail Bed
LEAD: WHAT should be done with an abandoned railroad bed?


LAW SCHOOL V. REALITY
LEAD: Having finished at Harvard Law School 20 years before Scott Turow, I have doubtless forgotten far more than he (''Law School v. Reality,'' Sept. 18).
Two things I do know.
His plea is well taken that law schools should teach ethics as if they matter and instill, if possible, the courage to accept the costs that ethics may impose.


Soviets Push for Better Europe Ties
LEAD: With Soviet-American relations temporarily becalmed by the Presidential election, the Soviet Union is making a major push this fall to improve ties with Western Europe.


DU PONT DISPUTES CHARGES ON SAFETY AT NUCLEAR PLANT
LEAD: In a sharp disagreement with the Department of Energy, the head of the Du Pont company says the Government is playing politics with the Savannah River nuclear weapon plant, which the department has shut down, and is exaggerating the problems to get money to build a new reactor.


Political Notes; Case on Estimate Board Might Confuse Primary
LEAD: The United States Supreme Court has scheduled arguments on the constitutionality of the New York City Board of Estimate for December, with a decision not likely until next spring - about the time the Mayor, the Council President, the Comptroller and Borough Presidents will be starting the process of seeking renomination and re-election.


Anita W. Monteith Weds John Dixon, a Consultant
LEAD: Anita White Monteith and John Charles Dixon were married yesterday at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York.
The Rev.
Judith T. Baumer performed the ceremony.


Paris by Bus
LEAD: To the Editor: Kay Eldredge's article on exploring Paris by bus (Travel, Aug. 14) didn't mention the S.I.T.U. automatic How to Get There From Here machines at many intersections around town.


TALKING: Day Care; Opening Centers in Apartments
LEAD: SHOULD a member of a condominium, co-op or homeowner association be allowed to operate a home-based day-care center inside her unit?
The question is being discussed more and more by residents and association officers as a growing number of owners take in four or five preschoolers each day for a fee, often without the prior knowledge or consent of the association board or the residents of adjoining units.


The AIDS Burden
LEAD: 'Our hospitals, clinics and social-service agencies are already strained to the limit, and many HIV-infected persons are not receiving adequate care.
How is the system going to manage in the future?' - New York City AIDS Task Force, calling for expanded services to treat an expected deluge of AIDS patients.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-17


THE TEMPTATION OF ST. TOM
LEAD:  ELIOT'S NEW LIFE  By Lyndall Gordon.
Illustrated. 356 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.95.


U.S. Concludes Accord to Run Philippine Bases
LEAD: The United States and the Philippines reached agreement today on terms for continued operation of American bases in the Philippines through September 1991, Administration officials said.


Countdown to Standard Time
LEAD: NEW ENGLANDERS are known for their set ways and obdurateness.
Old-timers greet change reluctantly. ''If it don't need fixin', don't fix it,'' they say.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Switching Channels  Starring Kathleen Turner, Burt Reynolds, Christopher Reeve, Ned Beatty, Henry Gibson, George Newbern, Al Waxman, Ken James, Charles Kimbrough.
Directed by Ted Kotcheff. 1988.
RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video.  104 minutes. $89.95.
Rated PG.
Contains strong language.


Maine Driver Is Cited Over Lobster on Plate
LEAD: The police in this small central Maine town have cited a resident for violating a state law that prohibits altering license plates.


Alice Forster to Wed Robert A. Griffin
LEAD: Bayard Stuyvesant Forster of New York and Clare Chanler Forster of Boulder, Colo., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alice Bayard Forster to Robert A. Griffin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Warner George Griffin of Shelter Island, N.Y., and Manchester, Vt.
A March wedding is planned.


New Hampshire Man Is Said to Admit Arson
LEAD: Prosecutors here said Friday that a former volunteer firefighter in neighboring Jefferson had admitted setting about 17 of the more than 20 arson fires that have plagued the area since May.


Forceful Sculpture Arises From Paper
LEAD: IT was somewhat surprising to enter a show entitled ''Paper: Form and Substance'' only to find a gallery full of forceful sculpture.


Which Candidate Understands a Mother's Fear?; Hitting Below the Belt
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beyond the Campaign, More Tests Await 'Star Wars'
LEAD: THE fate of ''Star Wars'' will be partly determined when voters choose between two Presidential candidates with sharply differing views of the space-based defense system, but political factors represent only half of the equation that will eventually determine its success or failure.


James D. Madigan 3d, Lawyer, 37
LEAD: James D. Madigan 3d, a lawyer who specialized in labor law and taught at the Brooklyn Law School, died of Hodgkin's disease yesterday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 37 years old and lived in Garden City, L.I.


MULRONEY LEADING IN CAMPAIGN POLLS
LEAD: Two weeks into a seven-week campaign, Canada's governing Conservative Party appears to have consolidated its lead in opinion polls and to be on course, barring major campaign upsets, for a second term in office.


A World of Wonders in Java
LEAD: ALL the cultures of the East - Hindu, Buddhist, Islamic and animist - have been converging and blending for centuries in Southeast Asia.
But nowhere, from Indochina and Thailand south to Australia, have they produced in one place a living museum of such quality and scope as they have within a hundred-mile radius of the Indonesian city of


Soviets Try to Return to Psychiatric Fold
LEAD: In an effort to improve the international standing of its long-criticized psychiatric profession, the Soviet Union has said it is reapplying to the World Psychiatric Association, a top official of that organization said today.


'Pull Over,' the Officer Said, So I Went to Court
LEAD: ''PULL over, blue Tercel,'' crackled the loudspeaker of the black and white police cruiser that pulled up behind me.


When Bedfellows Make Strange Politics
LEAD: EVERY marriage has its ups and downs, but back in '84 when my husband told me he was voting for the Presidential candidate who supported every issue I opposed, I knew we were in trouble.
How could I live with a man whose values were diametrically opposed to mine?
So I told him, ''Go with me for counseling or pack your bags.


Caron Beth Rosof Weds Gerald Weiss
LEAD: The wedding of Caron Beth Rosof, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard M. Rosof of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., to Gerald Martin Weiss, the son of Leopold Weiss of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Felicia Weiss, took place last evening at Temple Beth El in Great Neck L.I.
Rabbi Neil Kurshan performed the ceremony.


Eliza Stephenson Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Eliza Bayard Stephenson, a daughter of Edward L. Stephenson of Warrenton, Va., and the late Mrs.
Clifford F. Wolfe of Rockport, Maine, to William Blair Meyer Jr., the son of Sandra Payson of Delaplane, Va., and the late Mr.
Meyer of New York and Palm Beach, Fla., took place yesterday at the home of the bride's father.


Helping the Homeless, Living With Sadness
LEAD: THE children had invented a game.
It was a cross between bowling and relay races.
They stood at opposite ends of the black-topped parking lot and rolled a round stone to the targets at the end of the lot.
As the stone rolled in, a child would snatch it and run the length of the lot, then hand it to another runner, and the relay began.


Economics Is Giving Voodoo a Bad Name
LEAD: To the Editor:


Joan Futterman Is Married to Dr. David Bergman
LEAD: Joan Futterman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Futterman of New Rochelle, N.Y., and Dr.
David Bergman, a son of Mrs.
Bradley D. King of New York and Quogue, L.I., and the late Dr.
Arthur Bergman, were married last evening.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue Synagogue.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''He did not buy this thing to put Atlantic City on the airline map. ''  Timothy Pettee, analyst at Bear, Stearns, on Donald Trump's latest deal.


THE WET NURSE OF ALL CREATION
LEAD:  PLACEWAYS  A Theory of the Human Environment.
By Eugene Victor Walter.
Illustrated. 253 pp.
Chapel Hill:  The University of North Carolina Press.
Cloth, $29.95.
Paper, $10.95.


STATELY STYLE: MARK HAMPTON &amp; MARIO BUATTA
LEAD: Although Mario Buatta and Mark Hampton have distinct decorating styles - Buatta's chintz-filled and cluttered, Hampton's more tailored and classical - the sources of their ideas are surprisingly similar.
Both decorators scour the great houses of Europe, studying the details and structure of the buildings and their interiors and even the design of their gardens.


When Self-Importance Interferes With the Music
LEAD: While U2 was touring stadiums last year, band members told interviewers they had become fascinated with American music, especially the black Southern music at the roots of rock-and-roll - blues, gospel and soul.
At the same time, the Irish band's 1987 album, ''The Joshua Tree,'' had brought the band world-beating popularity, rocketing


New York as Window
LEAD: To call something a Winter Garden is to give it a wonderful name.
One thinks of snow and wind and icy blasts, and of roses and daffodils and hibiscus blooming peacefully under glass.
But to see the new Winter Garden at Battery Park City is to think of something else entirely.
It's to remember that New York is the City on the


Joleen Jasinski Wed To James A. Marren
LEAD: Joleen Jasinski, the daughter of Chester P. Jasinski of Springfield, Vt., and the late Beverly J. Jasinski, was married yesterday in Springfield to James Anthony Marren, a son of Therese V. Marren of Massapequa Park, L.I., and the late Thaddeus F. Marren.
The Rev.
James M. Shea performed the ceremony at St.


SONY AND CBS RECORDS
LEAD: I am surprised that even so brief a history of Columbia Records as the one boxed with Peter Boyer's article on the sale of the company could fail to mention Mitch Miller, who became head of the popular division in 1950, when it was No. 4 in the industry, brought it to No. 1 in two years; he left, in 1961, to work in television.


Floor Coverings
LEAD: COVERING wood floors with carpeting, asphalt tile or resilient flooring makes sense when restoring the floor is impossible or when the qualities of a particular floor covering are desired.
However, simply installing the new covering over the old floor can invite trouble.


How Military Might Robs an Economy
LEAD: The key to revitalizing America's economy lies not in trade, industrial policy, or management style - as important as each of these may be - but in defense policy.
Only by reducing the burden of its military expenditures can the United States unshackle its economic potential in the years ahead.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The glazing compound on the windows on the south and west sides of our house deteriorates rapidly, with the compound cracking and curling up.
We have tried several types of compound, but none seems to last more than a couple of years on those windows.
This is especially noticeable along the bottom of each pane on the windows that get the most sunlight.


BUICKS AND MADMEN
LEAD:  HELLO AMERICA  By J. G. Ballard.  224 pp.
New York:  Carroll &amp; Graf Publishers. $17.95.


Variations on a Theme
LEAD: Where do architects get their ideas?


'Things Change' Proves Don Ameche Doesn't Don Ameche and Hildegarde Neff in the 1955 production of the hit musical ''Silk Stockings''
LEAD: Once upon a time in Chicago, there lived an Italian shoeshine man named Gino who dreamed of owning a fishing boat.
One day, the old man is told that his cherished wish will be granted if he completes just one simple task.


Public Art Space as a Dynamic Force
LEAD: IN recent years, there has been a proliferation of public space for the display of fine art.
Innovative programs around the country have created new opportunities for artists to display their works.
For example, some communities set aside a specific portion of their public construction budgets for art.


Women Writers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Two Schools of Thought
LEAD: I have an American friend whose personal style of decorating is so close to that of the French ancien regime that anyone not wearing a pannier or knee breeches seems a tad out of place in his living room. (He calls it ''mon petit salon,'' and the accent is creditable.) Only the lowish ceiling betrays the fact that we are not tucked in an 18th-century hotel particulier on the Place Vendome.


Jane Seymour, Queen of the Mini-Series
LEAD: When journalists describe Jane Seymour as the queen of the mini-series, as they do with increasing frequency these days, her agent gets worried.
Doesn't it suggest she's a one-medium performer?
Isn't it time she established herself as a power on the big screen, too?
But the actress herself defiantly declares that the title makes her proud.


SONY AND CBS RECORDS
LEAD: Two billion dollars is an astounding amount; thus, how CBS spends the proceeds from the sale of its records division to Sony is surely significant.
I was amazed to learn from your article that ''much of CBS's cash now rests'' in Treasury bills.


Page Dwyer Wed To Robert Secor
LEAD: Page Williams Dwyer and Robert Miller Secor, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Secor of New York, were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas Williams, in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Chief Judge Thomas C. Platt of Federal District Court in Brooklyn officiated.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE UNPUBLISHED OPINIONS OF THE BURGER COURT.
By Bernard Schwartz. (Oxford University, $34.50.) As he did in his 1985 volume, ''The Unpublished Opinions of the Warren Court,'' Bernard Schwartz, Webb Professor of Law at New York University, examines the process that led to 10 of the most important decisions of the Warren E.


Let Speakers Speak
LEAD: After a heckler shouted down a controversial speaker last year, Harvard Law School decided it was time to spell out some rules of engagement.
Now a student-faculty committee has come up with guidelines aimed at letting speakers speak -and even letting hecklers hoot, if they don't drown out the message.


Still in Love With the Ocean
LEAD: FOR me it was a perfect summer.
We had just moved from Long Island into a retirement community near the ocean.
The first glimpse of ''my'' ocean beach was from a board ramp at Island Beach State Park that is hidden by the grasses and bushes that keep the dunes there.


A Breathtaking Bridge Soars High Over Tampa Bay
LEAD: The most surprising thing about the Sunshine Skyway Bridge, the central section of the 8.1-mile causeway across Tampa Bay that opened to traffic last year, is that it isn't ugly.
It is, in fact, more than not ugly.
It is startlingly beautiful, which makes it unlike almost any other bridge of the last generation.


GRAHAM'S ''DEEP SONG': 51 AND STILL PROTESTING
LEAD: The revival of ''Deep Song,'' a solo that Martha Graham created for herself in 1937 during the Spanish Civil War, as well as the re-entry into her dance company's repertory of several pieces from the 1930's and 1940's, illuminates a rarely considered facet of Miss Graham's work.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Ivy League; Cornell Defeats Brown in a Romp
LEAD: Aaron Sumida threw three touchdown passes today, two of them set up by the running of Scott Malaga, as Cornell beat Brown, 35-0, handing the Bruins their second straight shutout.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: 1976 Decision; Whether to Undo A Rights Ruling: The Justices Hear From All Sides
LEAD: THE lawyers who argued Patterson v.
McLean Credit Union before the Supreme Court last week had little to say about the case at hand: a racial harassment suit brought by a black North Carolina woman, Brenda Patterson, against her former employer.
Instead, they talked mostly about a 1976 decision that is critical to Mrs.


Nominees Deny Iranian Report on Hostages
LEAD: Representatives of Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis today flatly denied the assertion made by an Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister that both Presidential candidates had asked Iran for help in releasing the American hostages held in Lebanon.


Europe's Failing Effort To Exile Toxic Trash
LEAD: IN the town of Manfredonia on Italy's Adriatic coast, recently, there was a general strike and the city council resigned en masse to protest the Italian Government's efforts to get the port to accept the Deep Sea Carrier, a ship hauling more than 2,000 tons of toxic waste back to Italy from Koko, Nigeria.


Wall Street's Souped-Up Computers
LEAD: From the floor, the 65-year-old gold inlaid ceiling at the New York Stock Exchange is barely visible, obscured by a dizzying network of cables that feed the thousands of computers and display screens surrounding the Big Board's traders and specialists.


Floor Coverings
LEAD: COVERING wood floors with carpeting, asphalt tile or resilient flooring makes sense when restoring the floor is impossible or when the qualities of a particular floor covering are desired.
However, simply installing the new covering over the old floor can invite trouble.


Flexible Attitudes Help Older Workers
LEAD: JUNE A. DELVALLE, the former chief of occupational therapy at United Hospital in Port Chester, worked in her profession for 28 years before she retired.
Mrs.
Delvalle then became a volunteer at several local hospitals. ''But volunteer work wasn't challenging enough,'' she said, ''I missed the structure and the pace of the workplace.


CYCLING INTO OBLIVION
LEAD:  MAJOR TAYLOR  The Extraordinary Career of a Champion Bicycle Racer.
By Andrew Ritchie.
Illustrated. 304 pp.
New York:  Bicycle Books/Kampmann &amp; Company. $19.95.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Dodgers Win Game 1


Died-in-the-Wool Yuppie Has a Striking Proposal
LEAD: MY husband and I are young urban professionals.
Labled yuppies, we are bombarded with slick enticements for improving our minds (through psychotherapy), our bodies (through health clubs), our career (through power lunches), our homes (through Laura Ashley).


LONG DISTANCE ACQUIRER: O. Gene Gabbard; Ganging Up on the Big Boys
LEAD: Ask O. Gene Gabbard, founder and chief executive of Atlanta-based SouthernNet Inc., whether he is satisfied being the nation's fourth-largest long-distance carrier, and he breaks into his most disarming grin. ''We're just local people providing local services,'' he said. ''We're not going to become another U S Sprint.


Park Avenue to Broadway
LEAD:  Manhattan Evening


In Defense Of Alysheba
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Kerry T. O'Dwyer To Marry in June
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
William O'Dwyer of Loudonville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kerry Teresa O'Dwyer to Leon D. Marrano 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marrano Jr. of Rye, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.


BUSH AND DUKAKIS BOTH READY SHIFT IN THE CAMPAIGN
LEAD: Vice President Bush's campaign, sensing new opportunities after the Presidential debate Thursday, may now take the fight to the Democratic stronghold of New York and is exploring ways to help Republican senatorial candidates as well.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTIONS: Stirring Up Trouble About Language, Technology, and Education.
By Neil Postman. (Knopf, $17.95.) Neil Postman is that rare social critic whose commentary on the current state of American culture and education is as funny as it is thoughtful and well argued.
In these 18 incisive essays (some of them previously published), as in his earlier book ''Teaching as a Subversive Activity,'' Mr.


On the Farm, A Disaster That Wasn't
LEAD: The harvest is nearly over in western Missouri and there is no rejoicing.
But given the heavy toll that this summer's searing drought took on crops, what seems remarkable is that many farmers are not in deep despair.


THE QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Does Davey Johnson Deserve to Come Back?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Capital Subway Entryways Shut to Homeless
LEAD: The Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority is installing barriers to seal the entrances to four of its subway stops after hours, preventing numerous homeless people from using the stations as shelters at night.


Reviews/Music; Guibbory And Violin
LEAD: Shem Guibbory made his New York recital debut at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday evening with a long program of violin works ranging from Beethoven through Stravinsky and Webern to Anthony Davis.
Mr.
Guibbory has come to notice before as a collaborator of Steve Reich and Mr.
Davis, and the latter's ''Maps'' -a concerto for violins, strings, percussions and harp - provided the chief interest of the evening.


Vatican Has a Record Deficit And Asks More Contributions
LEAD: The Vatican today announced a record deficit of $63.8 million in 1987 and appealed to Roman Catholics throughout the world to increase their contributions to the work of the church.


The Race for Congress; Democrat Covers Rhode Island in an Uphill Race
LEAD: At 6:30 Wednesday morning, long johns beneath his pin-striped suit, Richard A. Licht was at the front door of a textile mill in North Providence, shaking hands with workers and promising to support limits on imported textiles.


ENHANCING THE LEGACY
LEAD:  ANNA FREUD  A Biography.
By Elisabeth Young-Bruehl.
Illustrated. 527 pp.
New York:  Summit Books. $24.95.


Listeners to DJ's: Name That Tune-Please
LEAD: Have you ever listened to a rock radio station and felt frustrated when a song you liked went blithely unidentified - because it was part of an uninterrupted sequence of four or five songs or because the disk jockey was too caught up in a clever introduction to the next record or a commercial or a weather forecast or a station promo or his own hyperenthusiastic personality to bother telling you what you just heard?


Gibson Crashes Athletics' Victory Party
LEAD: The Los Angeles Dodgers, who invoked all kinds of mysterious magic to upset the mighty Mets this week, went to even more dramatic lengths tonight when they defeated the favored Oakland Athletics, 5-4, in the opening game of the World Series on a pinch-hit home run in the ninth inning by the injured Kirk


The All-Volunteer Force Is More Popular Than Ever
LEAD: AMONG the few policies on which Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis agree is that the United States should continue to rely on volunteers to fill the ranks of the armed forces, and not return to conscription.


Distressed By Columnists
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


When Price of Competition is Far To Dear
LEAD: COMPETING - whether it be through sports, space exploration or strategies in business - has always been a strong value for Americans.
With the emergence of the global marketplace, we've become even more aware of the importance of competitiveness.
And best sellers like Tom Peters's ''Thriving on Chaos'' and national heroes like Lee


CLASSICAL ANTIQUITIES: JOHN SALADINO
LEAD: John Saladino thinks nothing of adding rough, scratch-coat plaster to perfectly smooth walls, upholstering a contemporary chair in faded fabrics or placing decaying columns in a crisp, modern setting. ''The year I lived in Rome affects the way I look at spaces,'' the designer explains. ''It was during that time that I fell in love with architectural ruins, and especially with corroded surfaces.


Question Of the Week; Once and For All, What About The D.H. in The Series?
LEAD: Let the Nationals and the Americans have their own rules during the regular season, but create equal footing for the World Series.
In each game, allow a team a designated hitter as long as its own starting pitcher remains in the game.
When the starter is relieved, the designated hitter is out of the lineup.


Some Questions On Plans for Islip
LEAD: While no one can argue with the fact that Central Islip will surely benefit from an influx of new industry and commerce, and new homes there are points in your article ''Central Islip Gets New Plans for Revitalization''  [ Aug. 28 ]  that need to be questioned.


Where Designers Get Their Ideas
LEAD: They see things ordinary mortals don't: an unusual bed in an old movie, the background color of a faded chintz, the rusty metal of a vintage airplane hangar.
These observations, no matter how insignificant they may seem, trigger ideas in the creative mind of the architect or decorator, ideas that shape the direction and look of design styles today.


Nasty People Lend Spice to 'A Perfect Spy'
LEAD: With ''A Perfect Spy,'' public television's Masterpiece Theater gets back on a quality track tonight at 9 on Channel 13.
After nearly two months of trying to avoid ''By the Sword Divided,'' fans can venture back to the fold.
Based on the John Le Carre novel, ''A Perfect Spy'' may not have Alec Guinness's George Smiley as a drawing card, but this seven-episode production is on a par with ''Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy'' and ''Smiley's People,'' the two previous television adaptations of Le Carre books.


Writer's Son Given Life Term in Death Of New York Youth
LEAD: Jacob Wideman, the 18-year-old son of a prominent writer, has been sentenced to life in prison for the stabbing death of a teen-age traveling companion from New York two years ago.


A Darker Side
LEAD: To the Editor:


Elizabeth C. Shaw Is Married to Francis C. Record
LEAD: Elizabeth Coolidge Shaw and Francis Crowninshield Record were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Washington.
The Rev.
Edward L. Lee officiated.


Laura Coleman Marries
LEAD: The marriage of Laura Kimbrough Coleman, a daughter of John T. Coleman 3d of Chase City, Va., and the late Elizabeth Coleman, to Klaus Theodor Said, a son of Mrs.
Herman Lang of Bonn, and the late Ahmed Said, took place yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
The Rev.


THE SCHOOL THEY ASKED FOR
LEAD:  THE WORLD WE CREATED AT HAMILTON HIGH  By Gerald Grant.  285 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press. $24.95.


When Miniature Means Monumental
LEAD: Miniatures with monumental presence are what Edward H. Merrin pursued for an exhibition and sale of mostly ancient amulets, votive figures, tomb objects, vessel decorations, tool handles, weights and a comb.


A Firsthand Look at Secondhand Chic
LEAD: ONE of the liveliest weekend scenes in Manhattan occurs on Sunday mornings at 25th Street and the Avenue of the Americas.
That's where a flea market takes place each week, and it has become a boon both to neighborhood treasure hunters and to those who like to keep their finger on the pulse of downtown fashion.


Ms. Winters Married To Roger D. Chiocchi
LEAD: Eileen Frances Winters, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis C. Winters of Newport, R.I., and Roger David Chiocchi, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph D. Chiocchi of Manasquan, N.J., were married yesterday at the Chapel-by-the-Sea in Newport by the Rev.
Thomas J. Carnevale, a Roman Catholic priest.


New York Moves to Protect Plants
LEAD: New York State is acting to protect 365 rare, native plants that it considers to be in danger.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  POINT A TO POINT B


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  No Town by Any Other Name


Recitals by a Soprano, A Cellist and a Violinist
LEAD:  Anne Nispel


LAW SCHOOL V. REALITY
LEAD: I agree with Scott Turow's call for serious exploration, in the law schools and out of them, of ''an understanding of the moral issues that govern law.'' But I am also concerned about what seems to me a misunderstanding, by Mr.
Turow and much of the profession, of what those moral issues are.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Fanwood  $176,000  54 Shady Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old expanded Cape Cod; w/w carpeting, patio, remodeled bathrooms; taxes $3,396.
Howell Township  $200,000  8 Mouse Creek Court  4-bedroom, 3-bath, new contemporary; fireplace, skylights, w/w carpeting; taxes $2,800.


Personalized Software
LEAD: In the beginning, say about 1977, virtually all users of the then-primal personal computers were, by necessity, hackers: technology buffs who could not only write whatever programs were needed, but could repair or rebuild the hardware as well.
Today, most users are less sophistBcated and computers are more powerful, prompting software companies to find new ways to improve the sometimes frustrating relationship between man and machine.


Uniforms Earning High Marks at Public School
LEAD: KELLY MARTE likes her uniform because the brown and yellow colors remind her of the school mascot, a giraffe.
Raymond Tavarez was elated because he did not have to go shopping for school clothes.
Victor Ramirez admires his plaid tie, even though it was stuffed inside his desk.


Debra K. Dorman Is Wed
LEAD: Debra Kristiina Dorman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert O. Dorman of Brooklyn and Lantana, Fla., and David Steven Smith, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald C. Smith of Manhattan and Greenwich, Conn., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Petti Palonen officiated at the Gloria Dei Evangelical Lutheran Church in Brooklyn.


THE NATION: The Responsibility Issue; After 40 Years, the Silence Is Broken On a Troubled Nuclear Arms Industry
LEAD: WITH a half-dozen Congressional committees scrambling - sometimes competing with one another - to expose the problems of the nation's nuclear weapons production industry, the Energy Department has provided a candid account of its failings.
But some are beginning to wonder, why has the Government operated in virtual silence about its activities for the past 40 years?


Penthouses
LEAD: To the Editor:


AXIONS, NEUTRINOS AND THOSE ELUSIVE WIMP'S
LEAD:  THE DARK SIDE OF THE UNIVERSE  A Scientist Explores the Mysteries of the Cosmos.
By James Trefil.
Illustrated by Judith Peatross.  197 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $17.95.


Sports of The Times: THE WORLD SERIES; The Dodgers' New Breed of Bulldog
LEAD: His nickname is Bulldog but he looks more like a whippet or a smooth-haired pointer.
His name is Orel Hershiser, the Dodgers' starter in the second World Series game tonight, and over the last six weeks, there has never been a pitcher quite like him.
In nine starts, he has a 7-0 record with seven shutouts that included 67 consecutive scoreless innings, plus a one-out, 12th-inning relief appearance in the pivotal fourth game of the National League playoff that reflected the nickname Tommy


Executive Is Wed To Pam McGinley
LEAD: The marriage of Patricia Ann McGinley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald H. McGinley of Short Hills, N.J., and Hobe Sound, Fla., to Scott Murray Quackenbush, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hubert G. Quackenbush of Orlando, Fla., took place yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Rose of Lima in Short Hills.


David Frediani Marries Mary Claiborne
LEAD: Mary Taylor Claiborne, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert Augustine Claiborne of Richmond, and David Raymond Frediani, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond R. Frediani of Roseville, Calif., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert Hetherington officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Richmond, assisted by the Rev.


An Abundance of Season Openings
LEAD: THREE season openings are featured this afternoon.
In Hartford, a Canadian pianist, Louis Lortie, starts the Winners' Circle series at the Bushnell Theater.
The 2:30 P.M. recital contrasts two sets of Beethoven Variations with 20th-century masterworks by Debussy and Stravinsky.
A meet-the-artist reception is part of the subscription package.


DATA UPDATE: October 16, 1988
LEAD:
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Aug. 88
July 88
Aug. 87
Nation
$91,300
$91,600
$86,500
Northeast
144,800
146,700
135,700
Midwest
70,500
70,600
66,500
South
84,300
85,600
80,800
West
122,000
123,500
115,100
*4*(Source: National Association of Realtors)


Disappearing Without a Trace
LEAD: WHEN the horror of a flash flood that trapped a church bus and van in central Texas was finally over, 10 of 43 young people were dead or missing in the Guadalupe River in Kendall County.
All but one body was recovered in July 1987 after the worst flooding of the river in 55 years.


An Improved Outlook For Manufacturing
LEAD: When William C. Johnson left his job in 1984 to sell cars after 23 years on the assembly line at the Warner &amp; Swasey Company's Cleveland plant, the downturn in the fortunes of the machine tool manufacturer seemed irreversible.
While major customers in the auto, defense and energy industries were in a slump, Japanese competitors had grabbed a large share of the market.


State Senator Wants Special Prosecutor In S.I. Youth's Death
LEAD: A New York State Senator called yesterday for the appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate the case of a black youth who was killed by a car on Staten Island earlier this month after he reportedly was chased by a group of white men angered at his presence in their neighborhood.


Shopping
LEAD: To the Editor: Betsy Wade's article on the duty-free status of items from developing countries and territories under the Generalized System of Preferences (Practical Traveler, Aug. 14) will undoubtedly benefit the traveling public as well as business people in the areas involved.


Mary C. Tanner Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The wedding of Mary Catherine Tanner, the daughter of Marilyn S. Tanner of Closter, N.J., and the late Donald N. Tanner, to Frederick Frank, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Simon Frank of Salt Lake City and La Quinta, Calif., took place yesterday at the Harvard Club in New York.
Justice Betty Weinberg Ellerin of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court, First


Decades of Latin-American Artists In a Contemporary Hispanic Setting
LEAD: ESTABLISHED in 1971, the Bronx Museum of the Arts spent its first 11 years tucked away in the rotunda of the County Courthouse.
It was a modest operation, but it seemed to do the job, which was to bring culture to a poor community.
One of the shows of that era that lingers was of the originals for science fiction illustrations; another was of contemporary abstractions painted entirely in black.


Forceful Foreman
LEAD: Don't be cynical about the string of 12 knockouts in 12 fights racked up by George Foreman in his comeback bid.
The 40-year-old former Olympic and world heavyweight champion said it's not that his opponents have been getting worse, but that he's been getting better.


The Puzzling New World of Bank C.D.'s
LEAD: If, like many investors, you put your spare cash into a federally insured 12-month bank certificate of deposit after the stock market crash last October, you may be faced with a decision about how to reinvest that money as the first anniversary of Black Monday approaches.
But what used to be a straightforward task - finding the highest rate for the length of time you were willing to tie up your money - has now become dauntingly complex.


President Assails Congress On Taxes and Budget Deficit
LEAD: President Reagan, in one of his most partisan radio addresses in months, today accused the Democratic majority in Congress of seeking to elect a ''tax-and-spend'' President.


Martin Trounces Adams, 34-0
LEAD: John Adams, the defending Public Schools Athletic League champion, lost a chance for its second consecutive undefeated season when August Martin trounced the Spartans, 34-0, yesterday and moved into first place in the Queens A Division.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: West; U.C.L.A. Reaches 6-0 in 38-21 Victory
LEAD: Troy Aikman threw for two touchdowns and ran for a third score as U.C.L.A. routed California, 38-21, in a Pacific-10 Conference game today.


Irish Upset The No. 1 Hurricanes
LEAD: In another of those magnificent and thrilling victories that have given Notre Dame a special place in sports history, a young and spirited Irish team brought down Miami, the long-reigning champion of college football, 31-30, today.


De Larrocha Travels To 'Iberia' Once More
LEAD: One has no choice but to call ''Iberia'' excessive.
This is not a condemnation, only a description of its essence.
Isaac Albeniz's 12 piano pieces are a hymn to overabundance.
He was a Catalan who spent much of his incredible childhood in the New World and his later productive years in Paris.
But Andalusia was closest to his heart, and the florid vegetation of this music seems to rise up like a mirage out of the hot, dry


RUNAWAY GLACIER
LEAD: YEAR OF CHANGE  More About ''The New Yorker'' &amp; Me.
By E. J. Kahn Jr.  295 pp.
New York: Viking. $19.95.


London's Crop Of Choice B &amp; B's
LEAD: NOBODY in the travel business seems to care much anymore about the discerning tourist of moderate means.
In London, as in most major cities around the world, the hotel chains have programmed their microchips to serve either the expense-account traveler or the packaged vacationer, trapping those who know what they like but can't always afford it between the basic $165-a-night Sheraton Hiltons on the one hand and the truly basic cell blocks of the mass-market travel trade on the other.


Thai Cuisine, Trekking Eastward
LEAD: THAI food is hot on Long Island.
Long a Manhattan favorite, this cuisine is slowly proceeding east.
Now, with the opening of the Thai Lemongrass Restaurant, the progression has reached Brentwood.


Put Humans in Space, As Well as Robots
LEAD: To the Editor:


Revaluations Anger Homeowners
LEAD: AS Trenton, Camden and Newark face their first revaluations of property in more than 25 years, the troubled experience of Jersey City offers an example of the confusion that revaluations can cause when they are postponed during years of rapidly rising real-estate values, tax experts and officials say.


Competing at a Risk
LEAD: Vowing to fight any resulting ban from competition, 13 American track and field stars, including several Olympic athletes, risked their careers yesterday by taking part in a meet in South Africa.
It was the first international meet held in the country since 1976, when South Africa was expelled from the International Amateur Track Federation.


BENTSEN APPEALS TO UNION MEMBERS
LEAD: Senator Lloyd Bentsen assailed the Republican ticket before older citizens in Northeastern Pennsylvania and union leaders in New York yesterday, vowing that he and Michael S. Dukakis ''will never sit idly by and watch America slip.''


TWO ROCHELLES MEET OVER FRENCH FARE


Five Nuns Meet Priest Dispatched by Vatican
LEAD: Five nuns locked in a spiritual battle over the intrusion of the modern world into their cloistered lives met today with a priest dispatched by the Vatican to help resolve the dispute.


Hawaii's Short-Sleeve Plumage
LEAD: LIKE fragrant woodroses and ruffled hibiscus, Hawaiian shirts are an integral, cheerful part of the Hawaiian landscape.
Hotel receptionists, newspaper vendors and fishermen unloading their catch at the Honolulu fish auction wear them, and so do many of their customers.
In Hawaii a business suit is a tucked-in aloha shirt, and there is no shortage of executives hurrying (admittedly in


WITH THE BARK OFF
LEAD:  GOLDWATER  By Barry M. Goldwater With Jack Casserly.
Illustrated. 414 pp.
New York:  Doubleday. $21.95.


Gaffe Me Your Tired. ..
LEAD: SENATOR LLOYD Bentsen ''was not likely to make any big national news,'' said his press secretary, Michael McCurry, ''because he's not prone to error.
He registers very low on the gaffe meter.''


Review/Music; Thouvenel String Quartet
LEAD: Composers have always used dissonance, in large or small measure, as an expressive tool; and listeners, depending on their orientation, have always found it shocking, surprising or affecting; sometimes all three.
In its program at Merkin Concert Hall on Thursday evening, the Thouvenel String Quartet - Eugene Purdue and Janet Chisholm, violinists; Sally Chisholm, violist, and Rebecca


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: A Year After the Crash, Climbing Back; Office Leasing Picking Up Pace in Manhattan
LEAD: IN the last year, downtown Manhattan has been a lonely place for landlords burdened by vacant office space.


U.S.C. Streak Intact, Barely
LEAD: After a first quarter in which neither team managed more than 15 yards rushing, after a half in which one team mustered only two first downs and the quarterback of the other ran 10 times for 42 yards in losses, there was little reason to believe that Southern Cal and Washington would give 62,974 in the Coliseum reason to be standing and hooting, exasperated over the final seconds of play.


; A Pianist Who Does Just As She Likes
LEAD: Mitsuko Uchida is still something of an enigma in the United States.
Is she a new competition-winning, 18-year-old technical wizard fresh from Japan?
Does she play anything other than Mozart, the composer with whom she is usually associated?
Does she speak English?


Student Rights Vs. School Responsibilities
LEAD: Earlier this year you published two letters on the Hazelwood decision of the Supreme Court affirming the right of a principal in St.
Louis to delete material from a student newspaper.
A former school-board member supported the decison, comparing the principal to a private publisher.
A Civil Liberties Union representative opposed the decision and the board member by claiming that a public school principal, unlike a private publisher, is a government official and cannot arbitrarily control student speech and press.


Focus on Game 2
LEAD:  Storm Davis  will be making his second World Series start.
Pitching 5 innings for the Baltimore Orioles in 1983, he earned a victory over the Philadelphia Phillies, despite allowing 6 hits and 3 runs.
He pitched well without a decision against Roger Clemens in Game 2 of this year's playoff.


The Difference Between Brooklyn And Here? Sidewalks
LEAD: MY mother-in-law's first reaction to our house in the county was: ''But there are no sidewalks!
Where will you walk with a baby carriage?'' At the time, mortgage payments - not baby carriages - were uppermost in our minds.


Kevin Sjodin Wed To Pamela Akers
LEAD: Pamela Renee Akers and Kevin Andrew Sjodin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton F. Sjodin of Fairfield, Conn., were married on Oct. 1, her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Akers of Westport, Conn., and Nantucket, Mass., have announced.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Robert L. Bast and the Rev.
Thomason L.


A Difficult Test
LEAD: MANY deals are like an onion:


Reviews/Dance; Rabelaisian Korean Folk Art
LEAD: Namsadang is the name of the lusty folk theater from South Korea that the Samul-Nori company and guests performed Friday night at the Asia Society.


Margot Murray To Wed Nov. 19
LEAD: The engagement of Margot Elizabeth Murray to Paul Christopher Leary has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald E. Murray of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mr.
Leary is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul M. Leary of Greenwich, Conn.
The wedding is planned for Nov. 19.
Miss Murray is an account executive in the New York office of Northern Telecom, a Canadian telephone system.


Without Electric Power System Expansion, We Face Blackouts
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHAT THEY'RE WEARING - BLACK
LEAD: No matter how vociferously designers, stores and the press promote color for evening, good old black remains a big favorite.
Certainly one gala evening last month provided ample evidence.
Manhattan's National Academy of Design was awash with women in beautiful black dresses at the preview dinner for the Geoffrey Beene ''First 25 Years'' exhibition.


Fire Razes Antebellum House
LEAD: A two-story frame house that withstood damage inflicted by cannon in the Civil War was destroyed Thursday in a fire believed to have been set by vagrants.
The vacant house was one of nine antebellum homes remaining in this northern Florida town. ''The Police Department had been running out some vagrants who had been staying there,'' said Capt.


The Bright Side of Hoover
LEAD: To the Editor:


Winning Streak Ends for Columbia
LEAD: Cockiness, not normally the byproduct of a single victory in five years of football, nonetheless pervaded football practice at Columbia all week.
Coach Larry McElreavy could sense it, and he did what he could to stop it.
But by week's end, it was still there: what McElreavy called an air of looseness about the team, an air of confidence among the players.


Books Written for Migrants' Children
LEAD: ''The Smallest Cow in the World'' is a special book to Derek Grace.
It is the story of a farm much like the one where he lives.
And the book's heroes, Marvin and May, look very much like Derek, who is 8 years old, and his 10-year-old sister Sarah.


Lush Crops and Profits in California
LEAD: Jack Pandol Sr. can watch the grape harvest on his family's 9,000-acre ranch near Delano in the heart of California's lush San Joaquin Valley this fall and permit himself a smile. ''Barring any unusual weather between now and Dec. 1,'' Mr.
Pandol said, ''we're quite optimistic.''


In Pursuit of the 20th Century Express) mm
LEAD: To Jack Cowart, one of the curators of 20th-century art at the National Gallery, it is ''a kind of coming-out party.'' Cobbled together during the last quarter-century, the museum's collection of paintings and sculptures since 1900 has over the years been displayed only sporadically, shunted aside whenever room is needed for blockbuster touring exhibitions.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: The Bare Facts The Town of Islip's naked man was getting an enthusiastic reception.


Mary E. Johnson Executive, Weds
LEAD: Mary Ellen Johnson, a vice president and the treasurer of the Sara Lee Corporation in Chicago, and Richard Karl Goeltz, the executive vice president for finance of the Seagram Company in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Herbert C. Skelly performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Spirit in Orleans,


Women Writers
LEAD: To the Editor:


The World Agrees: No More Khmer Rouge
LEAD: IN recent months, as the diplomatic pace toward a Cambodian settlement has quickened, one issue more than any other has taken on urgency: How can the Communist Khmer Rouge guerrillas be prevented from seizing power after Vietnam withdraws its troops?


LASORDA'S WEAPON IS EMOTION
LEAD: The manager of the Los Angeles Dodgers was walking, apparently aimlessly, through a clubhouse in St.
Louis late one afternoon last July when suddenly, to the happy surprise of one of his players, an unclaimed $20 bill appeared on the floor.


Oil Rig's Housing Unit Raised
LEAD: The housing module from an oil rig that exploded in July was hauled from the North Sea today to be searched for 112 bodies missing from the oil-rig disaster.
The rig, the Piper Alpha, exploded on July 6, killing 167 workers.
The module will be towed to the Orkney Islands in a two-day voyage.
There, the authorities will search it for bodies.


New Small Speakers Deliver Big Sound
LEAD: Harvest season.
Barns and barrels are filling up, and so are hi-fi shops.
With the audio industry clinging to the dubious notion that there must be new models every year, a fresh crop of components is sounding off each fall.
The assumption that the new stuff is better than the old is occasionally true, but that may not be a compelling reason to ditch your present rig.


350 Years of History Retraced in Exhibit on State Women
LEAD: FRAMED petition from 1669 which accused Katherine Harrison of witchcraft; the diary of a 16-year-old Irish girl who came to New Haven in the 1880's, and a 1987 photograph of the female graduating class of the police academy in Windsor Locks are all part of the exhibit ''Coming of Age: Connecticut Women and their Choices'' at the Connecticut Historical Society in


Blurring the Lines - Dots? - Between Camera and Brush
LEAD: OF ALL THE ARTISTS WHO CAME to be called Photo Realists in the early 1970's, only Chuck Close has successfully maintained a dialogue between the distinct but interlinked representational systems of painting and photography.


Clubs Not Lining Up to Copy Dodgers-A's Coups
LEAD: Although the teams that began the World Series last night were the busiest traders of last winter, general managers are apparently not sitting on the edge of their stadium seats waiting to unleash a flood of trades and free-agent signings this winter that could catapult their teams into next year's World


Cadigan Out 4-6 Weeks
LEAD: The Jets learned today that Dave Cadigan, their No. 1 draft pick, would be out from four to six weeks.
The rookie left tackle suffered a sprained left foot in practice Friday after he was kicked twice.


Eurailpass
LEAD: To the Editor: The statement in ''Taking Thrifty Cues From the Swiss'' (Travel, Aug. 14) that for visitors to Switzerland ''Eurailpass ... entitles them to unlimited first-class travel on the rail networks of Switzerland ...'' may be true in a technical sense, but it misleads the average tourist who does not realize that several private lines fail to qualify.


Leslie M. Ginway Wed To Peter Craig Gambee
LEAD: The wedding of Leslie McDowell Ginway, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Ginway of Lake Forest, Ill., and Mantoloking, N.J., to Peter Craig Gambee, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Craig Gambee of Weston, Conn., took place yesterday at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Bay Head, N.J.
The Rev.
Hugh McGlashon Jr.


Susanna R. Sieglaff Is Wed in Delaware To William Brown 3d, a Sales Manager
LEAD: At Trinity Episcopal Church in Wilmington, Del., Susanna Read Sieglaff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Maynard Sieglaff of Wilmington, was married yesterday to William Lee Lyons Brown 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brown Jr. of Louisville, Ky.
The Rev.
J.
Clark Grew 2d, the godfather of the bride, performed the ceremony.


SHERIDAN'S RIDE
LEAD:  THE GUNS OF CEDAR CREEK  By Thomas A. Lewis.
Illustrated. 371 pp.
New York:  Harper &amp; Row. $24.95.


Easy Goer Wins Champagne
LEAD: Easy Goer continued to look like the most promising 2-year-old in the last five years when he scored an easy victory in the Champagne Stakes at Belmont Park yesterday.
But his filly counterpart had a much closer call in the $349,200 Frizette.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  THIS FAR AND NO MORE: A True Story, by Andrew H. Malcolm. (Signet/New American Library, $4.50.) With Lou Gehrig's disease crippling her muscle by muscle, Emily Bauer decided to exercise her right to die. ''The reader, unabashedly voyeuristic, absorbs detail after detail about the torture of an intelligent mind entrapped in a useless body,'' Gloria Hochman said here in 1987.


C. Ellis Schiffmacher, 79, Counsel to Towns
LEAD: C. Ellis Schiffmacher, a lawyer who represented many municipalities and government agencies on Long Island, died Thursday at his home in Great Neck.
He was 79 years old.


Art Museums Abroad Seek U.S. Funds
LEAD: When the Tate Gallery in London decided to raise money last year to buy a painting by Jackson Pollock, it turned not only to its own coffers but also to a source that it believed was ripe for an approach: wealthy Americans.


Amsterdam
LEAD: To the Editor: Allow this Sephardic Jewish son of Amsterdam to commend Marylin Bender on her article about Amsterdam (Travel, Aug. 14).
However, there are a few assertions that should be corrected.
I lived in A'dam at the time in question and was subsequently arrested and sent to Auschwitz so I remember that nobody called de Joodse Raad the Judenrat.


WITH A LITTLE HELP FROM SOME FRIENDS
LEAD:  THE FIRST SALUTE  By Barbara W. Tuchman.
Illustrated. 347 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95.


Kitty Lorentzen Has a Bridal
LEAD: Cornelia Maria Lorentzen, the daughter of Mrs.
Robert Pollard 3d of Sugar Hill, N.H., and Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Per Arne Lorentzen, was married yesterday to James Keen Cornell, a son of Mrs.
Mortimer Ryon of Solebury, Pa., and Nantucket, Mass., and M. Keen Cornell of Bear Creek, Pa.
The ceremony was performed at St.


Bookshelf
LEAD:  Additional titles of interest:


BECOMING BORIS
LEAD:  CHALIAPIN  A Critical Biography.
By Victor Borovsky.
Illustrated. 630 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $45.


In Melbourne, A Silly Day At the Races
LEAD: A GIRL in a swimming costume under a fur coat climbed aboard the green tram.
Her boyfriend was on roller skates and wore long red socks and a red cap.
There were men in top hats and the Australian ''digger's'' slouch hat with its brim upturned on one side.
One person had a pig's face as a mask.


Algeria Riots Said to Bolster Islamic Militants
LEAD: One clear winner in the wave of unrest in Algeria has been the Islamic fundamentalist movement, many officials and diplomats here say.


A Girl's Peace Mission to Moscow
LEAD: FROM the beginning, it was a most unusual project for a group of five children: to embark on a three-week international peace mission on behalf of children who had died in wars since 1930.


By Definition
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A Travel Advisory report on Sept. 25 about fall foliage misstated the telephone number for information on Rhode Island.
The number is 800-556-2484; it can be used only from East Coast states from Maine through Virginia, plus West Virginia and northern Ohio.
Elsewhere, the number is 401-277-2601.


Dubious Celebration Of Insult and Prejudice
LEAD: Any unbiased examination, or simply reading of the ''real'' story of this restricted ''private'' community could never come up with such glowing language that you used to describe this ''idyllic life'' settlement on Fire Island, that includes a 6-foot chain link, topped by a 2-foot barbed wire fence from the bay to the ocean, with locks and gates to keep the two ''worlds'' of Fire


Sports of The Times; Going Straight
LEAD: Fred Claire had made big decisions before.
He used to be one of those dynamic, responsible, bottom-line, big-picture captains of industry known as sportswriters.


A New Influence in Gardens
LEAD: If James van Sweden and Wolfgang Oehme have their way, the American residential landscape is in for some major changes by the time the 21st century rolls around.
Already, their landscape architecture firm, Oehme, van Sweden &amp; Associates, founded in 1975 and based in Washington, has won kudos for its fresh style of garden design.


Mayor's Admission of Infidelity Brings Pain to San Antonio and Questions on Press
LEAD: For eight years, he has been cheerleader, role model, a figure of virtual reverence: not just the Mayor, but the embodiment of what many San Antonians aspire to be.


Q and A
LEAD:  Ban on Trust Ownerships


No Place Like Home
LEAD: After winning two gold medals at the Olympics an athlete is entititled to one of those luxury vacations in some strange and exotic clime.
And when they returned from Seoul, South Korea, Jackie Joyner-Kersee and her husband, Bob Kersee, decided to do just that, picking what Joyner-Kersee regards as the ideal place to be, her hometown of East St.


Vigorous Portugese in Danbury
LEAD: THE robust country cooking of Portugal can be found at its Connecticut best in a modest little storefront restaurant in Danbury called O Faia (named for the owner, Joao Martins Faia).


Algeria's Unhappy Revolutionary Example
LEAD: WATCHING images of destruction in downtown Algiers flicker across the television screen, a group of conservative Arab diplomats gathered in a Jordanian businessman's home last week agreed that the explosion of wrath by young Algerians against their Government had swept away the image of a triumphant and progressive


Star Trekking
LEAD: LET ME ASSURE YOU, the Saturday that I spent walking around Manhattan trying to spot a celebrity, any celebrity, broke all the rules.
Sure, my friends and I have hyper-evolved eyes for spotting famous people on the street, but it's not supposed to be a conscious activity.


THE REGION: A New District Attorney; Bronx Politics Gradually Catches Up With Its People
LEAD: ''LOOK at the Bronx and you're looking at the future.'' That was how the Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, who is Hispanic, viewed the imminent election of Robert T. Johnson, who is black, as the borough's district attorney.
To some politicians, the emergence of both Mr.
Ferrer and Mr.
Johnson in the past year signals the politics of the future in a city where minority groups are becoming the majority.


Art and Money Go South in California
LEAD: In the larger scheme of things, it seems fitting that the all-California World Series beginning here today bypasses elegant San Francisco, pitting this gritty rival to the south against Oakland.


LAW SCHOOL V. REALITY
LEAD: Scott Turow notes that ''our notions of privacy have changed and . . . venerable institutions like churches and schools have come to speak with less uniform authority.'' He fails to note what a major role democratic law, and lawyers, have played in dispelling the authority of the other institutions he mentions.


ARTS AND CRAFTS: JED JOHNSON and ALAN WANZENBERG
LEAD: The Arts and Crafts furniture and collectibles that fill this Manhattan apartment speak volumes about the design style of the owners, Jed Johnson, a decorator, and Alan Wanzenberg, an architect.
These pieces, all products of a decorative movement that began in England in the 1880's, stemmed from a strong collaboration between architect, designer and craftsman.


New York Region Brushes Off Effect Of Oct. 19 Collapse
LEAD: A year after the stock-market collapse sent shock waves through the New York metropolitan region, economists and business executives say most job seekers have little cause for worry -their skills are in high demand.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Pittsburgh
LEAD: THE largest mixed-use development in this area is rising in Robinson Township, about 15 miles west of downtown and two miles east of the Greater Pittsburgh International Airport.


2 Stand Trial for Bribery on Alaska's North Slope
LEAD: One of Alaska's most powerful political lobbyists has gone on trial here on Federal charges of bribery and racketeering, accused with a business associate of corrupting the Eskimo-led North Slope Borough government to reap millions of dollars in illegal gains.


A Contra Leader Says the Civil War Is Futile
LEAD: Declaring that the military struggle against the Sandinista Government is futile, a Nicaraguan rebel leader has announced the formation of a new group to push for peaceful change in his country.


Nicaragua's Economic Crisis Is Seen as Worsening
LEAD: Although the machine guns and mortars that echoed across Nicaragua for six years have largely fallen silent, the country is facing a profound social, political and economic crisis that diplomats and political leaders say will probably take years or even decades to resolve.


Piano Concert Opens a New Series Caramoor
LEAD: THIS weekend promises to be busy, with a piano recital, a chamber program and an orchestral concert among the opening night events, along with appearances by a major flute-piano duo, a county-based brass quintet and a visiting orchestra from Czechoslovakia.


An Ear for Music
LEAD: Ever since they escaped their medieval anonymity, artists, it is generally believed, have invested their work with their own personalities.
And in the last century, the notion arose that even specific events in an artist's life leave imprints on his creations.
Tracing such causal connections has since become the stock in trade of countless biographers.


Work Force Needs Older Employees
LEAD: I would like to respond to Diana Ballard's article entitled ''Older Workers: Needed but Not Wanted.'' (Opinion page, Sept. 4).


U.S. Weighs Easing of Strains With North Korea
LEAD: The United States is expected to take some modest but symbolically important steps toward opening diplomatic and trade contacts with North Korea as proposed by Seoul, State Department officials said today.


Don't Blame Strawberry
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


In Sudan, an Airlift to a Town of Misery
LEAD: A 10-year-old girl, so feeble from malnutrition that she walked with faltering steps like an old woman, her body so weak that her voice had become a scratchy whisper, was helped into the feeding center here today.


Question Of the Week; Once and For All, What About The D.H. in The Series?
LEAD: Dump the d.h.
In the intense atmosphere of a World Series game, eliminating the strategic moves by a manager relating to the pitcher slot is criminal.
TOM VENTRA  New York


Q and A
LEAD:  Bloomsbury


Sex Scenes: Handle With Utmost Care
LEAD: Since the plot of the courtroom drama ''The Accused'' hinges on the facts of a rape case and the manner in which they will be perceived by a jury, there's a lot riding on how the film depicts the crime.
Will the rape be presented in an exploitative way?
Will its impact be used to anger and upset the audience?


Catherine Friedman Weds Jon Duane
LEAD: Catherine Joan Friedman and Jon Richard Duane were married yesterday at St.
Raymond's Roman Catholic Church in Menlo Park, Calif., by the Rev.
William J. McCurdy.


Dr. Joel Solomon Wed To Emily Dana Honig
LEAD: Emily Dana Honig, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Honig of Great Neck, L.I., and Dr.
Joel Michael Solomon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin E. Solomon of Columbus, N.J., were married yesterday at the Park East Synagogue in Manhattan.


Zoning the 'Land of Milk and Honey'
LEAD: AS the town of Goshen gets ready to celebrate its 250th birthday, it finds itself beset by development pressures and legal battles over zoning laws.
The outcome will determine what will become of this former farming community in the future.


A Playwright Takes on Television
LEAD: ''I've got to keep my blood pressure down,'' David Mamet says when asked about his forays as a writer and director into the television and movie executive hierarchy. ''My experience with most movie producers has been that their job is to say, in effect, 'I'll tell you why we can't do that.' Or to say, 'I get it and you get it, but are they going to get it?.


Correction
LEAD: An essay on July 10 about the bicentennial of the French Revolution misidentified the French publisher of the Dictionnaire Critique de la Revolution Francaise.
Flammarion is publishing the book this month.


Israeli and 8 Arabs Wounded
LEAD: Assailants with axes and knives attacked an Israeli businessman in the West Bank after Israeli forces raided three villages today and rounded up 20 Palestinians suspected of making bombs.


POSTINGS: Tennis Courts, Too; Upgrading U.P.S.
LEAD: A large office building, topped by three clay tennis courts for those whose labors include perfecting a backhand, is to be fashioned from the 400,000-square-foot former United Parcel Service distribution center, at 333 East 38th Street.


Dr. Lynne M. Zeavin Is Married to Charles Musser
LEAD: Dr.
Lynne Marie Zeavin, the daughter of Dr.
Irvin Zeavin of Channel Islands, Calif., and the late Barbara I. Zeavin, was married last evening to Charles John Musser, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert John Musser of Greenwich, Conn.
Judge Emily Jane Goodman of Civil Court officiated at the Loft in Manhattan.


Ants Invade BAM. Puppets in Cahoots
LEAD: ''The fighting should be like a dance - not serious and tragic, but more like a fairy tale.'' Lee Breuer, in rehearsal, is directing the great battle sequence of ''The Warrior Ant,'' his epic-in-progress that opens the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival on Wednesday. ''I want it as if we were making a Kurosawa movie with Walt Disney cartoons,'' he says.


TWO GENERATIONS: GROWING UP IN JERUSALEM
LEAD: LATE ONE AFTERNOON in March, I was driving to the Hebrew University campus on Mount Scopus.
Suddenly, as I was waiting near Damascus Gate for the traffic light to change, I made a decision: Instead of driving directly, as usual, through the Arab section, I turned left, taking ''the Jewish way'' -through the safe


Paris by Bus
LEAD: To the Editor: After dinner in Paris several years ago my wife and I impulsively boarded a No. 72 bus on the Rue de Rivoli and enjoyed a beautiful ride that went on and on with fewer and fewer passengers until we were alone with the young driver and his uniformed female companion.
At St.
Cloud we were informed that it was the end of the line.


Belmont's Final Day Is Canceled
LEAD: The closing day of racing at Belmont Park tomorrow has been canceled in deference to the funeral of the jockey Michael Venezia and because of a threatened strike by the track's jockeys over demands for pay increases and improved safety standards.


Capitals Pummel Devils and Sauve
LEAD: The Devils yielded three goals before they took their first shot tonight and never quite recovered from the early shock.


Qian Changzhao, Politician, 89
LEAD: Qian Changzhao, a former official in the Nationalist Government and a ranking member of the mainland version of the Nationalist Party, died Friday, the official New China News Agency said.
He was 89 years old.


Asbury Park Fined for Beach Pollution
LEAD: The state of New Jersey has fined Asbury Park more than $1 million for causing the ocean pollution that closed a popular stretch of Monmouth County beaches for 19 days this summer.


Miss Briggs Weds in Rye
LEAD: At Christ's Episcopal Church in Rye, N.Y., Ashley Catlin Briggs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Briggs Jr. of Rye, was married yesterday to Jason Ruggles Bernhard, a son of Mrs.
John Updike of Beverly Farms, Mass., and Alexander H. Bernhard of Boston.
The Rev.
Perry R. Williams, the Dean of Trinity Episcopal Cathedral in Cleveland, performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


11 Judges Approved by Senate
LEAD: The Senate approved 11 of President Reagan's judicial appointments on Friday, but at least 15 others have virtually no chance of approval before Congress adjourns for the year.


After a Three-Year Fight, Students Can Vote at Local Polls
LEAD: WHEN students at the State University of New York at Purchase, Sarah Lawrence College and Manhattanville College vote at county polling places next month, many may not realize that they are taking part in something that is impossible in many other areas of New York State and very new in Westchester


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD: BRAHMS AT CATHEDRAL When the 60-piece Cathedral Symphony Orchestra celebrates the works of Brahms next Sunday afternoon in Newark's Cathedral of the Sacred Heart, it will be joined by two soloists and a 40-voice men's chorus.
And the reverberent acoustics of the cathedral should do nothing but enhance the symphony's performance of Brahms's Third Symphony under the direction of Keith


Jet Lag
LEAD: To the Editor: There have been many articles about jet lag.
John Alcock and Arthur Brown, who made the first nonstop trans-Atlantic fllight in 1919, also suffered jet lag, although in their case it should be called prop lag.
They flew from Newfoundland to Ireland in a World War I Vickers Vimy surplus bomber, a twin-engine open cockpit biplane.


'Electronic Cottages' Take Root
LEAD: While others commute to offices, millions of workers will stay home this week, toiling in their dens, spare bedrooms, kitchens, converted attics, garages and basements.
Link Resources, a research firm, says about 9.5 million people who work at home are self-employed, running their own businesses, while an additional 15.5 million work at home for others.


'Little Shop of Horrors' Is Staged
LEAD: TO preserve the purity of ''Little Shop of Horrors,'' a sweet musical spoof about a blood-guzzling plant in a skid row flower shop, the New York producers resisted all offers to move the show to Broadway.
After all, it originated in a 98-seat institutional theater and was transferred to a 340-seat commercial Off


The Looks for Less
LEAD: Creating the looks of America's top interior designers need not be costly.
In fact, if you can be content with furnishings that don't bear the pedigree of the established decorating sources, affordable suppliers abound.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  MENDELSSOHN CACHE  Seven newly discovered pieces of organ music by Mendelssohn will be played by seven Fairfield County organists in a concert at 7:30 this evening at the Greens Farms Congregational Church, 71 Hillandale Avenue, Westport.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Croton Falls, N.Y.  $206,500  Sun Valley Heights  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 28-year-old ranch; fireplace, w/b stove, playroom, office; walk to station; taxes $2,862.
Lincolndale, N.Y.  $275,000  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old raised ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage, walk to school and shopping; taxes $3,768.


Which Candidate Understands a Mother's Fear?
LEAD: To the Editor:


A River's Beauty In a 2-Part Show
LEAD: THE show ''Landscape Painters of the Delaware River'' is divided between two locations, both in Trenton.
One is the Trenton City Museum in Cadwalader Park, the other Artworks, at 19 Everett Alley (off Stockton Street).


How a Bush or Dukakis Victory Will Affect Jobs
LEAD: Job CREATION, an equivocal phase once found mostly in economic textbooks, has entered the nation's political vernacular with a vengeance this election year, and both Michael S. Dukakis and George Bush are responsible.


THE DIFFERENT DRUMS OF BOB TELSON
LEAD: OFF EASTERN PARKWAY on St.
John's Place in Brooklyn, the music begins a slow swell as a stranger walks up the street, past Glenda's West Indian Restaurant, past the freshly painted row houses with their immaculate, barren front yards.
It grows louder near a house toward the end of the block, louder still on the stoop, through a kitchen to the backyard, where the sound of Moods Pan


Reviews/Dance; Martha Graham Reworks Mythology
LEAD: Martha Graham does more than retell old stories in her mythological dances; she also tries to revivify them and set them moving in what she once called ''the dangerous landscape of the mind.'' The Martha Graham Dance Company presented two mythological works last Sunday at the City Center Theater.
The first act of ''Clytemnestra'' was performed in the afternoon, and ''Cave of the Heart,'' based on ''Medea,'' was offered in the evening.


Book Says Hoover Wanted to Tilt the Courts
LEAD: A new biography of J. Edgar Hoover, the longest-serving Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, says Chief Justice Warren E. Burger in 1971 sought the bureau's help in selecting conservative court administrators who, in Mr.
Hoover's words, might keep ''some of these stupid appellate opinions from coming out.


It's Bulb Planting Time
LEAD: BULB planting continues.
Don't forget to mow the lawn; mowers are set to cut high, but the last cut will be shorter to about one-inch.
Rake leaves off lawns and add them to compost, flower borders or vegetable patches.
Dig, dry and store tender bulbs, such as caladiums and tuberous begonias, if tops have been weakened by frost.


Fraternity Row Integrated at Ole Miss
LEAD: Two and a half months after an arson fire that threatened to prevent it, fraternity row here at Ole Miss is integrated today.


A Mania For Testing Spells Money
LEAD: ITEM: Some 1.7 million high school students will pay $13 each to take the Scholastic Aptitude Test this school year and another million or so will pay $11.50 to take the American College Test, all in hopes of getting into the college of their choice.


Protestant Militant Is Slain In Raid on East Belfast Bar
LEAD: Gunmen wearing jeans and ski masks burst into a Belfast bar tonight and killed a leader of the biggest Protestant paramilitary group in Northern Ireland, the police said.


Discovering Harriet Wilson
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alex Scribner Has Wedding
LEAD: At St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in Mount Kisco, N.Y., Alexandra Crowell Scribner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard O. Scribner of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Colin Mark Carter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Shelby H. Carter Jr. of Dallas.
The Rev.
Richard S. Anderson performed the ceremony.


'Biblical Scorecard' Chooses Bush, But With Reluctance
LEAD: The Presidential Biblical Scoreboard is a four-color, 48-page publication with a political message for America's evangelistic faithful: come November, hold your nose and vote for George Bush.


Giants Going Nowhere, Statistically
LEAD: For several weeks now, the Giants have been confronted with a succession of problems that have had the cumulative effect of breaking the team's rhythm and dampening its spirit.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Garden City  $308,400  131 Chestnut Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old colonial; dining room, screened porch, fireplace, 1- car garage; taxes $3,000.
Farmingville  $195,000  7 Fourth Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4- year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage; taxes $3,400.


Detroit Has Hard Times And One Man In Charge
LEAD: IN his 15 years as Mayor of Detroit, Coleman A. Young has seen the city's industrial base decline and its population shrink.
So he didn't seem surprised recently when the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Detroit announced that it, too, would be pulling up some stakes.
Mr.
Young said the archdiocese plan to close more than one-third of its churches in the city was simply a ''belated recognition'' of the fact that their congregations had long since left.


Army Speed Sends Lafayette to Defeat
LEAD: Army was too quick for Lafayette today, too determined, too tough.
The Cadet backs ran for 450 yards and the defense maintained pressure on the Leopards' outstanding passer, Frank Baur, right to the end.


Tyson's Career Hurt by Gossip
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Salvador's Poverty Is Called Worst of Century
LEAD: Ravaged by drought and war, more Salvadorans are living in abject poverty than at any other time in this century, according to economists, diplomats and Government statistics.


Question Of the Week; Once and For All, What About The D.H. in The Series?
LEAD: The d.h. at games in American League parks, no d.h. at games in National League parks.
That's easy to remember and equitable for comparing Series performance year to year.
RANDY J. WOODBURY  Fredonia, N.Y.


Still Sweating, but in Nicer Clothes
LEAD: In the movie ''Pumping Iron,'' Arnold Schwarzenegger's oiled chest earned him the Mr.
Olympia crown, and the sweaty gym he used was celebrated as the odoriferous temple of body building.


Overlooking Warts At Point O'Woods
LEAD: As a Point O'Woods neighbor who overlooks the ball field and chain-link fence, please note, There is no barbed wire (for at least 25 years).


HOW SWEET IT IS
LEAD: A SIMPLE PIECE OF PIE OR A BOWL OF ICE cream barely qualifies as dessert anymore.
Instead, diners are scanning the menu for something that's unforgettably rich and intense.
That may explain why a number of chefs are presenting more elaborate, more voluptuous and even more desserts on the plate.
A few chefs are offering three or four desserts at once, each a variation on a single flavor.


CHALLENGERS SEEKING TO UNSEAT 4 DEMOCRATIC ASSEMBLYMEN
LEAD: In election campaigns ranging from casual to intense, four incumbent State Assemblymen from the county's southern tier are being challenged this year by candidates seeking to break the Democratic hold on the area.


GIBSON LIMPS OFF WITH GLORY
LEAD: Before the first game of the World Series tonight, Tommy Lasorda, the usually optimistic manager of the Los Angeles Dodgers, was discussing the physical status of his No. 1 hitter and team leader, Kirk Gibson.


MEXICO TO START FIRST ATOM PLANT
LEAD: In the face of public opposition, the Mexican Government has ordered the start-up of this country's first nuclear power plant, a project burdened by two decades of construction delays, cost overruns and technical criticism.


RESULTS
LEAD:  Horse Racing  Winning Colors Finishes Fourth: The long shot Hail a Cab charged down the stretch to overcome a 15-length deficit yesterday and win the $264,000 Grade I Spinster Stakes at Keeneland, Ky.
Winning Colors, the winner of the Kentucky Derby, was fourth in a field of five fillies and mares.


U.S. Agent Held by Gunman
LEAD: An American consular agent was held at gunpoint for 14 hours in the Mexican port city of Veracruz, then released unharmed Friday after the gunman surrendered to Mexican officials, the American Embassy and local justice officials said.
An embassy statement said the consular agent, Edwin Culp, emerged unharmed from his office after being held by a man demanding justice in an inheritance dispute.


First-Class Fare Lives, a Puzzle
LEAD: Rumors of the death of first class are premature.
If evidence is needed, some people are paying more than is required to sit in first class.
And fare-cutting little Virgin Atlantic is increasing the space it allows for its premium-fare seats.


Lori Tarnopol Is Married to David Lewis Moore
LEAD: Lori Tarnopol, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Tarnopol of New York, was married yesterday evening to David Lewis Moore, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Isadore Moore of Scotch Plains, N.J.
Rabbis Stanley Davids and George Nudell performed the ceremony, accompanied by Cantor Richard Botton.


Reviews/Music; The Harrington Quartet, From West Texas State U.
LEAD: In 1981, the arts patron Sybil Harrington endowed a resident-artist program at West Texas State University.
To fill the residency, the school put together a quartet, which adopted its benefactress's name.
The ensemble - Dawn Harms and James Lyon, violinists; Amy Brandfonbrener, violist, and Brian Manker, cellist - made its New York debut on Wednesday at the 92d Street Y.


Prosecutors Assail Davis's Mother's Character
LEAD: Mary Davis, the mother of Larry Davis, made a qualified admission at her son's trial last week that she had earlier sought to influence a witness who was going to testify at the trial of another of her seven sons.


Question Of the Week; Once and For All, What About The D.H. in The Series?
LEAD: Let the ''real'' teams play.


Islanders Get By Canadiens
LEAD: It was an understated home opener, but according to Coach Terry Simpson, that was the only way for his Islanders to approach an evening with the Montreal Canadiens.


No Sale
LEAD: To the Editor:


PLAIN GEOMETRY: MARIETTE HIMES GOMEZ
LEAD: Listening to Mariette Himes Gomez discuss the design of a room conjures up images from a geometry class.
Words like ''solids'' and ''voids,'' ''volumes'' and ''planes'' invariably crop up in her descriptions.
Not surprising, then, that geometric shapes can be found in most of her rooms.
Take the master bedroom of her Long Island country house.


For Chicago, Racial Politics Is Becoming A Tradition
LEAD: IN most places, people are members of one ethnic group or another by birth and members of one political party or another by choice.
In Chicago, it often works the other way around.
Most people here were born Democrats.
But ethnic identity, in a broad sense, can effectively be a matter of choice.


In the West, A Museum In a Chateau
LEAD: DISTANCES are long in the austere landscape of central Washington State.


THE K.G.B. AND THE FAMILY TREE
LEAD:  TWO LIVES, ONE RUSSIABy Nicholas Daniloff.
Illustrated. 317 pp.
Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


Big Money Talks, Again, in Presidential Politics
LEAD: Political fat cats are in style again, and their comeback could not have been more obvious than at a Democratic cocktail party the other night on this strip of gaudy hotels that still symbolizes indulgence.


ACTORS AND MIRACLES
LEAD:  WATER INTO WINE  By Helen Norris.  152 pp.
Chicago:  University of Illinois Press.


Elizabeth L. Baum Is Wed To William Louis Berman
LEAD: Elizabeth Lee Baum, an associate in the Westwood, Mass., law office of Maureen A. O'Reilly, and William Louis Berman, an assistant district attorney for Middlesex County in Concord, Mass., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Ellen Lewis officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore B.


Bush Presses Issue of Rival's Liberalism
LEAD: Vice President Bush courted swing voters in California's Central Valley today by arguing that liberalism had lost faith in the American people.


Question Of the Week; Once and For All, What About The D.H. in The Series?
LEAD: With the advent of the d.h., the Tinkerses and Everses, Stankys and Darks, Rizzutos and Gordons, have been replaced by the left-hand batting what's-his-name batting against the right-hand pitching so-and-so who doesn't even get a time at bat.
JACK LEYTON  Fresh Meadows, Queens


Dukakis Takes On a Combative Edge
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis assailed Vice President Bush on crime and national security issues today, accusing him of being ineffective in the war against drugs and inattentive to the needs of the nation's armed service members.


Campaign Worries Goldwater
LEAD: Barry Goldwater, concerned about the tenor of the Presidential campaign, urged Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis on Friday to ''quit calling each other names'' and concentrate on important issues like the national debt and Federal budget deficits.


Donald Trump Bets On the Shuttle
LEAD: Donald Trump is acquiring another East Coast institution, the Eastern Airlines shuttle that links New York, Boston and Washington.
The New York developer will pay $365 million for the 17-plane operation, which was the most profitable part of financially troubled Eastern.
The sale provides much-needed cash for Eastern's parent, Texas Air, while keeping rival airlines away from such a valuable property.


Floor Coverings
LEAD: COVERING wood floors with carpeting, asphalt tile or resilient flooring makes sense when restoring the floor is impossible or when the qualities of a particular floor covering are desired.
However, simply installing the new covering over the old floor can invite trouble.


Saving the Past From the Future
LEAD: THE temporary lab was in the dimly lighted basement of one of the farm's outbuildings.
A petite silhouette, that of an archeologist, leaned over a long bench doubling as a desk and covered with tools, brushes, maps and a box of more than a hundred small, labeled plastic pouches.


Anderson's Works Performed On Tour
LEAD: IF Maxwell Anderson is to be appreciated anew, it is not likely to be as a consequence of the random compilation of the prolific playwright's works that is being produced by Uni/Verse, a Connecticut touring group specializing in what it calls ''literary performances,'' intended to fall somewhere between a staged reading and a complete production.


Alaska
LEAD: To the Editor: My wife and I recently returned from an Alaska vacation, which we mostly enjoyed.
What we wish we could have enjoyed thoroughly was our bus ride through Denali National Park.
The vehicle that shook us and approximately 46 other frail senior citizens through the park was an uncomfortable school bus with thinly upholstered, wobbly benches bolted to the floor and the kind of windows you have a hard time seeing through because they are small and have a metal stril running horizontally through the middle.


U.S. Reported Trailing Japan In the Superconductor Race
LEAD: In the race to commercialize new superconductors that could revolutionize the electronics, energy and transportation industries, the United States is already in danger of falling behind Japan, many experts say.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Local Colleges; Hofstra No Longer On Undefeated List
LEAD: Terry Underwood, who carried 39 times for 363 yards, scored three touchdowns as Wagner, defending champion of Division III of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, knocked Hofstra from the ranks of the undefeated, 30-24, yesterday at Fischer Field, Staten Island.
The game was played before a Homecoming


Theories on Boxing
LEAD: On the theory that the best way for a boxing promoter to assure himself a supply of future championship bouts is to hook up with some present boxing champions, Bob Arum has signed deals to promote fights for three Olympic gold medalists, and, just for good measure, two runners-up from the Olympic trials.


Prospects; Next's New Box
LEAD: After a delayof almost a year, Steven P. Jobs introduced his first new computer since leaving the Apple Computer Company in 1985.
The new machine, called the Next Computer System, was unveiled last week in San Francisco.
Aimed at the university market, it will sell for $6,500, more than a personal computer but considerably less than a work station.


Dr. Elisa H. Birnbaum Wed To Dr. Darryl Zuckerman
LEAD: Dr.
Elisa Hope Birnbaum, a resident in general surgery at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, L.I., and Dr.
Darryl Adam Zuckerman, the chief resident in radiology at the medical center, were married last evening at Sinai Temple in Champaign, Ill., by Rabbi Brad Bloom.


The Medicare Conspiracy: Becoming 'Old' Ahead of Time
LEAD: ALL of us get to be 65, if we're lucky.
That's when you enter the world of Medicare.


San Francisco's Military Base With Scenery
LEAD: IN June 1776, about the time Benjamin Franklin, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson were discussing the Declaration of Independence in Philadelphia, a young Spanish soldier named Juan Bautista de Anza planted a wooden cross on a windswept hillside above San Francisco Bay and decreed that a presidio would be built on the site.


Tokyo Finance Minister Is Implicated in a Scandal
LEAD: Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa came under fire today after he changed his testimony in a stock trading scandal and disclosed Friday that 10,000 shares of the stock in question were bought in his name.


Mythic Start, Bitter End
LEAD: The beginnings of the long, strange relationship between Du Pont and the Government are enshrined as part of the lore of the nuclear age.
Page 28.


768 Yards by Oklahoma
LEAD: Oklahoma ran for a record 768 yards, including 3 touchdowns by Charles Thompson, in routing Kansas State, 70-24, in a Big Eight Conference game today.


Reviews/Dance; A Partner Pays Tribute To an Artist
LEAD: Hector Tello, a dancer and choreographer who died last October, was celebrated on Tuesday at Japan House in a program of great warmth that was put together by Saeko Ichinohe, with whom Mr.
Tello had danced since 1980.
Dances, slide projections and reminiscences served to summon up Mr.
Tello's life and career, with Miss Ichinohe contributing two new pieces inspired by her young protege.


Millstone Township Journal; Residents Fight Incinerator as Threat to Bucolic Life
LEAD: EARLY on a recent Sunday morning, about 25 men and 3 women gathered in an abandoned soybean field that has been designated as part of a proposed 146-acre incinerator site.


Medical Study Losing Ground to Law
LEAD: Mark Lerner, a senior at Haverford College outside Philadelphia, is weighing the benefits of two careers that cross the minds of practically every college student: medicine and law.


Supermarket Mergers Will Mean Higher Prices
LEAD: To the Editor:


Game Wtih a Bit of an English Flair
LEAD: ANYONE who does not think the English eccentric, will reconsider when it comes to the shooting season.
After Aug. 12 and until Feb. 1, those privileged with large country houses start the round of shooting lunches and house parties, ''walking up'' grouse, ''pegging and unpegging'' dogs, getting out their shooting sticks and cartridge bags and hoping that their guests will not bring back birds that have been ''badly shot.


8 Educators Recognized With Awards of $25,000
LEAD: EIGHT educators are making plans that range from sending youngsters to summer camps to buying a diamond ring with the $25,000 awards each received for their work in the schools.


Penthouses
LEAD: To the Editor:


POSTINGS: Prize-Winning House; 'Realms' for All
LEAD: Beginning with the log cabin, wood has been the most popular material for American homes.
More than 90 percent of new homes are wood frame, according to the American Wood Council.


Miss McDonald Wed in Baltimore
LEAD: Elizabeth Hinsdale McDonald, a marketing manager for Time Inc. in New York, and Trevor Bowen Peard, an English teacher at the Choate Rosemary Hall school in Wallingford, Conn., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Blair Newcomb performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Baltimore.


LESSON NO. 1: EAT YOUR MIND
LEAD:  EMPIRE OF THE SENSELESS  By Kathy Acker.
Illustrated by the author.  229 pp.
New York:  Grove Press. $17.95.


Andrea E. Lodahl Is Married in Jersey
LEAD: The marriage of Andrea Elizabeth Lodahl and John Bell Henneman 3d, both lawyers in Chicago, took place yesterday at the chapel of the Lawrenceville (N.J.) School.
The Rev.
James H. Dunkerley, an Episcopal priest, officiated.


Grumbles in the Shower
LEAD: To the Editor:


WOMEN AND THE IDEAL FAMILY
LEAD: One really must wonder whether Jane O'Reilly has got hold of the straight goods.
If women are concerned about issues such as day care, abortion, equal rights, etc., then why, given the electoral majority they possess, did they do nothing at the polls to defeat Ronald Reagan, who certainly could not be suspected of holding a brief for any of those issues?


Marion Williams Wed in Maryland
LEAD: The wedding of Marion Elaine Williams, a management consultant in New York, to Stephen Irving Robertson, an investment banker in New York, took place yesterday at the Bethesda Presbyterian Church in Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
James G. Macdonell performed the ceremony.


CONJURING UP PAINTINGS AND LIGHT SHOWS
LEAD:  THE WEST DOOR  By Alfred Corn.  75 pp.
New York: Viking. $17.95.
FICTIONS FROM THE SELF  By Michael Burkard.  172 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $15.95.
BY CONTRARIESAnd Other Poems.
By Mark Rudman.  161 pp.
Orono, Me.: The National Poetry Foundation.
Cloth, $25.
Paper, $12.95.


Nancy Marchand Reflects
LEAD: First, there's Nancy Marchand the actress. ''I love theater,'' she says. ''I love to act.'' Then there's Nancy Marchand the person.


Syracuse Rallies To Win a Big One
LEAD: A crowd of 85,916, the second-largest in Beaver Stadium history, turned out expecting to see Penn State avenge a 48-21 loss to Syracuse last year.
Instead, it saw Syracuse become only the 11th team in Joe Paterno's 23 years as head coach to score consecutive victories over the Nittany Lions.
Syracuse, trailing by a point at halftime, rallied for 18 second-half points to defeat Penn State, 24-10.


Off-Season Work Pays Off
LEAD: The Boston Red Sox traded Dave Henderson to the San Francisco Giants because they didn't have room for him in their outfield of Mike Greenwell, Ellis Burks and Dwight Evans.
The Giants let him become a free agent two months later because they didn't have room for him in their outfield of Jeff Leonard, Brett Butler and Candy


'Guys And Dolls' Revived In Darien
LEAD: AT the Darien Dinner Theater, there is a musical fable about a gambler for whom the stakes are never too high (he is called Sky); Sarah Brown, the Salvation Army lass he takes to Havana (on a bet), and another gambler (Nathan Detroit) who has been engaged for 14 years to a nightclub singer (Miss Adelaide), who sneezes a lot.


Ella Yang Married To David A. Hahn
LEAD: At the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York, Ella Yang, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Insuk Yang of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Tokyo, and David Aaron Hahn, a son of Virginia Hahn of Lancaster, Pa., and the late Dr.
Irving N. Hahn, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Richard D. Leonard officiated.


Slash and Burn
LEAD:  DRUMS ALONG THE MOHAWK  Starring Henry Fonda (in photo), Claudette Colbert, Edna May Oliver, John Carradine.
Directed by John Ford. 1939.
Key Video. 103 minutes. $19.98.
Closed captioned.


Capturing a Picture Perfect Day


Florida Hunting Weekend Prompts Questions About Children and Guns
LEAD: Ten-year-old Michael Hall, perched in a tree, his green and brown camouflage outfit about two sizes too big, spotted the first deer shortly after sunrise.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday


Reviews/Dance; Grace and Exuberance
LEAD: It is 20 years now since the National Dance Company of Senegal first came to visit America.
An old favorite of New York audiences, the company is known for the uninhibitedness, style and cosmopolitan gaiety with which it performs the traditional dance and music of its country.
The musicians and dancers who performed on Friday at the Cathedral of St.


B-1's Long-Running Battle Just Goes On and On
LEAD: Over the last 20 years, few weapons in the United States arsenal have been blown about by political crosswinds as often as the B-1 bomber.
Even though it has been built and paid for, the aircraft continues to be the subject of partisan contention.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


Review/Music; A Dialogue Between Jazz and Symphony
LEAD: A new ''Jazz Symphony'' tonight introduced Meyer Kupferman the concert music composer to Meyer Kupferman the jazz clarinet and saxophone player.
With Loretta Holkman singing and Ron Finck playing the saxophone obbligatos, this long and elaborate meeting of cultures had its first performance at the Paramount Theater here.


Patriots Stop Bengals' Streak
LEAD: The New England Patriots concentrated on running the ball today.
They got the passing they needed from Cincinnati's erratic Boomer Esiason.


Books of The Times; A Writer Ponders a 'Question Mark' of a Friend
LEAD:  The Captain and the Enemy  By Graham Greene  189 pages. Viking. $17.95.


The Marcos Question
LEAD: There are fresh, but still mixed signals on the question of whether President Reagan will approve criminal charges against former President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines.


Lorimar and Warner Case
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission approved on Friday a trust set up by Warner Communications Inc. and the Lorimar Telepictures Corporation for the three television stations owned by Lorimar.


St. Luke's Orchestra In a 4-Concert Series
LEAD: The Orchestra of St.
Luke's is to give four concerts at Carnegie Hall this season, starting on Nov. 20 with John Eliot Gardiner conducting the Overture from Weber's ''Turandot,'' Schumann's Symphony No. 2 and -with the mezzo-soprano Shirley Verrett as soloist - ''La Mort de Cleopatre,'' by Berlioz.


Bills' Bennett Says He's Best
LEAD: Cornelius Bennett isn't bragging.
It's just that he's, well, Cornelius Bennett and he must speak the truth.


Larrocha to Play 'Iberia'
LEAD: The pianist Alicia de Larrocha is to play the complete Albeniz ''Iberia'' on Nov. 22 at Carnegi Hall.
Tickets, at $35, $25, $23, $20 and $14, are available at the box office or through Carnegie Charge, 247-7800.


Sports World Specials; One of a Kind
LEAD: When the U.S.
Caramel Company sponsored a baseball card promotion in 1932, promising a baseball (''value $1'') for each 32-card set turned in, No. 16 was the hard-to-get card.


Metro Matters; Deserted Houses Slowly Becoming Homes Again
LEAD: For two years after they were burned out of their apartment, Yvonne DeLeon lived with her husband and three children in city shelters.
The day after Christmas last year, they moved into a first-floor apartment on West 182d Street in the Bronx. ''Boy, did I cry,'' she remembers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; FCB/Leber Katz Gets More Beverage Brands
LEAD: After a three-way review, the Brown-Forman Beverage Company of Louisville, Ky., has decided to consolidate more of its business at FCB/ Leber Katz Partners.
The new brands include Korbel champagne and brandy, Bolla wines, California Cooler and the introduction of Earl Grey liqueur next year.
The budget adds up to nearly $15 million.


Fire In the Belly
LEAD: George Bush has devoted the past decade of his life to winning the Presidency, and this sense of purpose has profoundly changed him.
A few of the people who knew him in the 70's now marvel at how their gentlemanly friend will do damn-all to win.


Smart Machines, Smart Workers
LEAD: A decade ago, robots and computerized manufacturing equipment were rapidly appearing on the assembly line as industry sought to automate the nation's factories.


Where Carriage Horses Belong
LEAD: Last August, a carriage horse named Whitey collapsed on Second Avenue, a victim of heat exhaustion.
In December 1985, another carriage horse had to be destroyed after a speeding limousine caused it to bolt into an intersection.
And every day carriage horses, plodding at their own pace, add to New York's legendary midtown traffic congestion.


Amtrak Train Delayed In Search for a Suspect
LEAD: An Amtrak commuter train was delayed for more than three hours today while the police searched the train and a passenger terminal for a 17-year-old suspect wanted in a Rochester murder, the authorities said.


Big Banking Merger in Spain Is Approved
LEAD: Shareholders of Banco Espanol de Credito and Banco Central approved a plan on Saturday to merge the banks and create Spain's biggest commercial bank.


Afghan Radio Reports Death of 2 Americans
LEAD: The official Afghan radio reported today that two Americans helping Afghan rebels and two Pakistani officers were killed Saturday in fighting in Afghanistan.  [ In Washington, an Administration official familiar with the region said he had heard no reports of Americans being killed.
The official said no United


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Eastern Airlines to Lintas: Worldwide for advertising in Canada, Europe and Puerto Rico.


Craig Romps and 49ers Win
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers whipped the Los Angeles Rams for a half, building a 17-7 lead, and then over most of the third quarter, San Francisco was outgained, 89 yards to 1.
The 49ers entered the final quarter today trailing, 21-17.


Philcox Impressive In Syracuse Victory
LEAD: Syracuse has a number of superb athletes on its football team, and they were at their best Saturday night in the 24-10 triumph over Penn State.


GULF ARABS SEEK BETTER IRAN TIES
LEAD: With the Iran-Iraq cease-fire holding, Arab nations in the Persian Gulf that supported Baghdad during the eight-year war are now seeking restored ties with Teheran, according to diplomats and analysts in the Middle East and Western Europe.


Even 2 Games Up, Underdog Role Fits
LEAD: From the beginning of the season, the Los Angeles Dodgers have thrived in part by declaring themselves in the position of the unappreciated overachiever.
They held first place in the National League West from May 26 until October, and still managed to declare themselves underdogs.


Jersey Nuns Halt Talks With Vatican Envoy
LEAD: The five cloistered nuns protesting the intrusion of the modern world into their New Jersey monastery broke off talks yesterday with a Vatican emissary, charging that he could not be impartial because of his prior friendship with their mother superior.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Wit and Wisdom at Harvard Business School, on Video
LEAD: Harvard Business School, where businesses have been dissected and scrutinized for 80 years, is now undertaking a venture of its own.
It will soon market videotapes on which its leading professors and other experts offer management insights.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Theme Park Account Awarded to DMB&amp;B
LEAD: Six Flags Great America in Gurnee, Ill., has awarded its advertising to DMB&amp;B/Chicago.
The budget is $3 million.


Vicksburg Journal; Someplace for the King to Call Home
LEAD: If Elvis Presley is alive, if the King faked his own funeral and has been hiding out somewhere for the last 11 years, Ann Dinsik figures he could do a lot worse than Vicksburg.


Workers to Get Social Security Money's Worth; Valuable Insurance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Santiago Journal; At Pinochet's Heels, the On-the-Air Watchdogs
LEAD: Shortly before 1 A.M. on Oct. 6, two generals and an admiral strode into the presidential palace on their way to a meeting with Gen.
Augusto Pinochet.


Outdistance Age on the Golf Course
LEAD: YOU never get too old for golf.
It is Willard Scott's kind of sport.
A 99-year-old man recently made a hole-in-one in Switzerland and a 95-year-old woman made one in Florida.
As a matter of fact, the rarest feat in golf is for someone to actually give up the game.
The last known person to have done it was Cary Middlecoff, the two-time United States Open champion.


Albee, Auden, Welty, Wilder et al., With Voice to Words
LEAD: Truman Capote was nervous.
And that made John Malcolm Brinnin nervous.
Would Mr.
Capote's squeaky voice get even squeakier?
It was Dec. 8, 1949.
A reading at the Poetry Center of the 92d Street Y was about to begin.
Or was it?
Mr.
Brinnin, the center's director at the time, poured a brandy.
Mr.
Capote gulped it down, and, thus fortified, toddled timidly in a black velvet suit onto the stage.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
A.
L.
Laboratories Inc., Fort Lee, N.J., a maker of pharmaceuticals and other products, named David E. Cohen to the newly created post of president and general manager of the animal health division.


Dr. Deborah H. Elkind Marries Gregory S. Shatan
LEAD: The wedding of Dr.
Deborah Helen Elkind to Gregory Samuel Shatan took place yesterday at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman officiated.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Pavin Impressive in Victory: Corey Pavin equaled the second-best 72-hole score in PGA Tour history with a 259 in cruising to an eight-stroke victory yesterday in the Texas Open in San Antonio.
Pavin, five shots clear of the field when the day's play started, shot a bogey-free 66 that left him virtually unchallenged over the final 18 holes.


Now for a Real Underdog: Ron Paul, Libertarian, for President
LEAD: Ron Paul is, above all, patient.


THE WORLD SERIES: How It Happened; Doing It All, Naturally
LEAD: Welcome to the Orel Hershiser World Series.
That's as opposed to the Orel Hershiser National League Championship Series.


State by State; Early Euphoria on Texas Turns Sour for Dukakis
LEAD: The Democrats have not quite given up on Texas and its 29 electoral votes, at least not as completely as they have abandoned hope of carrying Florida, but after a strategy session in Boston on Saturday, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's managers acknowledged that victory here is now highly unlikely.


Donnaldson Kathryn Brown Is a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Donnaldson Kathryn Brown to Michael Victor Kokiko took place yesterday at the Burden Mansion in New York.
Jean Kotkin, a leader of the American Ethical Union, officiated.


Hampers, Not Pampers
LEAD: Just as it's desirable to limit carriage horses to Central Park, it's sensible to limit what the horses leave behind.
Yet the usual reaction to horse manure in the park is a resigned giggle.
No one loves the sight, smell or residue in the tread of bikes or running shoes, but what, shrug, is to be done?


5 Aboard a Helicopter Are Injured in a Crash
LEAD: Five people were injured early yesterday when the helicopter they were in crashed in the parking lot at a Wallingford industrial park, the authorities said.


Smiling Faces Enjoy a Fall Ritual


Making Fragrance From 3,000 Odors
LEAD: ''We must have a lot of imagination; we must be dreamers sometimes,'' mused Elie G. Roger, master perfumer and vice president at Firmenich Inc.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Boston Shop to Handle Pizzeria Uno Account
LEAD: Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson of Boston has been asked by the Uno Restaurant Corporation to handle the advertising for its 50 Pizzeria Uno restaurants across the country.
The $1.5 million budget will go toward radio, print and outdoor campaigns.


Crispo Cleared Of Kidnapping And Sex-Torture
LEAD: The art dealer Andrew Crispo was acquitted in Manhattan yesterday of charges that he kidnapped a homosexual man and tortured and humiliated him for six hours four years ago.


'Junk Bond' Problems at Southmark
LEAD: The Southmark Corporation, which had a loss of $138 million in its most recent quarter, provides an illustration of the serious trouble issuers of high-yielding ''junk bonds'' face when their main businesses falter, some analysts said Friday.


Peer Review in Science
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Drop in Long-Term Rates Seen
LEAD: Long-term interest rates have hovered just below 9 percent for the better part of a month, but credit market analysts and portfolio managers say they see little chance that they will move lower any time soon.


Decade of the Child, Revisited
LEAD: At times, this has seemed to be the year that every public official in America has pronounced a commitment to children, and none more forcefully than Governor Cuomo of New York.
For him, this is not merely the Year but also the Decade of the Child.
Three seasons have passed since he proclaimed the urgent need to help the one child in four who lives in poverty.


Yepes Guitar Recital
LEAD: The Spanish guitarist Narciso Yepes, who plays a 10-string guitar that he devised, is to perform works by Domenico Scarlatti, Bach, Villa-Lobos, Rodrigo, Albeniz, Falla and others at Alice Tully Hall on Nov. 17 at 8 P.M.
Tickets, at $17.50, $12 and $8, are available at the box office or through Center Charge, 874-6770.


Vietnam, in Flurry of Moves, Pushes for Better Ties to U.S.
LEAD: As relations improve between China and the Soviet Union, the Vietnamese are striving to advance the prospect of better economic and diplomatic relations with the United States.


Race and a Death Dividing Two Neighborhoods on S.I.
LEAD: In Rosebank, the Staten Island neighborhood where Derrick Antonio Tyrus was killed by a car on a rain-slicked street nine days ago, and in Park Hill, the nearby neighborhood where he lived, people are waiting for results of a police inquiry into the events leading to the black youth's death.


Review/Music; The Emerson Quartet Plays Bartok
LEAD: The Emerson String Quartet played its ''Bartok Odyssey'' on Saturday evening to a Carnegie Hall well filled with people who clearly wanted to hear this music.
The air was alive with attention, and the end of the cycle was greeted by an instant and nearly unanimous standing ovation.


Gandhi Plans First Visit to China By an Indian Premier Since 1954
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi plans to visit China in December, making the first trip to Beijing by an Indian leader since Jawaharlal Nehru went in 1954.


Holders Sue Genentech
LEAD: Genentech Inc. said Friday that it had been served with shareholder lawsuits in California state courts and the Federal District Court in San Francisco.
The suits charge that Genentech had misled investors by inflating the prospects of its tissue plasminogen activator, a drug that is used to break up blood clots after heart attacks.


Woman, 36, Charged In Beating of Man, 76
LEAD: A 36-year-old woman has been arrested and charged in the beating of an elderly man as she held him captive for months in her Brooklyn apartment, the police said yesterday.


Lafleur, 37, Returns To Prove a Point
LEAD: HIS star rose to its zenith, then exploded.
And now he has recovered the broken pieces and is struggling, older and by nature's laws a little less brilliant, to rise again.


U.S. Studies Health Problems Near Weapon Plant
LEAD: More than four decades after the vast energy of the atom was unleashed on Japan, Federal health investigators are preparing to search the high plains of eastern Washington State for American victims of the atomic bomb.


Business and the Law; New Leadership's Antitrust Policy
LEAD: WITH a new administration arriving in Washington soon, lawyers, business executives and Government officials have begun speculating on what critical changes to expect in antitrust policy.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council


Dollar Drops in Tokyo
LEAD: The dollar dropped to a four-month low against the Japanese yen this morning, while stock prices moved slightly higher in early trading.
The dollar opened at 126.30 yen, down 1.95 from Friday's close.
It was the dollar's lowest opening since June 20. ''There was dollar selling during early trading amid concern over possible Bank of Japan intervention,'' said a dealer with a major commercial bank, speaking on condition of anonymity.


Working to Fill the Polling Stations    The rally was held to encourage eligible voters to cast their ballots. (The New York Times/Fred Mertz)


Deborah Leavy Wed To Donald N. Bersoff
LEAD: Deborah Leavy and Donald Neil Bersoff were married yesterday at the Washington home of the bridegroom.
Rabbi Mindy Portnoy and Judge Abner Mikva of the Federal Court of Appeals in Washington officiated.


Laura Weinberg Marries a Lawyer
LEAD: Laura Ann Weinberg, a research analyst for AC &amp; R Advertising, and Richard Avery Aronow, a lawyer for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, were married yesterday at the Eagle Lodge in Lafayette Hill, Pa.
Rabbi Jerome P. David officiated.


Man Killed in a Hit-Run Accident By an Auto Racing With Another
LEAD: A man was killed early yesterday a few blocks from his home when he was struck by a car as it raced alongside another car in the East New York section of Brooklyn, the police said.


A Futuristic Act at an Old-Time Festival


Review/Concert; Latin American Voice For Dignity and Hope
LEAD: For Latin Americans, especially her fellow Argentines, Mercedes Sosa is like Joan Baez, Linda Ronstadt and Paul Robeson rolled into one.
With her magnificent voice she sings about the dignity of the poor and about the hope for freedom backed by the willingness to struggle; the songs vow that human dignity will survive and eventually prevail.


Packers Come Up With a 2d Shocker
LEAD: Don Majkowski passed for 243 yards and Max Zendejas tied a club record with four field goals today as the underdog Green Bay Packers took advantage of 15 Minnesota penalties for a 34-14 victory over the Vikings.


Mira Nair Combines Cultures to Create a Film
LEAD: While filming ''Salaam Bombay!'' the sharp-witted street children who are its stars devised nicknames -one Hindi, one English - for their director. ''In India, unless you're the same age, you hardly ever call a person just by a first name,'' explained Mira Nair, who at 31 years old is young for a director but too old to be first-named by her wise child actors.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Campaign Beginning On Time's New Format
LEAD: Time magazine is breaking a trade campaign on Monday to promote its new format.
The theme is ''Time, think about it.''


Gastineau and His Fiancee Facing Critics as a Team
LEAD: The couple are prisoners of their size and fame.
And the way Mark Gastineau of the Jets looks at life this season, he is sharing his American Conference-leading seven sacks with Brigitte Nielsen.


Plan to Admit Contras Mocks Refugee Act
LEAD: To the Editor:


Horse Racing; Personal Ensign Closer to Perfect Finish
LEAD: Personal Ensign remained perfect yesterday, winning the 12th and next-to-last start of her career with an easy 5 1/2-length romp over Classic Crown in the $332,400 Beldame Stakes at Belmont Park.


Antifeminist Discrimination? (6 Letters)
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Murder Suspect Goes Free in a Case of Mistaken Identity
LEAD: A murder suspect was released from a Long Island jail when he was mistaken for a man with the same name and a similar build who was being held on traffic violations, the authorities said yesterday.


As Starter, Bryant Powers Redskins
LEAD: Ever since he came to the Washington Redskins in 1986 after starring in the United States Football League, Kelvin Bryant has been complaining that he should be starting instead of being stuck in a backup role.


THE WORLD SERIES: Sports of The Times; Dodgers Do the Bashing
LEAD: LIVE by the bash, die by the bash.
Or at least go back to Oakland gasping for breath and base hits, down two games to none in a World Series that has turned out to be a remake of ''Hooray for Hollywood.''


Mexico to Seek More Loans In Plan to Offset Oil Decline
LEAD: President Miguel de la Madrid today ordered that a four-part plan be put into effect to offset falling oil prices, including additional loans from foreign creditors.


U.N. Panel on U.S. Ties Faces Weightier Issues
LEAD: In the old days, the special United Nations committee on relations with its American hosts used to concentrate on mundane matters like diplomats' parking tickets and unpaid rent bills.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Kathleen A. Holliday has joined the Newspaper Advertising Bureau as vice president, creative.


No Accord For Icahn On Eastern
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn met with leaders of the three major unions of Eastern Airlines over the weekend, but the groups were not able to agree on a plan to make an offer for the embattled carrier.


Randall D. Wheelis Is Wed To Mary Elizabeth Adams
LEAD: Mary Elizabeth Adams and Randall Dana Wheelis were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Larchmont, N.Y., by the Rev.
Dorothy Green.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas S. Adams Jr. of Delray Beach, Fla.
Her husband is a son of Mrs.
Reuben E. Wheelis of Mobile, Ala., and the late Col.


Edmond R. Kiely, Mathematician, 88
LEAD: Brother Edmond R. Kiely, a founding faculty member of Iona College and the chairman of its mathematics department when he retired in 1968, died Saturday at New Rochelle Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in New Rochelle.


Black Students Forgive Teacher's Mistaken Slur
LEAD: A racial slur uttered by Lois Bostic to her black students threatened to end her 27-year career in education until black students stepped in and saved her job.


Too Much Hershiser: on Mound, at Bat, on Basepath
LEAD: For an encore, the Los Angeles Dodgers rested Kirk Gibson tonight and turned the stage over to Orel Hershiser.
And in yet another smashing performance, Hershiser pitched the eighth shutout in his last 10 starts as Tommy Lasorda's ''team of destiny'' mastered the Oakland Athletics again and took a two-game lead in the 85th World


New Yorkers &amp; Co.; Turning a Concrete Concern Around
LEAD: When David M. Brodsky accepted an offer from United States Attorney Rudolph W. Guiliani to be trustee of the bankrupt Certified Concrete Company, he expected something different from the white-collar cases he normally handled.


Senate Accessories
LEAD: The surest sign that the nation's lawmakers may be ready to call it quits for the year has appeared on Capitol Hill: Senators wearing buttons bearing the slogan ''Free the 100th Congress.'' The Majority Leader, Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, had his prominently planted on his left lapel as he prodded senators to curtail their debating last


Marina Timasheff and Robert B. Charles Are Wed
LEAD: At the American Orthodox Church of St.
John the Russian in Ipswich, Mass., yesterday, Marina S. Timasheff and Robert B. Charles were married by the Rev.
Spiridon Schneider, a Greek Orthodox priest.


One-Year Bill Auction Set for Thursday
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market, with the sale of new one-year bills on Thursday.
The Treasury sales will begin the week with the regular auction of new three-month and six-month bills.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Debacle in Retrospect


Jill Graham Wed To Jonathan Klein
LEAD: The wedding of Jill Elise Graham, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jacob J. Graham of New York, to Jonathan Klein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gustave J. Klein of Great Neck, L.I., took place yesterday at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson officiated.


Effort Made to Free 3 Whales
LEAD: Three young whales are trapped in ice in the Arctic Ocean near Point Barrow and biologists hope they can stay alive until an ice-breaking barge, being prepared by workers in Prudhoe Bay, 250 miles to the east, can arrive.


Bic Counts on a New Age for Spray Perfume
LEAD: Societe Bic, which reshaped the markets for pens, razors and cigarette lighters with its low-cost disposable products, is attacking the perfume market with the same kind of ambition.


Trade Paperbacks Gaining In Role of a Happy Medium
LEAD: WHEN inflation and declining sales forced book publishers against the financial wall in the early 1980's, many of them sought refuge in trade paperback books.
Bigger than the rack-sized mass-market paperbacks and only about half the price of hardcovers, they seemed a perfect solution because of their portability and affordability.


2 Politburo Members Resign in Yugoslavia
LEAD: Two Politburo members resigned today on the eve of a Central Committee meeting widely expected to produce a purge of party members, the Tanyug press agency said.


Early Goals Help Rangers
LEAD: Throughout the first 10 days of the season, the Rangers had, in the estimation of their coach, been late making passes, late getting to pucks and late reacting to plays in their own end.
As a result, the Rangers were taking their time getting started in a season that they had already claimed they couldn't afford to begin slowly.


Sez Fourty Wins
LEAD: Sez Fourty came back in the last four strides to edge Seaquay by a nose today in the $425,000 My Dear Girl division of the Florida Stallion Stakes for 2-year-old fillies at Calder Race Course.
Ridden by Jorge Duarte, the winner was timed in 1:50 1/5 for the mile and an eighth and paid $15.80 for $2 to win.


Ex-Meese Aide Was Source of Story About Deaver Prosecutor
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Post-Marcos Philippines, Corruption Still a Way of Life
LEAD: Jaime Cardinal Sin, the Roman Catholic Primate, sometimes says that Ali Baba - Ferdinand E. Marcos - has fled the Philippines, but that the 40 thieves have been left behind.


Stock Market Official Says Changes Are Still Needed
LEAD: More changes are needed to bolster investor confidence in the stock market and to reduce the risk of another collapse like the one last year, the chairman of the American Stock Exchange said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about minority hiring by New York City municipal hospitals incorrectly stated both the size of the hospitals' black and Hispanic work force and the percentage of workers with annual salaries of more than $43,000 who are black and Hispanic.
In all, 65.5 percent of the total work force is black and Hispanic, while 22.3 percent of the highest-paid workers are.


Sun Goggles For Hill and Sea
LEAD: Designers of eyewear for athletes have produced products from goggles to sunglasses.
Lately, it is getting harder to tell the difference between the two.


Token Cuban Force Can Stay, Angolan Rebel Says
LEAD: Jonas Savimbi, the Angolan guerrilla leader, has said that a total withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola is not important as long as those Cubans who remain are only a token defense force and do not stay indefinitely.


Tyson-Bruno Now Jan. 14
LEAD: Mike Tyson is now scheduled to defend his heavyweight title against Frank Bruno of Britain on Jan. 14, instead of Dec. 17, at a location to be determined, Bill Cayton, Tyson's manager, said yesterday.


For the Athletics, the Dream Dies Hard
LEAD: The team that talked about winning the World Series in five games talked tonight about returning home and returning to normal.
Suddenly, the Oakland Athletics are no longer strutting.


Directors See Higher Offers For Hospital
LEAD: The 10 independent directors of the Hospital Corporation of America have received ''written indications from other parties'' that they might be willing to offer more than management's latest bid of $51 in cash and securities for the Nashville-based hospital chain.


Campaign Trail; Another Time, Another Medium
LEAD: While the political experts were glued to their television sets to assess the second debate between George Bush and Michael S. Dukakis, one, William C. Adams, a Georgetown University professor, decided to really listen to the action, on the radio.


CHINA REINING IN ECONOMY'S SHIFT TO A FREE MARKET
LEAD: The Chinese Government, in an effort to reassert control over the country's economy, has imposed a series of stringent measures in the last week intended to reduce sharply the role of the free market and local decision-making in economic affairs.


Review/Opera; Cast Changes for 'Boheme'
LEAD: Virtually all of Saturday night's principals were new to the New York City Opera's current run of ''La Boheme.'' Ruth Golden and Jon Garrison were Mimi and Rodolfo; Kenneth Shaw, Stanley Wexler and Michael Willson sang Marcello, Colline and Schaunard; the Musetta was Michele McBride.


Campaign Trail; Soviets Have Vicarious Campaign
LEAD: Far from the campaign trail, the Bush-Dukakis match escalates too.


New York City Slips as Center Of Research
LEAD: In the last four years, New York has relinquished its longtime pre-eminence in biomedical research to vigorous competitors in California, Massachusetts and elsewhere.


Sports World Specials; Picking a Winner
LEAD: If Massachusetts Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis wants to be President, he had better root for the Dodgers to beat the Athletics in the World Series.
Since 1952, every American league victory in October has presaged a Republican victory in November.
The Yankees beat the Dodgers in 1952 and 1956.
Dwight Eisenhower followed each Yankee victory with a Republican triumph at the polls.


Hudson Guild Book Fair
LEAD: The Hudson Guild, at 441 West 26th Street, will hold its 16th annual book fair from Thursday through Sunday.
Admission is free, except on Thursday, when there will be a $3 fee.
Hours are 5 to 8 P.M.
Thursday, 1 to 8 P.M. on Friday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. on Saturday and noon to 5 P.M. on Sunday.
Information: 760-9800.


Aqueduct Facing Strike by Jockeys
LEAD: Belmont Park's jockeys said yesterday they would strike and set up picket lines on opening day at Aqueduct Race Track Wednesday because horse owners have refused to negotiate pay increases.


Workers to Get Social Security Money's Worth
LEAD: To the Editor:


METRO DATELINES;
LEAD: Two Miami men were arrested Saturday night when the police found 20 kilograms of cocaine, estimated to be worth $8 million, in the trunk of the Cadillac the men were traveling in on the New Jersey Turnpike, the state police said.


3 Youths Are Held In Mall Kidnapping
LEAD: Two teen-agers were arrested yesterday and held with another youth in the rape and abduction of a 25-year-old woman from a shopping mall last week, the Nassau County police said.


Dukakis, in Boston, Rouses the Faithful
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis, defining himself proudly as a principled underdog ''fighting for the values I believe in,'' embarked on the final stretch of his Presidential campaign today with an impassioned promise: ''I'm not going to walk away from that fight.''


Reviews/Dance; Twists to the Flamenco
LEAD: The Carlota Santana Spanish Dance Arts Company used flamenco dance in traditional and experimental ways on Saturday night at Symphony Space.


Review/Television; When News Becomes Happy Talk
LEAD: The scene is a morning television show that is in transition from being a serious news program to becoming a lighter breakfast confection called ''Sunny Side Up.'' We are moving from the ''CBS Morning News'' right past ''Today'' and on to ''Good Morning America.'' Len, the young hotshot newcomer, is worried about the impression he made on the first telecast.


Queen Farida of Egypt Dies at 68
LEAD: A former Queen of Egypt, Safinaz Zulfikar, better known as Queen Farida, the wife of King Farouk, died in a hospital here today of leukemia.
A hospital announcement said she was 68 years old.


Memorial for Dougherty
LEAD: A memorial service for Philip H. Dougherty, the advertising columnist for The New York Times, who died on Sept. 27, will be held on Wednesday at 5:30 P.M. in the downstairs auditorium of the Equitable Center, at 787 Seventh Avenue, between 51st and 52d Streets.


Chase Ends in Jail Parking Lot
LEAD: A driver chased by four police cars and two helicopters ended a 14-minute chase today by pulling into the parking lot of the downtown city jail and giving himself up, the police said.
Frankie Hill, 32 years old, of Los Angeles was booked for assault with a deadly weapon on a police officer and held on $8,000 bail, Lieut.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Dodgers Take 2-0 Lead  Orel Hershiser pitched Los Angeles to a 6-0 World Series victory that gave the Dodgers a two-game lead over Oakland.
SportsMonday, page C1.
Minding the Robots  Robot automation in factories has been disappointing; managers have found that the machines require smarter workers.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct. 16, 1988:  MONDAY


O'Neill Statue Unveiled in Connecticut
LEAD: This harbor city celebrated the centennial of the birth of Eugene O'Neill today by unveiling a bronze statue of the playwright as a boy at the foot of City Pier, near where he had played.


Intel Buys G.E. Technology
LEAD: The Intel Corporation, as expected, said Friday that it had purchased from the General Electric Company a technology that could allow computers to display full-motion video images.


Apartheid Haunts Gold Giants' Fight
LEAD: Opposition to apartheid is giving a takeover contest between the non-Communist world's two largest gold mining groups heavy political overtones internationally, with voices raised in countries as diverse as the United States and Papua New Guinea.


Campaign Trail; Tapping Another Ethnic Group
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis has campaigned occasionally in the ethnic vein, drawing on his Greek heritage: his father was born on an Aegean island.


Discovery on AIDS Virus Raises A Possibility of Safe Fatherhood
LEAD: Using an advanced new technique for searching for signs of the AIDS virus, researchers have discovered that the virus does not lurk in sperm cells.
Instead, it is only in cells of the seminal fluid in which sperm cells are suspended.


Boeing Order By British Seen
LEAD: British Airways is ordering more than 35 new aircraft from the Boeing Company in a $1 billion deal, The Times of London reported today.


30 Dead in Jet Crash Near Rome
LEAD: A Uganda Airlines passenger jet crashed near Rome's Leonardo da Vinci Airport early today, apparently killing about 30 of the 51 people aboard, police officials said.


Kansas Man Sows Seeds of Dream
LEAD: From an unusual base, Balbir Mathur, an unusual Kansan, will set off for India Monday to continue his pursuit of a goal that seems to him altogether reasonable.
He wants to help reforest the world and help feed its hungry.


Piniella in No Rush To Make Decision
LEAD: Lou Piniella spent eight days this month fishing, swimming and walking along the beaches in Florida, his first vacation away from baseball in more than a year.
But he said today that the break offered no new answers about his future, that he remains undecided whether he will begin fulfilling a three-year contract with the Yankees next season or pursue one of several managerial openings.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If you're in the States and you cut yourself and you go to the emergency room they're going to say, 'Give me your insurance card.' We don't have that hassle here.''  - Dr.
Charles L. Rogers, who runs a clinic in Matamoros, Mexico.  [ A15:3. ]


ON YOUR OWN: Fitness; Strategy for Workouts: Mind Over Boredom
LEAD: THE great scourge of keeping fit is being bored.
So people have devised all sorts of schemes to fight the tedium of a workout.
Personal stereos are a favorite.
Some people go over their mental laundry list.
Others work out with a companion and chatter the entire time.
Then there is meditation.
This is a subject surrounded by more hyperbole than a Hollywood premiere, and there are as many definitions of it as there are sports psychologists.


Botha, Pressing Drive by Pretoria, Meets With Ivory Coast President
LEAD: President P. W. Botha of South Africa and President Felix Houphouet-Boigny of the Ivory Coast, black Africa's longest-serving President, met this weekend in a publicity coup for the Pretoria Government.


Pakistan Is Continuing In Narcotics Control
LEAD: To the Editor:


Giants Have a Jay Howell of Their Own
LEAD: It seemed to be pro football's version of baseball's Jay Howell pine-tar incident.
Like the Dodgers' relief pitcher, who was caught with an illegal substance on his glove and thrown out of a playoff game a week ago against the Mets, Ottis Anderson of the Giants was discovered with a sticky substance on his jersey.


2 Newspapers in Little Rock Refuse to Say Die
LEAD: Walter E. Hussman Jr. has fire in his eyes, a reflection of both his fear of failure and the glimmer of hope that he might succeed in his crusade to keep newspaper competition alive here in his adopted hometown.


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Taiwan's Finance Ministry announced increases in margin loans and asked institutions and large players to enter the local stock market to prevent it from falling further.
The securities commission said the limit on margin loans for buying class A shares rose to 50 percent from 40 percent and similar loans for buying class B stocks rose to 40 percent from 30 percent.


84 Arrested in Protest At the Seabrook Plant
LEAD: Eighty-four demonstrators, including at least two children under the age of 10, were arrested today in a protest against the long-delayed Seabrook nuclear power plant.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; At 60, Editor For Women Looks Ahead
LEAD: JOHN MACK CARTER, editor in chief of Good Housekeeping and the only person to be top editor of all of the Big Three in the women's service magazine field, has had a long love affair with women - millions and millions of them.


John Francis Collins Wed To Patricia Ann Houlihan
LEAD: Patricia Ann Houlihan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Houlihan of West Bloomfield, Mich., and John Francis Collins, a son of Edna Collins of Freeport, L.I., and the late Thomas F. Collins Sr., were married yesterday at Our Holy Redeemer Roman Catholic Church in Freeport by the Rev.
Ralph R. Sommer.


First Lady Faulted on Borrowing of Clothes
LEAD: Nancy Reagan has borrowed expensive clothing and jewelry for more than six years without reporting the loans as required by law, Time magazine reported yesterday.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: The most famous triple play in World Series history was the unassisted one executed by Bill Wambsganss for Cleveland in 1920.
What other teams have managed triple plays in the Series and who were the players involved?


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-13  China tightened economic control last week in the first show that liberalization is being scaled back.
Measures including price controls were imposed to reduce the role of free market and local decision-making.
Page A1


New York Is Building Schools To Reverse Years of Neglect
LEAD: After more than a decade during which its public schools have grown ever more dilapidated and overcrowded, New York City is beginning to build schools once again.


Age No Barrier for Ironman Couple
LEAD: THEY have been preparing for months for their fall trip.
Seven days a week, Ralph and Kate Perry have planned, practiced and dreamed about what they are going to do when they arrive in Kona, Hawaii.


Anita Neiman Is Wed To James Stern Zisson
LEAD: Anita Nan Neiman and James Stern Zisson were married yesterday at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston by Rabbi Alan Turetz.


Hilde Kahn Is Married To Steven G. Bradbury
LEAD: Hilde Elisabeth Kahn and Steven Gill Bradbury, both lawyers in Washington, were married yesterday in Oxon Hill, Md., at the Oxon Hill Manor estate by Rabbi Harold S. White.


Six Are Hurt in Violence at a Minnesota Campus
LEAD: Hundreds of university students clashed with the police and burned furniture in two nights of violence that resulted in at least 50 arrests, the police said today.


Bush Lists His Priorities If Elected to Presidency
LEAD: Vice President Bush said today that his election would represent a mandate for moving decisively to trim Government spending and to press negotiations with the Soviet Union on reducing conventional military forces.


43 Die in Chinese Bus Crash
LEAD: An overloaded bus traveling without windshield wipers in the rain toppled into a ditch and burst into flames, killing 43 people and injuring 40, an official report said today.
The People's Daily newspaper said the survivors managed to climb out the rear window, while the rest of the 83 people on board burned to death.


Brooklyn Restaurants Going Live With the Sound of Music
LEAD: The band's singer crooned his version of the Dinah Washington classic, ''What a Difference a Day Makes,'' and, as if hearing from an old familiar friend, the restaurant's patrons murmured with approval.
Nanette Peraino and Larry Holder sat holding hands at the bar and sipped red wine in the candlelight.


Heart Patient Thanks Doctors With a Gift
LEAD: Reuben Feinberg thanked the doctors who saved his life through heart surgery by giving $17 million to the Northwestern University Medical School.


Health Care on the Border: Poor Go to Mexico
LEAD: Carmen Cruz has lived in the United States all of her 15 years, but after she was bitten by a neighbor's dog earlier this month she made the short trip across the border from her home in Brownsville, Tex., to an emergency room here in Mexico.


NBC Proposes Standard For a Better TV Picture
LEAD: The National Broadcasting Company announced Saturday that it was proposing a new high-definition television standard intended to accelerate the development of a higher-quality television picture in the United States by the mid-1990's.


Dr. Jean Winkler Wed To Dr. Richard Hillel
LEAD: Dr.
Jean C. Winkler, a supervising psychologist at the Tufts University Counseling Center in Boston, and Dr.
Richard Hillel, chief of otolaryngology at the Mount Auburn Hospital and at the Harvard University Health Service, both in Cambridge, Mass., were married yesterday at the Berlin Chapel of Brandeis University.


Review/Ballet; A Surprise From Early Balanchine
LEAD: George Balanchine choreographed a considerable number of ballets that were never seen in the United States, presumably because he thought they were not worth restaging.


Reviews/Dance; 'On a Verge,' Works by 4 Young Chroreographrs
LEAD: Four young choreographers and dancers presented new dance that was sure but superficial in ''On a Verge,'' presented on Saturday night at the Nikolais-Louis Choreospace.
A new dance by Ann Burros was less ambitious than the others on the program, but Ms.
Burros worked her restricted area of concern - the ritual of psychotherapy - with humor and sensitivity.


Bridge
LEAD: One American team is virtually assured of qualification in the World Team Olympiad here, but the other needs to play steadily in the next two days.
The open team is clinging to third position in its pool, with the top four teams qualifying, after an up-and-down day in which it beat Barbados 25-0 but then lost 5-25 to the Netherlands.


College Football; Irish Hang On for an Astonishing Upset
LEAD: Notre Dame fans were celebrating until early this morning when rain forced them off the campus grounds, but it never dampened their spirits or sweet dreams.


Giants Defeat Lions Convincingly, 30-10
LEAD: After six weeks of fighting for their lives, the Giants were looking forward to an energizing performance this afternoon against the struggling Detroit Lions.


Mum's the Word
LEAD: Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan was a happy man last week when a project he had been working on for years finally became law - a bill overhauling the Federal welfare system.
In recognition of that effort, the New York Democrat's wife, Elizabeth, broke off managing his re-election campaign and flew to the capital to watch the signing of the bill by President Reagan at the White House.


Wilson Takes Doskocil Bid
LEAD: The Wilson Foods Corporation, which specializes in meat processing and supply, has agreed to be acquired by the Doskocil Companies for $14.50 a share, or about $147 million.


Tennis; Navratilova Tops Evert in 75 Minutes
LEAD: Martina Navratilova defeated Chris Evert, 6-2, 6-3, to win a Virginia Slims tournament.


Pakistan Points to Sabotage in Zia Crash
LEAD: A report issued today by a Pakistani investigation team said sabotage or another criminal act probably caused the plane crash that killed President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, the American Ambassador and 28 others.
But the report did not specify what criminal act was involved.


Sports World Specials; Crowded Winner's Circle
LEAD: For years, Hugh Bentley, like many trainers, had the idea of owning his own horse.
Two years ago, Bentley persuaded 19 golfing buddies to join him in chipping in $600 apiece to buy a standardbred yearling.


Market Place; Sundstrand Faces Various Problems
LEAD: THE Sundstrand Corporation faces serious near-term problems although its stock held up after last week's announcement that it would pay a record amount to settle a fraud case.


Battling Downtown Blues in an Upbeat City
LEAD: Martin E. Coughlin lives and works in the new Shelton, a community of expensive single-family homes and condominium developments, suburban shopping centers and modern office buildings.
Many of his neighbors and co-workers have little reason to consider, let alone visit, the old Shelton, a community of mixed housing, cracked pavements, uneven roads and old factory buildings.


The President, Under Glass
LEAD: Few modern Presidents have shielded themselves from reporters as successfully as Ronald Reagan.
News conferences have virtually disappeared; discourse between press and President consists mainly of shouted questions on the White House lawn, the answers muffled by the noise of a waiting helicopter.


Shoppers, in Survey, Say Service Is Not a Priority
LEAD: At a time when merchants in the New York area are trying to lure shoppers by slashing prices and improving customer service, an independent survey of area shoppers shows the two factors to be of secondary importance.


Sports World Specials; Glory in the Ring
LEAD: Vic Raschi, the great Yankee pitcher who died last week at the age of 69, had any number of athletic achievements to look back on and savor during his retirement in upstate New York.


Bob Toski's Checkpoints for a Longer Golf Life
LEAD: Strengthen your grip position.
Make sure the palms face each other, but turn your hands slightly to the right (clockwise).
This gives you the ability to turn the club around your body, get the pass on the inside of the target line and rotate the forearms to strike through the ball.


Campaign Trail; Crime Ads And Punishment
LEAD: For weeks George Bush has portrayed Michael S. Dukakis as soft on crime for granting furloughs to prison inmates.
Now the Dukakis forces are retaliating.


Aquino Indicates Last Details on Bases Accord Are Now Resolved
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino said today that the final problems on an agreement governing American military bases in the Philippines had apparently been resolved, clearing the way for signing the agreement on Monday.


What's Burning in Brazil
LEAD: The Amazon rain forest, the greatest natural wonder of the planet, is rapidly disappearing.
Spurred by misguided Government incentives, an army of settlers is torching the trees to convert the forest to cattle ranches.
Brazil's President, Jose Sarney, last week decried the ''predatory development.


Market Place; Takeover Targets In Bank Industry
LEAD: THE Bank of New York's protracted, expensive and ultimately successful takeover of the Irving Bank Corporation is more than an isolated event, according to some industry analysts.


Uganda Airliner Crash In Italy Leaves 31 Dead
LEAD: A Uganda Airlines passenger jet crashed near Leonardo da Vinci Airport outside Rome early today, killing 31 of the 52 people aboard, police officials said.


By Design; Going to Any Length
LEAD: Everyone thought - or hoped - the hemline controversy was over.
But here it comes again.


On California's North Coast, Oil Is the Only Issue
LEAD: On the last day of voter registration here, Rachel Binah signed up two out-of-town visitors: a television anchor who was in town for a feature on opposition to offshore oil drilling and a guest in the bed-and-breakfast inn that she owns on a bluff overlooking the Pacific.


Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
485,622,000
462,017,000
Net inc
28,901,000
27,887,000
Share earns
1.05
.90
Shares outst
27,739,710
31,189,506
9mo sales
1,420,685,000
1,324,119,000
Net inc
75,208,000
71,778,000
Share earns
2.71
2.30


INSIDE
LEAD:  Fashion and the First Lady  Nancy Reagan issued regrets at not reporting that she had borrowed designer outfits.
She promised in 1982 not to borrow any more.
Page A26.
Trump Sells St.
Moritz  Donald J. Trump is selling the elegant hotel to an Australian billionaire for $150 million more than he paid for it in 1985.


People
LEAD: *
Donna Campanella has joined Lintas: USA as senior vice president, group media planning director.


Upjohn Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Upjohn Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
651,806,000
608,517,000
Net inc
89,555,000
74,594,000
Share earns
.49
.40
9mo sales
2,035,756,000
1,871,363,000
Net inc
272,766,000
234,053,000
Share earns
1.47
1.25


Corning Glass Works reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corning Glass Works (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 9
1988
1987
Sales
625,400,000
610,100,000
Net inc
b123,900,000
c50,300,000
Share earns
2.74
1.08
9mo sales
1,578,500,000
1,544,200,000
Net inc
b243,000,000
c148,500,000
Share earns
5.39
3.20


Children Find Body While Playing Ball
LEAD: A group of youngsters playing ball in a grassy area near the Interboro Parkway in Brooklyn on Sunday found a body in a plastic bag that was hidden in bushes, the police said.


Campaign Trail; A Matter of Import To the President
LEAD: It was a White House political strategy luncheon with President Reagan, and the President's schedule over the final weeks of the campaign.
A White House aide began discussing Senate races around the nation.


Oregon Is Granted Custody Of 55 Children in Abuse Case
LEAD: Oregon officials today were granted custody of 55 hungry children taken from a farmhouse where an 8-year-old girl was reported to have been beaten to death by staff members of a California religious center.


The Athlete on the Mound
LEAD: OREL HERSHISER used to be a hockey defenseman.
You could almost see that from the way he swept around second base on Sunday night, leaning forward, long legs slightly bowed, looking to fire a slap shot or slide into third base.
He slid, and was safe.


People in the News: Gertrude Belle Elion; A Research Collaboration Spanning Four Decades
LEAD: GERTRUDE B. ELION is known for her precise, careful work, her intellectual brilliance and her ability to work with others, her colleagues said.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Rule Whether Burning the Flag Is Legal
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether burning the American flag as a political protest is the kind of symbolic or political speech protected from criminal prosecution by the First Amendment.


New Law Is Directed Against Fan Violence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Books of The Times; One Man as an American Metaphor in Vietnam
LEAD:  A Bright Shining Lie  John Paul Vann and America in Vietnam  By Neil Sheehan  Illustrated. 861 pages.
Random House. $24.95


Utah Power &amp; Light Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Utah Power &amp; Light Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
277,179,091
250,262,957
Net inc
49,904,329
43,371,376
Share earns
.83
.72
9mo rev
777,222,840
740,785,379
Net inc
125,582,480
105,254,310
Share earns
2.09
1.73


Burlington Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Resources Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
496,629,000
560,696,000
Net inc
62,356,000
57,010,000
Share earns
.41
.38
Shares outst
150,050,000
150,000,000
9mo rev
1,691,093,000
1,764,739,000
Net inc
20,916,000
167,883,000
Share earns
.13
1.11
Shares outst
150,101,000
150,000,000


Lilco Assures N.R.C. of Its Shoreham Nuclear Plant's Readiness
LEAD: The Long Island Lighting Company sought today to convince the Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission that it was ready to begin full-power operations at its Shoreham nuclear-power plant.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about an American airlift of food to the southern Sudan, and its headline in some copies, misstated the cost of the airlift.
It is $1.5 million, not $100 million.


Woman's Right to Die Upheld
LEAD: In a case that gained attention from the involvement of a Roman Catholic bishop, a Federal judge ruled today that a comatose woman has a constitutional right to have her feeding tubes removed, despite objections by a state attorney that she would starve to death.


Manville Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manville Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
584,326,000
547,890,000
Net inc
53,494,000
c48,596,000
Share earns
1.96
1.76
9mo sales
1,647,515,000
1,540,742,000
Net inc
b122,305,000
c132,574,000
Share earns
4.31
4.73


Equimark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equimark Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,521,000
3,997,000
Per share
.47
.35
9mo net inc
13,611,000
10,092,000
Per share
1.13
.87
Shares outst
9,951,000
8,992,000


The A.C.L.U. That Thornburgh Forsook
LEAD: To the Editor:


Huntington Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huntington Bancshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
22,516,000
19,874,000
Per share
.60
.53
9mo net inc
64,704,000
42,193,000
Per share
1.72
1.11


Electronic Shipments Up
LEAD: American factory shipments of electronic equipment and components in the first nine months of 1988 rose 10.3 percent, to $183 billion, from $166 billion a year earlier, the Electronic Industries Association reported today.


Bush Assails Dukakis on the Military
LEAD: Vice President Bush said today that his military spending goals were consistent with those that had restored the nation's ''diplomatic credibility.''


Rules Aimed at Gangs Produce Unexpected Result: Marriages
LEAD: Faced with moving toward the altar or moving out, half a dozen men chose to get married rather than be ejected from their women friends' apartments at a West Side housing project.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Maple Leafs 6, Canadiens 2: The center Vincent Damphousse scored three goals for the first time in his career as Toronto (4-3) beat Montreal (2-4) last night.
The Maple Leafs took a 3-0 lead in the first 15 minutes, as Derek Laxdal and Damphousse each scored his fourth goal of the season and Dan Daoust had his first.


U.S. DOESN'T DOUBT PAKISTAN ON CRASH
LEAD: American officials expressed confidence today in Pakistan's investigation of a plane crash that killed President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq of Pakistan, but they would not rule out a further inquiry by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Tishman Sets Aoki Venture
LEAD: The Tishman Realty and Construction Company of New York and the Aoki Corporation of Japan have formed a joint real estate investment fund to sponsor some $2 billion of Tishman construction projects in the next five years.


Keycorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keycorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
30,944,000
27,098,000
Per share
.82
.78
9mo net inc
81,363,000
71,886,000
Per share
2.19
2.05


Careers; Expertise Needed for Cogeneration
LEAD: USING a process called cogeneration, a growing number of industrial and commercial plants are cutting millions of dollars from their utility bills.
Under the process, the plants produce their own electric power and thermal energy from waste heat - and add to the employment possibilities for technical experts in such widely varying fields as engineering, law, marketing and finance.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Sneaking a Snicker
LEAD: Robert Gates, the nation's No. 2 intelligence official, doesn't mind joking about his experience in 1987 Senate confirmation hearings.
Mr.
Gates withdrew his nomination to be Director of Central Intelligence after legislators said they would vote against him to send the White House a message about the


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.33
8.14
7.61
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.33
7.32
6.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.42
7.40
6.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.67
8.69
9.81
30-YR.


New York Mounts Campaign Against Wall St. Tax Cheats
LEAD: As part of a major drive against income-tax evasion by Wall Street brokers and investment house employees, the state tax department announced today that it would withhold taxes from bonuses and commissions at the state's highest rate starting Jan. 1.


O'Neill Lauded in His Own Words . . .
LEAD: ''Come on now, everybody, with a Happy Birthday . . .''  - Theodore Hickman (Hickey) in ''The Iceman Cometh''


Office Depot reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Office Depot (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
36,503,000
9,114,000
Net inc
b588,000
c720,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo sales
83,296,000
19,756,000
Net inc
b3,426,000
c1,536,000
Share earns
.49
-


Studies Link AIDS Virus Directly to Cancer and Dementia
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have found surprising effects of the AIDS virus that may help explain how it contributes to cancer and dementia in many of its victims.


Jordan's West Bank Move Upsetting Daily Life
LEAD: King Hussein's decision in July to give up all ties to the Israeli-occupied West Bank of the Jordan River in favor of the Palestinians is having real consequences on the lives of the 2.8 million people of Jordan, about 40 percent of whom consider themselves Palestinians.


Grace, W R &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grace, W R &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,390,438,000
1,100,591,000
Net inc
b50,537,000
c41,455,000
Share earns
.60
.48
9mo sales
4,134,459,000
3,210,603,000
Net inc
b158,064,000
c122,999,000
Share earns
1.87
1.44


L.I.R.R. Details Plan to Revamp Penn Station
LEAD: A new, ''more distinguished'' look and about 17,000 square feet will be added to Penn Station under the Long Island Rail Road's $73-million renovation plan, which the railroad described in detail for the first time yesterday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The Nobel Prize is fine, but the drugs I've developed are rewards in themselves.''  - Gertrude B. Elion, who shares Nobel Prizein Medicine.  [ C16:2. ]


Andersen Unit Is Renamed
LEAD: Arthur Andersen &amp; Company said today that it had changed the name of its United States Information Consulting practice to Andersen Consulting.


United Jersey Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Jersey Banks Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
29,979,000
27,292,000
Per share
.67
.60
9mo net inc
87,529,000
76,829,000
Per share
1.95
1.75
The year-ago figures have been restated to reflect the acquisition of First Valley Corp.


First Union Real Estate Investments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Union Real Estate Investments (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
18,323,000
18,459,000
Net inc
b5,326,000
c5,677,000
Share earns
.29
.31
9mo rev
54,480,000
54,965,000
Net inc
b17,948,000
c20,024,000
Share earns
.99
1.10


Yonkers Puts End to Failed Attempt to Revitalize Downtown Area


NCR Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCR Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,407,386,000
1,339,514,000
Net inc
103,129,000
97,794,000
Share earns
1.26
1.05
Shares outst
82,114,000
93,548,000
9mo rev
4,185,742,000
3,820,612,000
Net inc
289,701,000
257,945,000
Share earns
3.49
2.74
Shares outst
83,077,000
94,209,000


Bridge
LEAD: One American team qualified for quarter-final matches in the World Team Olympiad here tonight, and the other is virtually certain to do so.


India Shifting Carbide Judge
LEAD: An Indian court has ordered the replacement of the judge trying the compensation case against the Union Carbide Corporation, saying there were grounds for the company's concern that it might not get a fair trial at Bhopal.


Pirate Radio Station Goes On and Off Air From a Ship Off L.I.
LEAD: An unlicensed rock radio station forced off the air 14 months ago by the F.C.C. resumed broadcasting for about an hour last night from a ship four miles off Long Island until ordered to stop by a Federal judge.


A Man Called Lemkin
LEAD: The story in the paper reported that after 40 years of consideration the U.S.
Senate voted last Friday to make it a Federal offense to commit genocide.
That is the crime of acting with intent to destroy a national, ethnic, racial or religious group.


Morgan, J P &amp; Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan, J P &amp; Co Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
233,600,000
219,200,000
Per share
1.25
1.18
9mo net inc
743,700,000
b140,800,000
Per share
4.00
-
b-Net loss  Provision for credit losses of $20 million for the latest third quarter was unchanged from the year-ago period, and the latest 9 months totaled $100 million, compared with $930 million, in the year-ago period.


Flexible Address Book
LEAD: IT has always seemed like a good idea: automating an address book.


Summer's Comeback Gathers Momentum


Ewing Practices
LEAD: Patrick Ewing, the Knicks' center, who has missed all three of the team's preseason games with a bruise above his right knee, returned to practice yesterday at the team's training camp at SUNY-Purchase.
During Ewing's absence, the Knicks lost their last two exhibition games, to the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Charlotte Hornets.


Krueger, W A Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Krueger, W A Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
105,467,000
98,596,000
Net inc
4,697,000
5,682,000
Share earns
.15
.18
9mo sales
273,489,000
247,045,000
Net inc
b13,876,000
12,792,000
Share earns
.45
.41


Jersey City Schools Return $3 Million in Aid From U.S.
LEAD: Jersey City was forced to return more than $3 million in Federal and state school aid over three years because it could not document enrollment figures or prove the money had been correctly spent, a state auditor said today.


Maurice Moore-Betty, 77, a Chef
LEAD: Maurice Moore-Betty, a cooking teacher and author, died of a heart attack Wednesday at a friend's home in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old and lived in Shelter Island, L.I.


Sorg Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sorg Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,291,000
18,539,000
Net loss
1,210,000
b271,000
b-Includes a loss of $87,000 from discontinued operations.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Acme Electric Corp., Olean, N.Y., a maker of power conversion equipment for electronic and electrical systems, elected as a director Robert T. Brady, president and chief executive of Moog Inc.


Barris Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barris Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,578,000
5,280,000
Net loss
6,899,000
b3,830,000
Share earns
-
.47
b-Net income  The company said the latest first quarter results were negatively impacted by unrealized losses on equity securities of $3,865,000 and losses on the sale of investments of $523,000 with no associated tax benefits.


Houston Responds
LEAD: The University of Houston said yesterday it had filed its response to the National Collegiate Athletic Association regarding allegations of recruiting violations in its football program.
Yesterday was the deadline for a response.
The program is accused of 250 rules infractions said to have taken place during the coaching tenure of Bill Yeoman, now a fund-raiser for the school.


A's Pitcher Looks to Recapture Triumph
LEAD: Like Kirk Gibson with his home run in Game 1, Bob Welch has embraced his own moment of personal triumph in the World Series.
But the 10 years that have passed since Welch, then a 21-year-old rookie for the Dodgers, struck out Reggie Jackson have seemed to pass too quickly.


Macmillan and Kohlberg Win Round in Takeover
LEAD: In an important victory for Macmillan Inc. in its struggle to evade a takeover by the Maxwell Communications Corporation, a Delaware judge upheld a provision fashioned by Macmillan to help carry out a leveraged buyout of the company by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company.


EAST GERMAN SEES JEWISH SPOKESMAN
LEAD: The East German leader, Erich Honecker, met today with the president of the World Jewish Congress, Edgar M. Bronfman, to discuss the possibility of East German reparations to Jewish victims of Nazism.


Birmingham Steel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Birmingham Steel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
114,769,000
80,329,000
Net inc
12,000,000
5,245,000
Share earns
.97
.48


Arabs Giving Millions To Fund for Palestinians
LEAD: Arab donors have contributed about $18 million to a special United Nations effort to aid Palestinian refugees in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, officials here said today.


Gertrude Baltimore, Educator, 79
LEAD: Gertrude Baltimore, a former psychology instructor at Sarah Lawrence College in Bronxville, N.Y., died of cancer yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 79 years old.


It's Gorbachev and Soviet Masses vs. Old Guard; Forget Plot Fantasies
LEAD: To the Editor:


Compaq Introduces Laptop
LEAD: The Compaq Computer Corporation, a pioneer maker of transportable computers that got off to a late start in the growing laptop machines market, yesterday introduced its smallest computer yet.


Campaign Trail; Full-Court Press For Letters on Press
LEAD: Among the list of messages on Susy Elfving's desk the other day was one to call the Bush-Quayle headquarters about ''grass-roots support'' for the Republican candidates.
Since Ms.
Elfving is a Democrat, an administrative assistant to Representative Norman Y. Mineta, Democrat of California, the message left her puzzled.


U.S. and Philippines Sign Pact on Bases
LEAD: The United States and the Philippines signed an agreement today that will give the Philippines $962 million in military and economic aid in 1990 and 1991 in exchange for the continued operation of two American military bases there.


Bavarian Party Moves to Fill Posts Once Held by Strauss
LEAD: Bavaria's right-wing Christian Social Union today gave two men the task of filling the roles held by Franz Josef Strauss, who died early this month.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: Utah's Intermountain Power Agency yesterday offered approximately $500 million of power supply revenue refunding bonds through a syndicate led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


MEXICO TO RECEIVE UP TO $3.5 BILLION AS LOAN FROM U.S.
LEAD: In its largest loan ever made to a debt-pressed nation, the United States said today that it would grant Mexico up to $3.5 billion to help it cope with reduced revenues resulting from the plunge in oil prices.


India Reports Arrival of Burmese Refugees
LEAD: Students fleeing Burma have begun to arrive in India's northeastern states, according to reports from the area.


Late and Loudly, Jackson Rejoins Fray
LEAD: Jesse Jackson was not sulking or skulking.
He was not dispirited or dyspeptic.
He was, on the contrary, ready to fire and inspire.


Review/Music; Chamber Works Old and New at Tully
LEAD: The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center is celebrating its 20th anniversary this season, and the planned festivities include performances of the 20 works voted most popular by the society's audience.
At the opening concert of the series, on Sunday afternoon at Alice Tully Hall, two of those works were played -Bach's ''Brandenburg'' Concerto No.


Mercantile Bancorporation Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Bancorporation Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
7,415,000
10,591,000
Per share
.46
.66
9mo net inc
20,868,000
b15,332,000
Per share
1.30
-
b-Net loss and included a special provision of $75 million added to the reserve for possible loan losses for Latin American loans.


Pro Football Notebook; Elway Is Added to Toll of Quarterbacks
LEAD: When John Elway lay on the Mile High Stadium grass on Sunday clutching his right knee while his right ankle also throbbed with pain, Coach Dan Reeves realized that the Broncos, too, had been bitten by the nagging bug that has plagued the National Football League this season.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Art Is Also in Her Blood
LEAD: The name on the abstract graphics and metal sculptures in a Washington gallery is Gabriela von Habsburg, which sounds like royalty.
And it is.


Indian Head Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Indian Head Banks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,096,000
4,735,000
Per share
1.06
1.02
9mo net inc
13,911,000
12,220,000
Per share
2.88
2.67


Chess
LEAD: Bent Larsen, the greatest player in Denmark's history, has neither played nor lived in his native country in recent years.
But he made an exception to enter and share first prize in the Naestved Open International Tournament, which ended July 31, with Ferdinand Hellers of Sweden.
Both the famous grandmaster and the rising international master scored 7 points in the nine-round


Review/Television; Roseanne Smirks Through the Trials of Life
LEAD: Turning to his passengers on a Manhattan bus the other day, the driver asked if anybody wanted the 23d Street crosstown. ''Why?'' said a smirking enormous woman sitting opposite me, ''Ya selling one?'' Having just watched the pilot for ''Roseanne'' - which can be seen at 8:30 tonight on ABC - I was freshly familiar with the type.


WASHINGTON TALK: Congress; CONTRA AID BATTLE IS STYMIED, BUT DISPUTES LINGER
LEAD: While the Congressional battle over aid to the Nicaraguan rebels has been suspended, a dispute persists over whether the Administration's public relations campaign to promote the program in earlier years amounted to an illegal domestic propaganda operation.


COMPANY NEWS;
LEAD: Mounting a stunning takeover bid that would create the biggest producer of consumer goods in the world, Philip Morris Companies Inc. late yesterday offered to buy Kraft Inc. for nearly $11.5 billion in cash.


Chase to Aid Harlem Dance Tour
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Bank announced yesterday that it would sponsor the Dance Theater of Harlem's 1989-90 national tour, which will celebrate the ballet troupe's 20th anniversary.
The troupe is to receive a $120,000 grant, with an additional amount estimated by a bank representative as at least $120,000 given for such services as tour publicity and receptions.


10 Students Win Churchill Awards
LEAD: Ten American students have been awarded the 1988 Winston Churchill scholarships for graduate work in engineering, mathematics and the sciences at Cambridge University in England.


Nicor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nicor Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
144,883,000
156,595,000
Net inc
1,132,000
b31,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
1,045,419,000
1,007,973,000
Net inc
68,661,000
48,495,000
Share earns
2.24
1.52


CRACKS ARE FOUND ON AGING JETLINER
LEAD: A 30-inch-long series of cracks has been discovered on a 19-year-old Continental Airlines Boeing 737, a top Government safety official said yesterday in a speech about the hazards of aging airliners.


Commerce Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
12,548,000
9,730,000
Per share
1.27
.95
9mo net inc
36,777,000
29,134,000
Per share
3.67
2.83


Why Small Businesses Need Health Insurance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Earnings Climb At W. R. Grace
LEAD: W. R. Grace &amp; Company said yesterday that its third-quarter profit rose 21.7 percent as sales climbed 26 percent.
Earnings were $50.5 million, or 60 cents a share, up from $41.5 million, or 48 cents a share, a year earlier.


DESPONDENT BOYS IN DOUBLE SUICIDE
LEAD: Two 15-year-old boys despondent at being separated when one of their families moved away took their lives together in a weekend reunion, sharing a hunting rifle that each fired at his own head, the police said today.


A.T&amp;T. to Cut Long Distance By About 3.8%
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it would cut long-distance rates an average of 3.8 percent, a move that would save residential and business customers about $700 million a year.


The A.C.L.U. That Thornburgh Forsook; His Long Silence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Grainger, W W Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grainger, W W Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
408,118,000
351,093,000
Net inc
29,782,000
23,315,000
Share earns
1.07
.80
9mo sales
1,150,924,000
983,140,000
Net inc
82,941,000
66,484,000
Share earns
2.98
2.29


Weyerhaeuser Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weyerhaeuser Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,959,941,000
1,819,882,000
Net inc
144,812,000
126,123,000
Share earns
.70
.59
9mo sales
5,910,059,000
5,206,339,000
Net inc
409,574,000
317,223,000
Share earns
1.95
1.51


Burlington Northern Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Northern Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,662,572,000
1,683,609,000
Net inc
120,359,000
141,266,000
Share earns
1.60
1.89
Shares outst
74,670,000
74,123,000
9mo rev
5,209,203,000
4,908,383,000
Net inc
176,852,000
301,098,000
Share earns
2.34
4.02
Shares outst
74,698,000
74,135,000


United Technologies Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Technologies Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,500,000,000
4,300,000,000
Net inc
b190,100,000
165,000,000
Share earns
1.45
1.26
9mo rev
13,200,000,000
12,600,000,000
Net inc
b508,500,000
419,200,000
Share earns
3.89
3.20


Crawford &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crawford &amp; Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
74,740,000
68,199,000
Net inc
5,362,000
5,008,000
Share earns
.46
.43
9mo rev
220,074,000
199,313,000
Net inc
14,372,000
13,108,000
Share earns
1.23
1.12


Sobol Backs Course On AIDS in Sayville
LEAD: State Education Commissioner Thomas Sobol ruled yesterday that a curriculum intended to teach about AIDS was proper, despite assertions by some parents that the courses were nothing more than sex education under a different guise.


Judge in Drexel Fraud Case Refuses to Remove Himself
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday refused to remove himself from the Drexel Burnham Lambert securities fraud case and denied charges made by some of the defendants that by presiding in the case, he was violating conflict of interest rules.


Hewlett-Packard's Stake in Conductus
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company said that it had made a 15 percent equity investment in Conductus Inc., a start-up company based in Palo Alto, Calif., that is pursuing high-temperature superconductor technology.
The companies agreed to perform joint research and development for five years.


PATTERNS
LEAD:  Tahari Branches Out


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Sweet Deal
LEAD: Having established a bastion on Capitol Hill, there was still another Federal fortress - the White House - to be stormed with M &amp; M's, the hard-shelled chocolate candy that comes in a variety of colors.
Now that has happened, and jellybeans are history.


Diebold Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diebold Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
115,815,000
109,336,000
Net inc
9,217,000
9,164,000
Share earns
.70
.70
9mo sales
333,415,000
319,804,000
Net inc
b26,610,000
23,834,000
Share earns
2.02
1.81


New Soviet Credit Line Is Expected
LEAD: The Soviet Union is expected this week to wrap up what is likely to be the largest credit line ever with the West.
The deal with London banks would come just days after the Soviets signed two major credit agreements with West German and Italian banks.


Accounts
LEAD: *
CBS to Beber Silverstein &amp; Partners, Miami, for a TV station, WCIX, Channel 6, in Miami, that it proposes to own and operate, pending F.C.C. approval.


Topics of The Times; Andrew Cuomo's Example
LEAD: For nearly three years, Andrew Cuomo, the son of New York's Governor, has been the driving force behind Help, an innovative nonprofit enterprise that provides decent transitional housing for the homeless.
Yesterday the younger Mr.
Cuomo set a worthy example: He announced he was giving up his lucrative legal practice to work for the homeless organization full time.


Review/Theater; Rodgers and Hart, 48 Different Ways
LEAD: Listening to two hours of Rodgers and Hart is not one of life's ordeals, and you can do it for the next couple of weeks at the York Theater, where six singers and two pianos are offering, in whole or part, 48 songs from the team that gave Broadway 26 musicals between the mid-1920's and the early 1940's, when Lorenz


Gregory Henderson; Korea Expert Was 66
LEAD: Gregory Henderson, a former Foreign Service Officer and a specialist on Korea, died at Lawrence Memorial Hospital in Medford, Mass., on Sunday as a result of injuries suffered in a fall.
He was 66 years old and lived in Medford.


Campaign Trail; Spirits Are High At White House
LEAD: Despite Mr.
Atwater's admonition, White House officials were virtually popping the champagne corks on Monday, mindful that their jobs may remain intact if Mr.
Bush moves into the Oval Office.


Steinberg Trial Is Told Evidence May Be Painful
LEAD: The prosecution in the trial of Joel B. Steinberg said yesterday that its evidence would be gruesome and that ''there are no eyewitnesses'' to the crime.


Modular Clothes: Count the Ways
LEAD: In a time of escalating clothing costs and fashion ennui, ''modular dressing'' is catching on across the nation.
Sold in department and specialty stores by clerks trained as stylists, collections like those from Singles, Multiples and Units promise freedom from the ironing board as well as from the dictates of fashion.


Binks Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Binks Manufacturing Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
54,196,000
51,720,000
Net inc
1,953,000
2,568,000
Share earns
.69
.89
9mo sales
141,716,000
145,231,000
Net inc
b5,989,000
6,061,000
Share earns
2.10
2.09
Shares outst
2,857,570
2,909,360


Terms Revised in Deal for Lorimar
LEAD: In response to the delay in closing the merger deal between the Lorimar Telepictures Corporation and Warner Communications Inc. as well as the weakening condition of Lorimar, the companies have renegotiated the terms of their merger agreement.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Pope &amp; Talbot Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pope &amp; Talbot Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
123,304,000
113,528,000
Net inc
8,479,000
7,077,000
Share earns
.71
.59
9mo rev
360,990,000
320,119,000
Net inc
23,395,000
20,939,000
Share earns
1.95
1.74


The Growth of the Global Office
LEAD: For the New York Life Insurance Company, the office of the future is in this rural Irish market village, where high technology has usually meant a new tractor.


Bard, C R Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bard, C R Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
192,500,000
162,300,000
Net inc
20,000,000
15,700,000
Share earns
.35
.27
9mo sales
565,600,000
473,700,000
Net inc
58,000,000
45,800,000
Share earns
1.01
.79


Reynolds Metals Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reynolds Metals Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,482,600,000
1,146,000,000
Net inc
137,200,000
b62,500,000
Share earns
2.56
1.18
9mo rev
4,134,900,000
3,160,700,000
Net inc
342,100,000
b139,500,000
Share earns
6.40
2.79


U.S. Issues Overcome Early Dip
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved higher in very thin trading yesterday despite some weakness in the dollar and a further slight rise in the price of oil.


Saudis Call For Cut in Oil Output
LEAD: A powerful alliance of Arab oil producers inside the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, led by Saudi Arabia, called today for a steep cut of as much as 3 million barrels a day in OPEC's current oil production.


Mr. Bush Sinks the Truth in Boston Harbor
LEAD: As the court-appointed Special Master in the Massachusetts Superior Court litigation over the pollution of Boston harbor, I find myself compelled to speak out on what I believe is a damaging distortion by Vice President George Bush of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's environmental record.


New Terms for Bird
LEAD: Larry Bird and the Boston Celtics agreed yesterday on a two-year contract extension worth a reported $4.2 million per year.
The Celtics announced an agreement in principle to extend Bird's current five-year contract.
The pact, which had two seasons left, pays Bird $1.8 million per year, said to Bob Woolf, his attorney.


People in the News: George Herbert Hitchings; A Research Collaboration Spanning Four Decades
LEAD: GEORGE H. HITCHINGS is described by his colleagues as a man so dedicated and so brilliant that his ideas have shaped drug development for more than 40 years.
Yet he had all but given up the idea of ever winning the Nobel Prize.


The Reality: A 2-Game Lead
LEAD: There is, Joe McIlvaine, a Mets masochist, said today, ''a superior force at work here.'' He meant superior as in supernatural.
The Mets executive knows whereof he speaks because he watched the Los Angeles Dodgers do it to the Mets and now he is watching them do it to the Oakland Athletics.


HOUSE REPORT FAULTS F.D.A. APPROVAL OF SEDATIVE
LEAD: A Congressional investigation into how the Food and Drug Administration approved a sedative linked to deaths and serious side effects shows that the agency has failed to get all available data before clearing this and other drugs, a House subcommittee reported today.


Abitibi-Price Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abitibi-Price Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
813,400,000
749,800,000
Net inc
44,500,000
33,000,000
Share earns
.61
.45
9mo sales
2,448,900,000
2,201,900,000
Net inc
143,000,000
91,100,000
Share earns
1.98
1.23


Simpson Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Simpson Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
43,276,000
34,127,000
Net inc
2,464,000
1,175,000
Share earns
.39
.18
9mo sales
129,912,000
109,711,000
Net inc
7,138,000
3,578,000
Share earns
1.13
.56


Glaxo Appointment
LEAD: Thomas W. D'Alonzo has been named president of Glaxo Inc., the United States subsidiary of Glaxo Holdings P.L.C., a leading pharmaceutical company.
Mr.
D'Alonzo, 45 years old, fills a position vacated this summer when Ernest Mario, 50, was named chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
D'Alonzo joined Glaxo, of Research Triangle Park, N.C., in 1983 as general counsel and was named executive vice president last year.


Joyner-Kersee Fights Steroid Rumors
LEAD: She received another award yesterday.
The Women's Sports Foundation selected Jackie Joyner-Kersee the amateur athlete of the year for the second successive year, and only if someone else had won would it have been a surprise.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  Philip Morris offered $11.5 billion for Kraft in a bid that would create the world's biggest producer of consumer goods, with an empire ranging from its many cigarette brands to Miller beer and a huge line of General Foods products.
The $90-a-share deal would, if completed, displace Unilever, the big British-Dutch company, as the world's largest producer of consumer goods.


A 'Free Market' at Work in Feeding Kids
LEAD: Here is a tale of free enterprise at work that will gladden the heart of every capitalist who manages to avoid paying taxes:


National City Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
59,128,000
50,523,000
Per share
.97
.83
9mo net inc
166,668,000
111,333,000
Per share
2.74
1.82


Why Next Is Promising A Revolution
LEAD: LAST week was Next week.
Next Inc. of Palo Alto, Calif., briefly diverted the nation's attention from the Presidential elections by announcing a new computer that makes more promises than any candidate.


U.S. Court Upholds Sentence Of Former Mayor of Syracuse
LEAD: A Federal appeals court yesterday upheld the sentencing of a former mayor of Syracuse who pleaded guilty to racketeering.


Union National Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union National Corporation (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
8,551,000
5,770,000
Per share
.87
.80
9mo net inc
b21,553,000
23,042,000
Per share
2.19
2.33
b-Included $800,000 after-tax loss on the sale of a Pittsburgh office building and an after-tax expense of $1.8 million for an early retirement program.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. Why are heavenly bodies round?
A. ''They are not, of course,'' said Leroy Doggett, an astronomer with the nautical almanac office of the United States Naval Observatory. ''They only seem spherical, or they are almost spherical.''


Roosevelt Savings Yield Put at 9.71%
LEAD: The Roosevelt Federal Savings and Loan Association yesterday priced a $100 million offering of 10-year mortgage-backed securities through an underwriting syndicate led by Drexel Burnham Lambert.


36 New Goldman Partners Symbolize a Global Outlook
LEAD: Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the last major Wall Street firm organized as a partnership, yesterday announced the results of its naming of partners, bringing 36 new professionals into the fold.


Nacco Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nacco Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
188,556,000
108,847,000
Net inc
12,292,000
5,739,000
Share earns
1.39
.64
9mo rev
d465,717,000
363,064,000
Net inc
34,872,000
27,675,000
Share earns
3.94
3.04


US Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
31,196,000
28,302,000
Per share
.76
.69
Shares outst
41,043,000
40,848,000
9mo net inc
88,974,000
b89,401,000
Per share
2.17
2.19
Shares outst
41,011,000
40,773,000


Review/Music; Taste for the Fastidious
LEAD: American conductors in important posts have become somewhat of a trend in European musical life.
Many have done better abroad than at home.
New York, for example, hears Lawrence Foster less than it hears about him, but this conductor from Los Angeles has a number of interesting conducting jobs on the Continent.


Koch, in Miami, Tempers Tough Talk
LEAD: One moment speaking Yiddish and the next posing in a boat that is used to chase drug traffickers, Mayor Koch of New York campaigned here today for Michael S. Dukakis, the Democratic Presidential candidate.


Delchamps Spurns Proposal by A.&amp;P.
LEAD: Delchamps Inc., a supermarket chain based in Mobile, Ala., said that its board had rejected a $30-a-share offer from the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company and that Delchamps had filed a lawsuit against A.&amp;P. and related parties in Federal District Court in Mobile.
The suit contends that A.&amp;P.


Witness Tells Of Warnings By Myerson
LEAD: Sukhreet Gabel testified yesterday that Bess Myerson told her in the midst of a grand jury investigation that ''you could be dangerous'' and that she should ''keep your mouth shut.''


Brothers Put The Pressure On Interco
LEAD: The Cardinal Acquisition Corporation yesterday intensified its battle to acquire Interco Inc. by raising its bid by $4 a share, to $74.
The new offer totals about $2.67 billion, up from $2.53 billion, for Interco, a St.
Louis-based furniture and apparel company whose products include Ethan Allen furniture, London Fog raincoats and


200 Arrested Near Pentagon In Protest of Salvador Policy
LEAD: The Federal and local police arrested more than 200 demonstrators outside the Pentagon today during a protest against United States military involvement in El Salvador.


Officials Plan Meeting on Foster-Care Issue
LEAD: Aides to the City Comptroller, Harrison J. Goldin, and Deputy Mayor Stanley Brezenoff will meet at City Hall today, following an incident yesterday in which investigators for the Comptroller were denied access to a city center in the South Bronx where foster children are supposed to be cared for.


Leaders of 3 U.S. Jewish Groups Take Issue With Pro-Israel Lobby
LEAD: Leaders of three of the nation's most important Jewish organizations have asserted that the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, the chief lobby for Israel on Capitol Hill, is out of step with ''the consensus of the organized Jewish community'' on some key Middle East issues.


Review/Opera; 'Cosi' in Los Angeles, With Debut and Supertitles
LEAD: An excellent rendition of Mozart's ''Cosi Fan Tutte'' - strongly cast in most roles, beautifully conducted, manifestly prepared with care for detail -concluded the opera's four-performance run at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion here Sunday afternoon.


Makings of Genius
LEAD: ''Genius,'' Thomas Alva Edison once remarked, ''is 1 percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration.''


Campaign Trail; Atwater's Order: 'Keep the Heat On'
LEAD: Lee Atwater should be delighted, but he's nervous.
Forget all the talk about George Bush being ahead in the polls, about the Vice President outperforming Michael S. Dukakis in the Presidential debate, he says.
Lee Atwater doesn't want to hear a word about it.


Man Is Sentenced In L.I. Killing
LEAD: A man who admitted killing a drug dealer's girlfriend after the dealer offered to forgive a $7,000 debt in exchange for the murder was sentenced today to 18 years to life in prison.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher; Gold Prices Advance in U.S.
LEAD: The dollar rose yesterday against most major currencies after reports of intervention by the Bank of Japan.


TRW Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TRW Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,650,000,000
1,700,000,000
Net inc
b68,000,000
63,000,000
Share earns
1.11
1.01
9mo sales
5,270,000,000
5,080,000,000
Net inc
205,000,000
177,000,000
Share earns
3.33
2.85


Andrew Cuomo to Shift to Full-Time Housing Work
LEAD: Andrew Cuomo announced yesterday that he would leave his job with a Manhattan law firm to devote full time to building housing for homeless families now in welfare hotels.


Alma Cunningham, 78, Clothing Executive
LEAD: Alma Cunningham, retired vice president of fashion design for the Simplicity Pattern Company, one of the world's leading manufacturers of paper patterns for clothing, died of breast cancer on Oct. 10 at a hospital in Dallas.
She was 78 years old and lived in Dallas.


It Began With Dolley Madison
LEAD: Nancy Reagan is not the first President's wife whose appetite for high-fashion clothes has come under scrutiny.
In the 19th century Dolley Madison, Mary Todd Lincoln and Julia Grant were known to spend lavishly on clothes.
When Jacqueline Kennedy was criticized early in her husband's Administration for wearing French designer clothes, she dealt with the problem by installing Oleg


Republicbank in Dispute Over Tax Bill Provision
LEAD: The First Republicbank Corporation and its creditors stand to lose as much as $200 million of the holding company's last remaining assets should Congress pass a pension law provision included in the proposed tax amendment act.


It's Gorbachev and Soviet Masses vs. Old Guard
LEAD: To the Editor:


Archer-Daniels-Midland Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Archer-Daniels-Midland Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
91,301,000
82,983,000
Share earns
.52
.45


Standard Products Co reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Products Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Sales
113,895,000
102,765,000
Net inc
5,054,000
4,442,000
Share earns
.48
.40
Shares outst
10,636,128
11,147,523


Badger Meter Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Badger Meter Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
18,900,000
17,015,000
Net inc
588,000
541,000
Share earns
.39
.36
9mo sales
53,497,000
50,504,000
Net inc
1,756,000
1,407,000
Share earns
1.17
.94


Here and There
LEAD: Frank Bruno flew to New York yesterday and said that he did not want to change the site of his mandatory challenge of Mike Tyson from London to the United States.
Tyson, who signed an agreement in August to fight Bruno in London, apparently changed his mind earlier this month. ''In England I've got all the advantages,'' said Bruno.


Georgia Congressman Charged With Perjury
LEAD: Representative Pat Swindall of Georgia was indicted by a Federal grand jury today on 10 counts of perjuring himself in his grand jury testimony earlier this year in a Federal money-laundering investigation.


APPEAL REBUFFED IN RARE SPY CASE
LEAD: The Supreme Court today refused to hear an appeal by a former Navy intelligence analyst who was convicted of espionage for giving classified satellite photographs to a British military journal.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1988
From '87
Archer-Daniels-Midland Co.
$ 91,300,000
+
10.0
Burlington Northern Inc.
120,400,000
-
14.8
Champion International Corp.
122,400,000
+
38.0
Coca-Cola Co.
295,600,000
+
8.9
Commercial Credit Group
33,100,000
+
13.7
Corning Glass Works
123,900,000
+
146.3
Florida Progress Corp.


Aramco Wins Overseas Discrimination Suit
LEAD: American companies operating abroad do not have to comply with the civil rights law forbidding discrimination on the job, a Federal appeals court ruled today.


Federal Signal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Signal Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
95,920,000
78,916,000
Net inc
4,780,000
3,450,000
Share earns
.52
.36
9mo rev
275,732,000
230,700,000
Net inc
13,340,000
10,676,000
Share earns
1.45
1.11


Southtrust Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southtrust Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
17,243,000
15,378,000
Per share
.68
.61
9mo net inc
49,641,000
44,435,000
Per share
1.96
1.76


Mirages in the Sky May Not Be So Rare
LEAD: NEW evidence indicates that giant arcs of light, mirages produced by the gravity of distant galaxies, are more abundant in the universe than had been supposed.


Corrections
LEAD: The TV Notes column yesterday misidentified the New York station that broadcasts reruns of ''Cheers'' and has been losing viewers.
It is Channel 11, not Channel 9.


Teamsters Back Bush, Only
LEAD: Vice President Bush won the Presidential endorsement of the Teamsters executive board today after a poll of the nation's largest union gave him a small margin over his Democratic opponent, Michael S. Dukakis.
The union president, William J. McCarthy, said the endorsement applied only to Mr.
Bush personally and not to his running mate, Dan Quayle, or the Republican Party.


On Horse Racing; A Death Intensifies Jockeys' Solidarity
LEAD: The bitter labor strife that has enveloped New York racing lifted briefly yesterday, long enough for the funeral and burial of Michael Joseph Venezia.


LaRouche Enters Not Guilty Plea in a Fraud Case
LEAD: Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., the political extremist, and six co-defendants pleaded not guilty today to Federal charges of fraud and conspiracy in connection with what the authorities said was a scheme to raise money.


Survival Test for Simms
LEAD: In a pro football season in which quarterbacks have been knocked out of action week after week, Phil Simms of the Giants has survived.
On a Sunday in which John Elway of the Denver Broncos, Mark Rypien of the Washington Redskins and Steve Pelluer and Danny White of the Dallas Cowboys were knocked out of games, Simms was sacked five times and hit several times more, but he and the


Haiti Says It Foiled Coup Attempt
LEAD: The military Government said today that it had thwarted an attempted coup against Lieut.
Gen.
Prosper Avril by two military officers.


For Dodgers, A Miracle?
LEAD: The World Series switched to northern California today with the Los Angeles Dodgers holding a two-game lead over the Oakland Athletics, who were placing their hopes for survival on the home turf, the designated hitter and two games of freedom from Orel Hershiser.


Florida Progress Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Progress Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,010,000,000
1,900,500,000
Net inc
175,000,000
189,200,000
Share earns
3.43
3.79
Revenue for the year-ago period have been restated to include certain previously unconsolidated operations.


National Westminster Banorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Westminster Banorp Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b34,900,000
17,200,000
9mo net inc
b91,100,000
c174,300,000
b-Included extraordinary credits of $7.8 million for the quarter and $18.1 million for the 9 months from the partial recognition of previously unrecorded tax benefits related to the special loan loss provision recorded in 1987.


Sun and Seiko In Licensing Pact
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc., based in Mountain View, Calif., signed a licensing agreement with Seiko Instruments Inc. of Tokyo for Sun's scalable processor architecture, or Sparc.
Seiko plans to use Sparc, a fast microprocessor based on reduced instruction set computing, a technology used to speed processing, in its high-end computer work stations and file servers.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-17


Unlikely Allies Rush to Free 3 Whales
LEAD: Three young whales, battered and bloodied by jagged ice that has trapped them near Point Barrow, Alaska, have become the focus of a huge rescue effort by uncommon allies.


Findings Shed Light on Asbestos and Cancer
LEAD: DOCTORS have known for more than 20 years that asbestos can cause cancer, but just how the mineral does this has been a mystery.


Egyptians Agree to Postpone Enforcement of Taba Ruling
LEAD: Egypt has agreed to delay enforcement of an international ruling on the Taba border dispute with Israel until after Israel's general elections, the Foreign Ministry said today.


Lotus Development Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lotus Development Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
116,763,000
101,199,000
Net inc
14,285,000
19,130,000
Share earns
.31
.42
9mo sales
356,170,000
279,960,000
Net inc
49,937,000
49,118,000
Share earns
1.08
1.08


New Certificate May Ease Criticism of Death Data
LEAD: IN an ironic twist, probably no document has as much impact on the health of a population as does the death certificate.
Data collected from the certificates have become the most widely used statistical tools to monitor serious diseases.
Thus the documents play an integral role in helping shape health policy.


Dukakis Rolls Up Sleeves and Steps Up His Attack
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis brought his campaign to the industrial heartland today, to Shorty's Delux Diner and the Varsity Bowling alley, with the kind of person-to-person politicking that marked the early days of his drive for the White House.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Saturday about Rodney W. Markley Jr., a former executive of the Ford Motor Company, misidentified his widow.
She is the former Annabel Pugh Dolan.


3 Drug Pioneers Win Nobel in Medicine
LEAD: Two Americans and a Briton won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine yesterday for discoveries of what the Nobel committee in Stockholm said were ''important principles for drug treatment.'' The researchers developed a series of drugs that have become essential in the treatment of heart disease, peptic ulcers, gout, leukemia and other ailments.


Student Dies After Fall
LEAD: A 16-year-old girl who fell through a skylight while taking yearbook pictures on the roof of her high school has died after two days in a coma, the authorities said.
Rabsary Gutierrez, a junior at Hialeah-Miami Lakes High School, fell 30 feet on Friday when she apparently misjudged her step and plunged through the glass skylight.


'Jammy Man' Actor's Plight
LEAD: ROBBY RAMSEL, the most mysterious figure in print advertising since the man in the Hathaway shirt, desperately wants work.


Our Towns; 'Liberal' Is Not A Dirty Word To This Coalition
LEAD: Sometimes it seems as if the only guy in America saying the word ''liberal'' out loud is George Bush, and he says it about every two minutes in a tone that makes it sound like a synonym for ''extremely painful root canal.''


Workers Evacuated at A-Plant
LEAD: An exhaust fan failed in a plutonium-processing area of the Savannah River nuclear weapons plant complex today, causing the evacuation of about 100 workers.
But officials said there was no contamination.
The fan pulls fresh air through the building and out through filters that trap any radioactive material.


First of America Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First of America Bank Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
22,857,000
21,350,000
Per share
1.60
1.58
9mo net inc
62,108,000
55,113,000
Per share
4.25
4.16


French Government Is Criticized For Failing to Condemn Algeria
LEAD: The French Government has come under sharp domestic attack for failing to criticize Algeria for repression in quelling riots and protests there last week.
Some 250 people were reported killed in the clashes.


Court Drops Charges On Mafia Informant
LEAD: Heroin-smuggling charges were dropped in Federal court in Brooklyn yesterday against Tommaso Buscetta, a Mafia defector who gave law-enforcement officials valuable information in major organized-crime trials in Italy and the United States.


Court Eases Securities Firm's Bond
LEAD: In a ruling sharply limiting the impact of a racketeering indictment against five executives of a New Jersey securities firm, a Federal Judge yesterday restricted the amount of money that the firm would have to post as a bond to insure assets that might be forfeitable to the Government.


United Cable Television Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Cable Television Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
72,636,000
61,041,000
Net inc
3,542,000
b667,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


Comdial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comdial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
22,637,000
22,776,000
Net inc
659,000
b1,879,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
70,659,000
67,557,000
Net inc
764,000
b2,685,000
Share earns
.04
-
b


Business and Health; The Controversy On Benefit Rules
LEAD: EMPLOYER-SUBSIDIZED health benefit plans that cover millions of Americans are likely to be revised as a result of new requirements that Congress is reviewing this week.
The measures, which have attracted criticism, are intended to insure that a company's lower-paid employees get the same type and value of medical benefits as managers and other higher-paid personnel.


Baybanks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baybanks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
22,168,000
17,090,000
Per share
1.39
1.14
9mo net inc
65,166,000
b55,657,000
Per share
4.10
3.72
b-After a gain of $4,820,000 from an accounting change.


For Iguanas, Place in Sun May Be Too Bright
LEAD: CONSERVATIONISTS breeding green iguanas in captivity to replenish the dwindling population of the species in Central America face a quandary: is it better to turn loose the bullies or the more submissive iguanas?


Franklin Computer Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Computer Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
17,503,000
8,742,000
Net inc
2,648,000
b119,000
Share earns
.41
-
6mo sales
30,429,000
14,277,000
Net inc
4,028,000
b578,000
Share earns
.62
-


Source Capital Inc reports earnings for As of Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Source Capital Inc (NYSE)
As of Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
286,722,600
310,609,772
Share earns
37.72
41.98
Net income represents net assets.


Pulitzer Publishing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pulitzer Publishing Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
94,408,000
89,746,000
Net inc
3,132,000
3,134,000
Share earns
.30
.30
9mo rev
284,991,000
268,015,000
Net inc
11,991,000
9,619,000
Share earns
1.15
.92


Philip Morris Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philip Morris Companies (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,547,000,000
6,967,000,000
Net inc
639,000,000
502,000,000
Share earns
2.76
2.11
Shares outst
231,000,000
238,000,000
9mo rev
22,602,000,000
20,631,000,000
Net inc
1,768,000,000
1,364,000,000
Share earns
7.56
5.73
Shares outst
234,000,000
238,000,000


Strain on Industrial Capacity Eases
LEAD: The strain on industrial capacity in the United States eased in September for the first time in seven months as utilities scaled back after the summer heat wave, the Government said today.


Escape From Cabaret: Peter Allen to Put 'Legs' on Broadway
LEAD: So why is Peter Allen making the leap from cabaret to Broadway?


British Retail Sales Slip
LEAD: Retail sales in Britain fell by 1 percent in September, the Government said today, raising expectations that some of the heat may be going out of a consumer boom that has fueled inflation and deepened the trade deficit.
Base lending rates have been raised to 12 percent from 7 1/2 percent since June.


Pentair Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pentair Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
203,920,000
198,474,000
Net inc
10,114,000
4,560,000
Share earns
.95
.39
9mo sales
602,168,000
592,595,000
Net inc
28,859,000
11,165,000
Share earns
2.74
1.00


Manville Net Rises by 10%
LEAD: The Manville Corporation yesterday reported a record third-quarter net income of $53.5 million, or $1.96 a share, up by 10 percent from the corresponding period last year, when the Denver-based company had a profit of $48.6 million, or $1.76 a share.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Good to the Corps
LEAD: One of the tasks of the Peace Corps is to help developing countries become more self-sufficient in food supplies.


Louisiana-Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana-Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
462,900,000
461,000,000
Net inc
36,700,000
41,400,000
Share earns
.96
1.08
9mo sales
1,351,100,000
1,238,000,000
Net inc
104,000,000
88,700,000
Share earns
2.71
2.32


Judge Picks Final Site For Yonkers
LEAD: The Federal judge in the Yonkers housing-desegregation case yesterday designated the last of seven sites for low-income public housing and ordered the city to act to acquire the property.


Steel Output Falls 2.1%
LEAD: Steel production fell to 1.797 million tons in the week ended Saturday, a decrease of 2.1 percent from the previous week's 1.836 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute said yesterday.
The industry's production amounted to 83.8 percent of capacity during the week, compared with 85.6 percent in the previous week.


Myers Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Myers Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
46,078,977
38,370,259
Net inc
2,055,420
1,409,551
Share earns
.34
.24
9mo sales
131,674,572
88,786,322
Net inc
5,582,836
3,477,188
Share earns
.93
.58


Gundle Environmental Sysems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gundle Environmental Sysems (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
27,949,000
14,568,000
Net inc
2,793,000
1,268,000
Share earns
.44
.23
9mo sales
64,256,000
33,513,000
Net inc
4,880,000
1,970,000
Share earns
.83
.35


Friends of Louise Nevelson Gather In a Memorial for the Late Artist
LEAD: When asked, after a trip to Egypt, how she liked the pyramids, the sculptor Louise Nevelson replied, ''Too small.'' The response, said the art dealer Arnold Glimcher, typified her sense of ''grandeur,'' her ''great expectations'' for herself and everyone around her.


Justin Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Justin Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
62,515,000
57,338,000
Net inc
1,822,000
b373,000
Share earns
.32
.06
9mo sales
172,912,000
166,674,000
Net inc
3,900,000
b692,000
Share earns
.70
.12


Kelly and Bills Bury Jets
LEAD: Suddenly, it seems like winter again for the Jets.


Panel Backs Libel Law Shift
LEAD: A panel of experts on libel and free expression yesterday recommended new Federal rules on libel claims to help settle disputes more quickly.


Chubb Unit Pays Claims to Farmers
LEAD: The Chubb Corporation said its Federal Insurance Company unit had paid out $20 million in claims on rain insurance to farmers in seven Midwestern states.
It also paid $11 million to farmers who applied for the insurance but received no coverage.


August Rise In Inventories Is Put at 0.8%
LEAD: Business inventories, a closely watched indicator of a developing recession, rose by a strong eight-tenths of 1 percent in August, the Commerce Department reported yesterday.
It was the 20th consecutive monthly increase.


Icahn Ending Attempt To Buy Eastern Airlines
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn, the investor and chairman of Trans World Airlines, told officials of the Texas Air Corporation yesterday that he was ending his effort to make a bid for Eastern Airlines.


Bid for London Papers
LEAD: Daily Mail and General Trust P.L.C., a British investment concern, said today that it had agreed to acquire the 50.5 percent of Associated Newspapers Holdings P.L.C. that it does not already own.
The offer of $13.46 a share for the remaining 66.9 million shares outstanding puts a value of $2.1 billion on the printing and publishing company.


A.I.D. Embezzler Sentenced
LEAD: A former financial adviser to the Agency for International Development who admitted embezzling $1.37 million was sentenced Friday to five years in prison.


Sallie Mae Yield Tied to Yen
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association yesterday priced a $60 million offering of reverse principal exchange-related securities through a syndicate led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


United Technologies' Profit Up 15%
LEAD: The United Technologies Corporation today reported a 15 percent increase in its third-quarter profit, including a gain from the sale of assets.


First Pennsylvania Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Pennsylvania Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
14,014,000
14,024,000
Per share
.33
.33
9mo net inc
b44,085,000
c65,180,000
Per share
1.04
-
b-Included gains of $3.2 million on sales of investment securities and $1.5 million from the sale of lease financing residual values.


Dale Pon's Milestone For Cool Jazz on WQCD
LEAD: Dale Pon, who left Lois Pitts Gershon Pon/GGK on Labor Day to form Dale Pon Advertising Inc., yesterday displayed for public view his first television commercials for his charter client, the radio station WQCD-FM in New York City, which features contemporary jazz and jazz alone.


Chemistry of Sexual Desire Yields Its Elusive Secrets
LEAD: The sex hormone testosterone is a genuine aphrodisiac, with higher levels stimulating sexual desire in men and perhaps in women as well, recent research has shown.
But the level of testosterone coursing through a person's body has little direct impact on sexual performance, according to the studies, which have discovered a sharp distinction between the chemistry of desire and that of the sexual act itself.


Topics of The Times; Bone in the Throat
LEAD: Consumers are entitled to accurate information about food.
Yet the U.S.
Department of Agriculture now proposes to let manufacturers put ground bone in hot dogs, bologna and other processed meats without revealing it on the label.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about American reaction to recent demonstrations in Yugoslavia, and a correction in this space yesterday, misidentified a New York Representative who received a letter from Vice President Bush expressing concern about the situation of ethnic Albanians.
He is Joseph J. DioGuardi, Republican of Westchester County.


New Plans for Space Reactors Raise Fears of Nuclear Debris
LEAD: THE United States and the Soviet Union are drawing up elaborate plans for the use of nuclear power in space, reigniting fears that radioactive debris from an accident will sooner or later come raining down on the Earth.


Fairchild Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fairchild Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
137,044,000
113,792,000
Net inc
b6,048,000
c463,000
Share earns
.30
-
9mo sales
399,317,000
330,584,000
Net inc
b21,680,000
c22,584,000
Share earns
1.11
.96


Autodie Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autodie Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
28,049,482
14,682,925
Net inc
1,293,976
101,654
Share earns
.25
.02
Yr sales
87,716,740
58,641,626
Net inc
b3,459,855
180,521
Share earns
.67
.04


John Ball Dies at 77; A Critic and Novelist Know for Mysteries
LEAD: John Ball, a music critic turned mystery writer, died of colon cancer Saturday in Encino (Calif.) Hospital.
He was 77 years old.


Chase Manhattan Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chase Manhattan Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
283,000,000
226,000,000
Per share
3.09
2.55
9mo net inc
784,000,000
b1,050,000,000
Per share
8.62
-
b-Net loss  The latest third quarter earnings included an after-tax gain of about $103 million from modification of its pension plan and the purchase of annuity contracts substantially in settlement of its pension plan obligation.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amax Inc. said its Amax Oil and Gas unit had completed its acquisition of SPG Exploration Corp. from Quantum Chemical Corp. for $118 million.


Commercial Credit Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial Credit Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
244,900,000
230,000,000
Net inc
33,100,000
29,100,000
Share earns
.74
.55
Shares outst
46,000,000
53,000,000
9mo rev
712,200,000
677,400,000
Net inc
94,300,000
b19,200,000
Share earns
2.11
.36


Storm in Chicago Area Leads To Hundreds of Flight Delays
LEAD: A storm raked central and northern Illinois with hail and high winds today, delaying hundreds of flights at Chicago airports.
Five people were reported to have been struck by lightning.


Trump to Sell The St. Moritz At Big Profit
LEAD: Donald J. Trump said yesterday that he was selling the St.
Moritz Hotel on Central Park South for $150 million more than he paid for it in 1985.


...And in San Francisco, They Also Have a Cake
LEAD: In the six years Eugene O'Neill lived in his California home, Tao House, nearly an hour's drive from here, he wrote some of his greatest plays, including ''A Moon For the Misbegotten'' and ''The Iceman Cometh.''


Ziegler Company reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ziegler Company (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,110,000
9,378,000
Net inc
1,307,000
995,000
Share earns
.42
.30
9mo rev
26,473,000
30,179,000
Net inc
1,833,000
3,318,000
Share earns
.58
1.00


People in the News: Sir James Whyte Black; A Pharmacology Pioneer Who Avoids the Spotlight
LEAD: SCIENTISTS who know him describe Sir James Black as tenacious and driven by obsessive curiosity, but also as a modest man who shuns publicity.


German Oil Trader Held
LEAD: The chief oil trader at Kloeckner &amp; Company was dismissed from his job and arrested today on suspicion of embezzlement in connection with a multimillion-dollar oil trading loss, the company said.


Leslie Fay Companies reports earnings for 13wk to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leslie Fay Companies (NYSE)
13wk to Oct 1
1988
1987
Sales
220,216,000
185,788,000
Net inc
13,156,000
7,731,000
Share earns
.69
.40
40wk sales
517,503,000
453,783,000
Net inc
17,574,000
13,642,000
Share earns
.92
.71


Northern Trust Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Trust Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
25,500,000
18,200,000
Per share
1.53
1.09
9mo net inc
67,300,000
b29,900,000
Per share
4.02
-
b-Net loss


Green Names Coaching Staff
LEAD: Dallas Green, the new manager of the Yankees, yesterday announced his coaching staff for the coming season, selecting four men who have had managerial experience in the major leagues.


Chase, Morgan and First Chicago Profits Up
LEAD: Three major bank holding companies yesterday reported higher third-quarter earnings although they were unable to report profits from a large part of their Argentine loans.


Worries Persist On Towers Plan At Coliseum Site
LEAD: A proposed skyscraper complex on Columbus Circle, which was scaled down after objections to its size, would still increase traffic congestion, cast shadows over Central Park and place new burdens on the area's sewerage system, a draft environmental impact statement filed yesterday said.


Trivandrum Journal; An Education in Politics For Girls at Holy Angels
LEAD: In India's gentle deep south, where mosques and churches share the beach-front coconut groves with Hindu temples, two perenially wary adversaries - a Marxist government and a Roman Catholic education system - are squared off again in tense confrontation.


Dow Ends Up by 7.29 in a Seesaw Session
LEAD: Stocks bounced back and forth yesterday, but by the closing bell prices were moderately higher, buoyed by some program buying and a token show of strength in the dollar.


Champion International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion International Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,285,698,000
1,198,987,000
Net inc
122,386,000
88,694,000
Share earns
1.29
.94
9mo sales
3,814,141,000
3,457,235,000
Net inc
336,553,000
299,872,000
Share earns
3.54
3.17


Campus Buildings Are Decaying, Survey Says
LEAD: By constantly deferring expenses for maintenance, the nation's colleges and universities now face an estimated $20 billion in urgently needed work to repair and update buildings, equipment and utilities, a survey contends.


Soviet Players Get Some Pointers


Morrow To Publish Spy Book
LEAD: A book to be published next week says the British Government shielded a top-ranking British traitor because he had access to intelligence information about the purported Nazi sympathies of the Duke and Duchess of Windsor.


British Brewer Gets Elders Bid
LEAD: The Australian brewing group Elders IXL today began a takeover bid of $:1.6 billion, or about $2.8 billion, for the British company Scottish &amp; Newcastle Breweries P.L.C.


Foothill Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foothill Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
24,885,000
19,230,000
Net inc
b4,117,000
c2,018,000
Share earns
.44
.22
9mo rev
68,943,000
56,544,000
Net inc
b10,142,000
c5,703,000
Share earns
1.10
.62


Palestinians to Meet This Month on Declaring State
LEAD: After several postponements, the Palestine National Council is scheduled to meet on Oct. 31 to adopt a declaration of an independent Palestinian state, Palestinian officials said today.


Ashton-Tate Names PC Division Officer
LEAD: The last career decision that William P. Lyons made was in 1969 when he was promoted to captain in the United States Army.
He dropped out of the Army and joined the International Business Machines Corporation instead.


6 IN CHICAGO PLAN TO RUN FOR MAYOR
LEAD: The field of Democrats planning to run in next year's Chicago mayoral election grew to six today, when Edward M. Burke, one of the city's best-known political names, declared himself a candidate.


Advisory Facts and Fantasy Figures
LEAD: It's official!
The Administration has issued its formal estimate that the Federal deficit in fiscal 1989, which began Oct. 1, will be less than the $146 billion ceiling set by the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law.
Not much less, says the Office of Management and Budget - only $545 million.
But that's enough to forestall the chaotic across-the-board spending cuts that would otherwise be required.


Myers Suspended
LEAD: Angel Myers, dropped from the United States Olympic swimming team after testing positive for steroid use, has been suspended from competition through 1989, according to a board of review for United States Swimming, the sport's governing body in this country.
The three-member board, meeting to decide a penalty against the swimmer following her failure to have the test findings overturned in appeal, also invalidated Myers's records and recalled medals she won during the national long course championships, the meet used to select the Olympic team.


Hubbell Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hubbell Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
150,990,000
146,010,000
Net inc
17,078,000
14,883,000
Share earns
.66
.57
9mo sales
459,376,000
434,324,000
Net inc
52,844,000
45,519,000
Share earns
2.04
1.74


Yugoslav Party Opens Pivotal Session
LEAD: The Communist Party Central Committee today opened a meeting that had been billed as crucial to solving Yugoslavia's urgent economic, ethnic and political problems.
But it failed to produce any concrete initiatives to deal with those problems.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M.


Yonkers Razes a Blighted 'Parthenon'
LEAD: When they were erected here a decade ago, the Colonnades held out all the hope of a heart transplant for Getty Square, the shabby and shunned downtown area of this Westchester city.


Avemco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avemco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
26,844,000
29,155,000
Net inc
b3,785,000
c4,193,000
Share earns
.42
.43
9mo rev
81,079,000
86,468,000
Net inc
b14,222,000
c14,193,000
Share earns
1.56
1.47


Runner Returning
LEAD: Antoni Niemczak of Poland, the second-place finisher in the 1986 New York City Marathon, who later was disqualified after testing positive for an anabolic steroid, will return to compete in this year's race after having served a two-year suspension.
The announcement of his eligibility was made yesterday by the race director, Fred Lebow.


Coca-Cola's Net Up 8.9%
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Company today reported an 8.9 percent rise in third-quarter net profit and said its performance for the year was on target.


South Africans Try to End Segregated Rugby
LEAD: In open defiance of the Pretoria Government, white rugby officials have reached an agreement with black guerrilla leaders and black sports administrators to desegregate rugby, the national sport of Afrikaners.


Town &amp; Country Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Town &amp; Country Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
38,310,300
29,723,662
Net inc
87,236
567,542
Share earns
.01
.07
6mo sales
80,794,889
62,652,957
Net inc
1,761,076
1,808,481
Share earns
.18
.21


Goetz Seeks Reversal On Gun Conviction
LEAD: A lawyer for Bernhard H. Goetz asked the state's highest court yesterday to give some weight to ''little words'' and overturn a gun possession conviction stemming from his shooting of four men in New York City in 1984.


Horizon Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
15,011,000
12,018,000
Per share
1.68
1.33
9mo net inc
38,516,000
32,868,000
Per share
4.27
3.63


Addendum
LEAD: *
M magazine, a men's life style publication, will be raising its rate base 7 percent, to 160,000 from 150,000, with ad rates increasing 10 percent, with the January issue.


Loring Journal; Rallying Round an Air Base in Northern Maine
LEAD: Several times a day, the tranquillity of this Northern Maine potato-farming town is broken by shrieking jet engines.


Give Manhattan Chauvinism a Bronx Cheer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rig Count Up in Week
LEAD: The number of working oil and gas rigs jumped by 11 last week, to a total of 925, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
A year ago, the count was 1,134.
The rig count is a widely watched industry index of drilling activity and reflects the number of rigs exploring for oil as of last Friday.


Soviets Say U.N. Peacekeeping Effort Should Emphasize Prevention
LEAD: A senior Soviet official said today that the United Nations should shift the focus of its peacekeeping operations, putting greater emphasis on preventing conflicts instead of seeking to stop them after they have started.


Coca-Cola Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca-Cola Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,128,320,000
2,014,363,000
Net inc
295,616,000
271,363,000
Share earns
.81
.72
9mo rev
6,311,002,000
5,666,594,000
Net inc
809,212,000
723,181,000
Share earns
2.20
1.91


Hospital Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hospital Corp of America (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,018,743,000
1,160,564,000
Net inc
b53,768,000
cd232,821,000
Share earns
.75
-
9mo rev
3,088,460,000
3,752,767,000
Net inc
205,533,000
c91,344,000
Share earns
2.88
-


Net Up at Unisys and NCR, But Both See '89 Slowdown
LEAD: Unisys and NCR announced higher third-quarter earnings yesterday, but both companies said they expected an industry slowdown in 1989 and were already seeing slower orders.


Why Bennington Is the Most Expensive College
LEAD: Among the reasons Bennington College is the nation's most expensive school is the way it has handled Ada Vlachoutsikou and her imperiled monk seals.


Old Kent Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Kent Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
19,110,000
17,231,000
Per share
.85
.76
9mo net inc
53,325,000
46,650,000
Per share
2.36
2.06


Great Lakes Chemical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Chemical Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
158,030,000
122,470,000
Net inc
26,778,000
14,270,000
Share earns
1.54
.82
9mo rev
459,484,000
359,112,000
Net inc
75,773,000
37,978,000
Share earns
4.35
2.32


Platinum Contracts Surge, Bolstering Gold and Silver
LEAD: Prices of platinum futures rose sharply yesterday on speculative buying.
These gains led gold and silver higher in what analysts said might indicate a bullish turnaround for precious metals after a sharp drop last month.


Joseph E. Sokal, Researcher, 71
LEAD: Dr.
Joseph E. Sokal, a researcher in cancer treatment, died Thursday at Duke Hospital in Durham, N.C., after a short illness.
He was 71 years old and lived in Durham.


Puzzle on Solar Heat
LEAD: Scientists have detected gigantic whirlpools on the surface of the Sun and speculate that this turbulence could be responsible for the extremely high temperatures of the outer solar atmosphere, which is one of the most puzzling features of the Sun and other stars.


Review/Music; At Radio City, Dylan Sings Dylan With All the Old Fire
LEAD: Bob Dylan has always taken liberties with his songs - changing the tempos and arrangements, altering or jettisoning melodies, turning venom to sarcasm to enigmatic croon.


Keys to Israeli Vote: The Orthodox and the Arabs
LEAD: As he stepped to the microphone, Shimon Glick, a medical doctor, admitted that he had never given a political speech before.
But he stood before a packed hotel conference room in Tel Aviv, adjusted his skullcap and promised to ''try my best.''


Amity Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amity Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
317,000
287,000
Per share
.32
.29
9mo net inc
1,080,000
1,034,000
Per share
1.10
1.06


Bronx Official Seeks Hair From Relative Of Missing Woman
LEAD: A Bronx prosecutor asked a judge yesterday for permission to take hair samples from the former brother-in-law of a Bronx woman whose headless body, the police say, was found in the Hudson River last spring, nearly two years after she disappeared.


Unisys Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unisys Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,267,700,000
2,223,200,000
Net inc
151,000,000
129,700,000
Share earns
.77
.68
9mo rev
7,028,100,000
6,914,000,000
Net inc
462,600,000
361,100,000
Share earns
2.38
1.89


U.N. Official Criticizes Focus Of Third World Development
LEAD: The director general of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization criticized third-world governments today, saying they spent too much money and energy on ''showcase'' projects in their big cities while neglecting food production and the needs of the rural poor.


IRAN SAID TO WORK ON U.S. EMBASSY
LEAD: Iranian travelers here report that Revolutionary Guards have been withdrawn from the United States Embassy in Teheran and that the complex is being refurbished, Western diplomats said today.


First Chicago Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Chicago Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
111,431,000
61,839,000
Per share
1.73
1.05
9mo net inc
375,838,000
b474,212,000
Per share
6.13
-
b-Net loss


Graco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Graco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 23
1988
1987
Sales
67,092,000
59,598,000
Net inc
3,722,000
3,080,000
Share earns
.52
.36
9mo sales
191,520,000
172,429,000
Net inc
10,780,000
8,526,000
Share earns
1.54
.96


Federal Suit Accuses Burger King Of Discrimination Against Blacks
LEAD: The Burger King Corporation was accused in a lawsuit today of relegating black owners of its fast-food franchises to unprofitable locations in poor, urban neighborhoods and reserving more profitable outlets for whites.


First Lady Expresses 'Regrets' on Wardrobe
LEAD: The White House acknowledged today that Nancy Reagan has borrowed designer clothes and jewelry from American fashion houses in recent years, even though she promised to end the practice in 1982.


McKesson to Sell Liquor Businesses
LEAD: The McKesson Corporation agreed to sell its remaining alcoholic beverage businesses to a unit of Remy Martin et Cie, the French cognac house.
The sale, for an undisclosed amount of cash, includes all of the capital stock of ''21'' Brands Inc. of New York and Distillerie Riunite di Liquori S.p.A. of Italy, and a majority interest in Mt.


FMC Gold Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FMC Gold Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
47,100,000
41,400,000
Net inc
17,600,000
14,400,000
Share earns
.27
.22
9mo sales
126,400,000
110,900,000
Net inc
45,900,000
36,000,000
Share earns
.70
.55


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about a visual-arts exchange between the United States and the Soviet Union misidentified the site of an exhibition of works by students from the I. E. Repin Institute of Painting, Sculpture and Architecture in Leningrad.
The exhibition will be at the New York Academy of Art, 419 Lafayette Street, tomorrow through Nov.


D.F. King Fills Dual Post Of President and Chief
LEAD: D.F.
King &amp; Company, one of the Wall Street proxy-solicitation firms that have thrived in the era of mergers and acquisitions, has named John J. Gavin president and chief executive.


Lin Broadcasting Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lin Broadcasting Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
68,644,000
58,792,000
Net inc
20,590,000
15,559,000
Share earns
.39
.28
9mo rev
201,322,000
168,910,000
Net inc
56,177,000
b71,721,000
Share earns
1.05
1.27


Angelo Carmine Ferrara, 57, Pediatrician
LEAD: Dr.
Angelo Carmine Ferrara, a pediatrician and neonatologist, died of cancer Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old.


When Leaking Becomes Spying
LEAD: Only one American has been convicted of espionage for leaking classified information to a publication.
He is Samuel Loring Morison, a naval intelligence worker who sold a photograph taken by satellite to the British publisher of a military-affairs magazine.
Now the Supreme Court refuses to review that conviction, leaving in force a dangerously broad definition of espionage.


An Ad Woman For Bank Post
LEAD: Becoming part of the 17-member New York State Banking Board had never occurred to Caroline R. Jones.


Albany Imperium? Is That Near the Civic Center?
LEAD: Nassau County has its Coliseum and Manhattan has its Garden.
In Albany, how about the Sportacular, or the Spectraplex, or perhaps the Stockade?


Knoll International Inc. Picks a Top Executive
LEAD: Alfred S. Crimmins, former chief executive of the Collins &amp; Aikman Corporation, the big textile maker, has been named president and chief operating officer of Knoll International Holdings Inc., a privately held company that has enterprises ranging from commercial furniture to do-it-yourself tile stores to the venerable ''21'' Club restaurant in New


Bush Gains in a New Poll of Voters
LEAD: Vice President Bush has opened a large lead over Michael S. Dukakis among likely voters, according to the first major survey of opinion since Thursday's final debate.


Vote 'Yes' for Charter Revision
LEAD: With the Supreme Court poised to rule next spring on the constitutionality of New York City's Board of Estimate, the city's Charter Revision Commission, led by Richard Ravitch, wisely deferred any change in the board's present structure.
Instead, five less momentous but still important charter amendments will appear on the Nov.


Union Picks Up Check for Green's Luncheon
LEAD: New York City Schools Chancellor Richard R. Green was unable to get enough corporate donors to pay for a luncheon he sponsored last month to mark the beginning of the school year, officials involved say.


Taiwan Push Overseas
LEAD: Businessmen from Taiwan, facing rising wages and tough antipollution laws at home, are expected to double their overseas investments this year, to about $200 million (United States funds), the Government's Investment Commission said today.


Corestates Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corestates Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
45,014,000
39,321,000
Per share
1.15
1.00
9mo net inc
129,414,000
113,258,000
Per share
3.30
2.88


Demystifying the Elements Of Asian and Thai Cooking
LEAD: TWO newly published books are musts, the first for those who are struggling to learn about Asian ingredients and have run into language barriers in the tiny shops where many of the more exotic ones can be found, and the second for those who wonder whether the Thai food in their local restaurants is authentic or Americanized.


Dollar Ends the Day Higher As Gold Prices Move Down
LEAD: The dollar finished higher against most major currencies yesterday after an up-and-down day of trading in the foreign exchange markets.


Irving Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Irving Bank Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
30,700,000
95,900,000
Per share
1.39
5.20
9mo net inc
253,000,000
b17,500,000
Per share
12.95
-
b-Net loss  The latest third quarter results were affected adversely by the placing of $72 million in Argentine term loans on non-accrual status, reducing net income by $2.8 million.


Warner Communications Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warner Communications Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,027,442,000
824,092,000
Net inc
105,376,000
66,212,000
Share earns
.66
.41
9mo rev
3,010,373,000
2,378,714,000
Net inc
b322,072,000
b236,126,000
Share earns
2.02
1.50


Waiting for the Japanese
LEAD: After five weeks of vacation it was dismaying to get home and find the election was still going on.
I'd gone away hoping they might come to their senses, call the thing off for a year or 18 months, then start all over again with some new candidates.


Moscow Calls for Naval Cuts
LEAD: At the United Nations, a senior Soviet official stressed the need for reductions in naval strength, where NATO forces have an edge.
Page A12.


Occidental Is Told To Sell a Company
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Company was ordered to sell Tenneco Polymers Inc., after an administrative law judge ruled that the 1986 acquisition of the company reduced competition in the production of materials needed to make plastics.


Memories of DeMille Go on Auction Block
LEAD: Lester Binger wanted a money clip that had belonged to Cecil B. DeMille, but the retired Federal employee never even raised his bidding paddle.


Survey Shows Senate Battle Is a Dead Heat
LEAD: Attorney General Joseph I. Lieberman is running even with the incumbent, Lowell P. Weicker Jr., in the Senate race in Connecticut after trailing by a large margin a month ago, according to a statewide poll released yesterday by the University of Connecticut's Institute for Social Inquiry and published in The Hartford


Sundstrand Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sundstrand Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
356,547,000
334,351,000
Net inc
20,435,000
14,455,000
Share earns
1.10
.77
9mo sales
1,057,122,000
987,439,000
Net inc
b3,936,000
45,000,000
Share earns
.21
2.40


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a report on Monday in the Campaign Trail column about the views of a professor, William C. Adams, on how the second Presidential debate was perceived by a radio listener misstated his affiliation.
He teaches at George Washington University.


A Cake Wizard Brings Out a Book of Magic
LEAD: RARELY does a book on baking attract widespread attention in the food world.
Rose Levy Beranbaum's ''Cake Bible'' is different.
Even before its official publication date, Sept. 20, bakers and nonbakers alike were telling each other that it was one of the very few books that, like Paula Peck's ''Art of Fine Baking'' and Flo Braker's ''Simple Art of Perfect Baking,'' would serve as textbook and inspiration for a generation of dessert makers.


Of Sudan's Woes, War Is the Worst
LEAD: In a country that has been besieged this year by plagues of almost biblical proportions - famine, flood, drought and locusts - a protracted civil war is proving the most debilitating of all.


Consolidated Freightways Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Freightways Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
704,387,000
589,307,000
Net inc
32,337,000
16,362,000
Share earns
.86
.43
9mo rev
1,971,621,000
1,678,518,000
Net inc
72,841,000
54,011,000
Share earns
1.93
1.40


Philip Krumm, 82, A Former President Of Olympic Group
LEAD: Philip O. Krumm, a former president of the United States Olympic Committee, died of a heart attack Sunday at his home in Divide.
He was 82 years old.


Time and Tribune Gain; Media General Is Flat
LEAD: Two large media companies, Time Inc. and the Tribune Company, reported higher third-quarter income yesterday, while Media General Inc. said that its earnings for the period were flat.


Harassing Letters Upset Students at Dartmouth
LEAD: A series of letters delivered last week to black, gay and female Darmouth College students demanding that they get off the campus has left students here angry and frightened.


Dep Corp reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dep Corp (OTC)
Year to July 31
1988
1987
Sales
88,810,000
66,780,000
Net inc
4,588,000
1,845,000
Share earns
.77
.31
Year-ago share earnings are adjusted for a 3-for-2 stock split effective April 29.
The company said year-ago sales included $4,052,000 related to divesting subsidiaries.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Soviet-U.S. Harmony
LEAD: Call it the Hot Capitals, or something like that.


About New York; Keeping Faith: A Loyal Porter And a Synagogue
LEAD: Four decades ago Ansche Chesed was one of the grand synagogues of the Upper West Side.
More than 1,000 families came to worship in its orange brick temple, including the lords of the building and rag trades.
Limousines were parked out front.
Top hats, striped pants and cutaway coats were de rigueur.


Bush Asserts 'Iron Curtain' Remains, but It's 'Rusting'
LEAD: Vice President Bush today came to the place where Winston Churchill warned of an ''Iron Curtain'' descending across the European continent and declared that, 70 years after the Russian Revolution, Marxism ''is losing its luster.''


Washington Talk: Briefing; Paris on the Potomac
LEAD: Ever since the Kennedy Administration there has been nothing nouvelle about French chefs in Washington.
They are all over the place, and in neighboring suburbs of Virginia and Maryland.


THORNBURGH BACKS WIDER DEATH RULE
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh says he would support legislative efforts to expand the use of the death penalty for Federal crimes, including the assassination of senior Government officials.


Washington Talk: Briefing; It's Raining Money
LEAD: Lawmakers representing urban areas have found the Reagan Administration a hard sell when it comes to approving money for mass transit programs.
But they are gleeful at the moment over an unexpected and absolutely unintended windfall in the 1989 transportation spending bill President Reagan signed on Sept.


Fame Is Fleeting In Hollywood
LEAD: Hollywood and Washington collided the other night, and the results were a little bruising and a little funny.


5 Big Drug Companies Report Increases in Profits
LEAD: Five major drug companies yesterday reported double-digit increases in their earnings for the third quarter, but analysts said a weakening dollar might slow the trend at the end of the year.


Boxing Notebook; Patterson Guides Protege
LEAD: Tracy Harris Patterson will be making his Felt Forum debut on Oct. 27, and when he climbs into the ring, a familiar figure, Floyd Patterson, the former heavyweight champion, will be working his corner.


OPEC's Present Output
LEAD: Sheik Mani Said al-Otaiba, the oil minister of the United Arab Emirates, said in remarks published today by the Saudi newspaper Asharq al Awsat that OPEC was now producing 21 million to 22 million barrels of oil a day.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Angela Abelow has been named senior vice president at Ketchum Advertising, New York.


Day 744 of Fight to Open Bronx Shelter
LEAD: Winter is coming and in the north Bronx, at the House of the Holy Comforter on the Grand Concourse, the number posted above the entrance grows bigger every day.


From the Very Busy Sendak, A Book of a Rare Grimm Tale
LEAD: ''When you hit 60,'' says Maurice Sendak, ''you get so maniacal.
You want to do everything, in case you don't hit 61.''


SHIFT ON MEDICARE EXPECTED TO HURT HOSPITALS IN CITIES
LEAD: The Department of Health and Human Services will begin a Medicare reimbursement policy on Nov. 1 that will hurt large metropolitan teaching hospitals that serve the inner-city poor.


Review/Theater; Next Wave's Formula For Nurturing of Artists
LEAD: ''Arm in arm with the artists in the trenches,'' is how Joseph Melillo, the producer of the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival, describes the academy's role in producing more of the work that occupies its stages.
This effort will be on display during the nine-week festival of experimental dance, performance and music that opens its sixth season tonight with ''The Warrior Ant,'' the Lee Breuer-Bob Telson spectacle combining Japanese puppetry, Latin American music and West


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Rosenfeld, Sirowitz
LEAD: Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss has bought, for an undisclosed combination of cash and stocks, a $17 million Southwest shop called Patchen Brownfeld.
The decade-old Phoenix agency, whose name will be changed to RSH&amp;S/Patchen Brownfeld, will be bringing on board clients such as America West Airlines and Sun State Savings and Loan Association.


Panel Chooses A Former Hotel As a Landmark
LEAD: The former Knickerbocker Hotel, at Broadway and 42d Street, whose exuberant turn-of-the-century design still conjures the time of John Jacob Astor and Enrico Caruso and George M. Cohan, was made a New York City landmark yesterday.


College Football Notebook; Unbeaten Ithaca at Top in Poll
LEAD: Ithaca College, unbeaten after six games, again led the poll of the East's Division III teams this week.
Wagner, after its 30-24 victory over Hofstra, went from fifth to third behind Fordham, also 6-0.


Review/Television; Comedies From Sports And Canada
LEAD: No doubt about it.
Home Box Office is making the most of comedy, encompassing everything from straightforward stand-up routines to elaborate sketches.
Tonight, HBO cable-channel subscribers can jump from a pack of troglodytic football players, unabashedly vulgar and uproarious, to five delightfully inventive young men from Toronto who, in the Monty Python tradition, spend a good deal of their comedy time in drag.


Criminal Inquiry On Drexel
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. has been notified in writing by prosecutors in the United States Attorney's office that it is under investigation for a broad range of possible criminal violations including racketeering, people who have seen the letter said yesterday.


IC Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IC Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
923,900,000
758,600,000
Net inc
b77,900,000
c48,200,000
Share earns
.72
.43
9mo sales
2,547,100,000
2,153,300,000
Net inc
b174,400,000
c123,100,000
Share earns
1.62
1.09


Foster, L B Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foster, L B Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
70,003,000
52,406,000
Net inc
2,370,000
c34,588,000
Share earns
.24
3.55
9mo sales
197,760,000
159,469,000
Net inc
b9,280,000
c19,339,000
Share earns
.95
1.97


Banc One Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banc One Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
88,416,000
74,502,000
Per share
.68
.58
9mo net inc
252,640,000
162,960,000
Per share
1.94
1.29
The year-ago 9 months per share earnings restated to reflect a 10 percent stock dividend paid in the first quarter.


A New York Race Moves to the South
LEAD: Although the feud between Mayor Koch of New York and Mr.
Jackson is supposedly history, the Mayor could barely contain his annoyance with Mr.
Jackson here on Monday while campaigning for Mr.
Dukakis.
Underscoring it all seems to be Mr.
Koch's concern that Mr.
Jackson will campaign to unseat the Mayor next year.


Bentsen Assails G.O.P. Charges as 'Nonsense'
LEAD: Senator Lloyd Bentsen, in one of the strongest counterattacks of his Vice-Presidential campaign, today accused the Republican candidates of turning ''a great national election into a carnival sideshow of nonsense and negativism.''


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: DEAR Diary:


Marshall and Tudor Join Ailing Gibson
LEAD: The merry mystique of the Los Angeles Dodgers finally took some bashing tonight from the leading bashers in the American League.
But the emotional damage seemed a lot less punishing than the physical damage the Dodgers suffered while losing to the Oakland Athletics for the first time in the 85th World


Holly Farms Rejects Tyson Bid
LEAD: The Holly Farms Corporation's board rejected Tyson Foods Inc.'s $920 million takeover offer, which was made one week ago.
As expected by industry analysts, the Memphis-based chicken supplier called the Tyson offer, valued originally at $45 in cash and $4.50 in common stock per share, inadequate and not in the best interests of its shareholders.


OUSTER OF ISRAEL FAILS AGAIN AT U.N.
LEAD: Ninety-five countries, 15 more than last year, voted today to block an Arab-sponsored measure that would have expelled Israel from the United Nations General Assembly.


Merck &amp; Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merck &amp; Co Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,468,800,000
1,306,500,000
Net inc
311,800,000
237,600,000
Share earns
.79
.58
9mo sales
4,405,400,000
3,666,900,000
Net inc
899,500,000
674,000,000
Share earns
2.28
1.65


Alabamian Admits Role in '63 Bombing of Church in Birmingham
LEAD: A retired bus driver in Alabama has told investigators that he participated in one of the most infamous incidents of racial violence during the civil rights movement, the 1963 bombing of a Birmingham church that killed four black girls, Federal investigators said tonight.


Private Incentives As Pollution Curb
LEAD: IN this year of needle-strewn beaches and radon-poisoned parlors, every candidate who reads the polls is a self-proclaimed environmentalist.
George Bush and Michael Dukakis are not exceptions: Both favor tougher enforcement of air and water quality standards and a moratorium on oil drilling off the coast of vote-rich


American Television &amp; Comunications Corp reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Television &amp; Comunications Corp
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
205,210,000
180,500,000
Net inc
b9,649,000
13,066,000
Share earns
.09
.12
Shares outst
109,093,000
109,646,000
9mo rev
599,803,000
527,486,000
Net inc
47,920,000
36,365,000
Share earns
.44
.33
Shares outst
109,078,000
109,566,000


EATING OUT: With Luciano Pavarotti; For Pavarotti, the Proof's in the Pasta
LEAD: ''I HAVE eaten only one piece of fennel all day,'' said Luciano Pavarotti as he maneuvered his diminished yet still heroic frame into a banquette at San Domenico, the Italian restaurant at 240 Central Park South.
Mr.
Pavarotti, the celebrated tenor blessed with perfect musical pitch and a soaring vocal range, concedes that there is only one scale he struggles to conquer - the one in his bathroom.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Penguins 4, Flyers 2: Mario Lemieux scored three times and set up a goal by Bob Errey as Pittsburgh beat the Flyers in Philadelphia last night, ending the Flyers' four-game season-opening winning streak.
Lemieux's points raised his league-leading total to 19.
He has had at least 1 point in each of Pittsburgh's five games and has 12 in the last two games.


Lebanese Fail to Elect Speaker
LEAD: Lebanon's Parliament failed to elect a Speaker today when Christian legislators boycotted the session, preventing a quorum.
Only 26 legislators, all pro-Syrian, attended the session.
Thirty-nine are needed for a quorum.
The post of Speaker is reserved for a Shiite Moslem under a national covenant.


60-MIUNTE GOURMET
LEAD: ONE recent evening some friends dropped in unexpectedly, presenting me with the challenge of extending a casual dinner to make enough for company.


Bad Weather Threatens Whale Rescue Effort    Plans call for a hovercraft barge, being readied at right, to be towed about 230 miles by an Alaska National Guard helicopter, above, to the site to break the ice and make a trail to open water for the whales.   Biologists reported that the whales, 24 to 30 feet long, were weakening and that the breathing of one was raspy, suggesting it had pneumonia.   The whales became trapped almost two weeks ago while migrating south to warmer waters. (AP)


Off-Duty Officer Shot In a Struggle in Bronx
LEAD: An off-duty police officer was shot in the hand, apparently by a bullet from her own gun, during a struggle with an assailant in a passageway outside her apartment building in the Parkchester housing complex in the Bronx, the police reported.


U.S. Schools Abroad: Issues Beyond Learning
LEAD: As superintendent of the Colegio Americano here, Floyd J. Travis deals with curriculum, teacher recruitment and all the other issues that confront school principals in the United States.
But unlike his counterparts back home, Dr.
Travis must also worry about exchange rates, visas for his staff and complying with the separate school certification requirements of two countries.


American Home Products Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Home Products Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,415,204,000
1,298,687,000
Net inc
240,663,000
217,530,000
Share earns
1.65
1.48
9mo sales
4,199,621,000
3,814,914,000
Net inc
693,543,000
629,878,000
Share earns
4.75
4.26


Israelis Kill Two Arab Youths And Hurt U.S. Photographer
LEAD: Israeli soldiers shot and killed two Palestinian boys, one of them 5 years old, and wounded an American news photographer today when they opened fire with plastic bullets in a West Bank riot, Arabs and the army said.


Court Overturns Gag Order in Steinberg Case as Unconstitutional
LEAD: A gag order forbidding lawyers in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg from discussing the case with reporters was overturned yesterday by a New York State appeals court on the ground that it went too far.


Islanders Outlast Canucks
LEAD: It was a case of vintage performances by both teams at Nassau Coliseum tonight.


CPC Sets Appointments For Orderly Succession
LEAD: CPC International Inc., a major food company with annual sales of $4.9 billion and several top brands, named a new vice chairman and a president at a board meeting yesterday.


San Pablo Journal; New Indoor War Game Makes Splash in the Fog
LEAD: Laird Cummings did not see the man coming at him through the smoky haze in the dimly lit warehouse here.
He did not see the gun pointed at him.
But he heard the shot that nailed him squarely in the back. ''I'm hit, I'm hit,'' he shouted.
Then lowering his own custom 300-shot ''sniper'' pistol, Mr.


Colt and Union to Hold Talks For First Time in 17 Months
LEAD: Officials of the Colt Firearms Divison and the striking United Automobile Workers union are to meet Wednesday in their first bargaining session in almost 17 months.


California Dropping Dick and Jane
LEAD: In their reading textbooks, elementary school students in California will seldom see Dick and Jane run.
Instead, as early as next year, they will learn to read by using such classic tales as Aesop's Fables and stories by Mark Twain and other modern writers.


Warner-Lambert Falls After Vote by Panel
LEAD: Scientific reservations about Lopid, the Warner-Lambert Company's largest-selling drug, sent Warner-Lambert shares plummeting yesterday, but a company spokesman said the market's concerns about the anti-cholesterol drug were unfounded.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Taking No Chances
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh seems determined to avoid the sorts of allegations that bedeviled his predecessor, Edwin Meese 3d, who was repeatedly accused of accepting valuable gifts and other favors from friends seeking influence in the Reagan Administration.


Judge's Daughter Concedes Giving Differing Testimony
LEAD: A defense lawyer hammered away at Sukhreet Gabel in cross-examination yesterday as she acknowledged giving conflicting testimony in the Bess Myerson case.


A French Economist Wins Nobel
LEAD: Maurice Allais, a 77-year-old French economist, won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science today for his pioneering development of theories to better understand market behavior and the efficient use of resources.


Fans Unruly at Jets Game
LEAD: There were many incidents of bottle-throwing, drunken behavior, and fighting in the crowd of 70,218 at the Jets' game Monday at Giants Stadium.
While conceding that there were even more incidents than normal for a Monday night game, the Jets' president, Steve Gutman, said he was not sure what, if any, measures he was prepared to recommend to curtail them.


Diamond Shamrock R&amp;M Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diamond Shamrock R&amp;M Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
468,100,000
466,600,000
Net inc
b19,000,000
c6,600,000
Share earns
.73
-
9mo sales
1,354,400,000
1,273,600,000
Net inc
b26,100,000
c1,700,000
Share earns
1.02
-


Commonwealth Edison Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Edison Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,867,717,000
1,856,031,000
Net inc
424,203,000
484,223,000
Share earns
1.89
2.20
9mo rev
4,263,870,000
4,443,795,000
Net inc
662,673,000
906,922,000
Share earns
2.77
4.01


Richard L. Frey, Leading Figure In Contract Bridge, Is Dead at 83
LEAD: Richard Lincoln Frey, one of the great figures in contract bridge, died of cancer Monday night at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in The Living Section last Wednesday with an article about vegetables in unusual colors identified a vegetable incorrectly.


Time Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Time Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,130,000,000
1,070,000,000
Net inc
b81,000,000
c74,000,000
Share earns
1.42
1.24
9mo rev
3,300,000,000
3,050,000,000
Net inc
b231,000,000
c198,000,000
Share earns
4.00
3.30


Cigars and Pipe Tobacco To Get Warning Labels
LEAD: Most cigars sold in the United States, and possibly some pipe and loose cigarette tobacco, will soon carry cancer warning labels as a result of an agreement reached today by manufacturers to settle a lawsuit filed by the California Attorney General.


ISRAELI COURT BARS PARTY OF KAHANE
LEAD: Israel's highest court ruled today that the Kach party of Rabbi Meir Kahane is not eligible to run in the national elections on Nov. 1.


Jersey Tells Town to Plan Housing Despite Lack of Open Land
LEAD: A state agency has told this densely developed suburb that it cannot be excused from an obligation to provide low- and moderate-income housing simply because it has no vacant land.


Southwestern Bell Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwestern Bell Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,234,600,000
2,087,400,000
Net inc
323,300,000
314,100,000
Share earns
1.08
1.04
9mo rev
6,266,500,000
5,849,900,000
Net inc
754,900,000
800,600,000
Share earns
2.51
2.66


First Bank System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bank System Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
41,500,000
54,300,000
Per share
.65
.89
9mo net inc
112,800,000
b7,100,000
Per share
1.79
.03
b-Included a $160 million addition to reserve for loan losses to reflect exposure to less developed countries.


Tax Sleight of Hand Made 'Reform' Possible Teaneck, N.J., Oct. 9, 1988  The writer, a tax lawyer, is professor of taxation at Fairleigh Dickinson U.
LEAD: To the Editor:


India Bans a Book For Its Own Good
LEAD: Dear Rajiv Gandhi:


7 Officers Killed On Duty in '88
LEAD: Feb. 27 - Officer Edward Byrne, 22 years old, a rookie, was shot and killed execution-style while he was guarding the home of a witness in a drug case in South Jamaica, Queens.
Four suspects are awaiting trial in the case.


Metro Datelines; Insurance Official Remains Suspended
LEAD: The Joint Underwriting Association suspended its general manager yesterday for another nine days, this time without pay, after hearing allegations that he misused association cars and drove without insurance.
He had been suspended with pay on Sept. 22 The general manager, Nelson D. Ealey, has held the post since the association's inception in mid-1983.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The Government was lying to us, and they lied and lied.
It's just a terrible thing they've done.''  - Doris Clawson, who lives next to the Fernald nuclear plant in Ohio.  [ A1:4. ]


Court Orders New York State to Speed Prisoner Transfers
LEAD: New York's highest court ordered the state prison system yesterday to take custody of prisoners within 10 days after their sentencing, a decision which the State Corrections Commissioner said will have ''massive implications'' for a system already stretched beyond capacity.


Tribune Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tribune Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
575,124,000
532,427,000
Net inc
51,636,000
b33,085,000
Share earns
.69
.42
9mo rev
1,710,121,000
1,568,799,000
Net inc
147,463,000
b98,322,000
Share earns
1.94
1.24


Crossland Savings FSB reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crossland Savings FSB (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
27,062,000
21,373,000
Per share
1.16
1.02
9mo net inc
83,926,000
75,865,000
Per share
3.64
4.39
The latest 9-month per share earnings reflected quarterly dividend payments on Crossland's 2.5 million shares of $12.75 cumulative preferred stock, series B.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Wines of the Valley


Black Colleges Turn To Marketing Methods
LEAD: Faced with increasing competition from larger and better known colleges for a shrinking number of black college-bound students, the nation's black colleges and universities have discovered that how they market themselves is as vital as the size of their libraries or the prowess of their athletic teams.


PPG Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PPG Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,360,000,000
1,260,000,000
Net inc
112,900,000
91,300,000
Share earns
1.03
.76
9mo sales
4,190,000,000
3,860,000,000
Net inc
365,300,000
280,600,000
Share earns
3.32
2.34


California Court Backs Suit of Moon's Church
LEAD: Two former members of the Unification Church can sue it on charges of deception and brainwashing because freedom of religion does not protect fraudulent recruiting, the State Supreme Court has ruled.


How It Happened; One Pitch Spoils Howell Comeback
LEAD: Between the playoff game from which Jay Howell was ejected for having pine tar on his glove and his appearance in the ninth inning of the third game of the World Series tonight, the Los Angeles Dodgers' relief corps allowed only two runs in 27Y innings.


Bangkok Journal; There She Is: Valley Girl Wins the Hearts of Siam
LEAD: Anyone who regards beauty contests as a pre-feminist frivolity might consider the events of Saturday night at the Rama Gardens Hotel.
Angry contestants passed over earlier that evening in the 1988 Miss Thailand World competition reportedly ransacked the room of the winner, Papasara Chutanupong, and deposited her cape and scepter in the toilet.


American Electric Power Co reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Electric Power Co (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,758,000,000
4,865,000,000
Net inc
b555,847,000
564,213,000
Share earns
2.87
2.92
b-Includes a reduction in net earnings and share earnings of $68,863,000 and 36 cents a share, respectively, due to Columbus Southern Power Company's write-off, after taxes and related adjustments, of a second portion of its investment in the Zimmer Plant.


Real Estate; L.I. County's Office Space: Old vs. New
LEAD: DURING the 1960's and 1970's most builders of speculative office space in Nassau County found no shortage of tenants.
Back then, new construction lagged behind demand as the Long Island economy rapidly moved from manufacturing toward office-based services.


Metro Datelines; Goldin Staff Allowed Into Welfare Centers
LEAD: The Koch administration agreed yesterday to give investigators for Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin access to child-welfare centers, a day after Mr.
Goldin's aides had been barred from a Bronx center by workers who cited confidentiality rules.


Apollo Computer Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apollo Computer Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
157,095,000
135,041,000
Net loss
3,583,000
2,859,000
9mo sales
469,481,000
390,676,000
Net loss
1,079,000
b11,177,000
Share earns
-
.31
b-Net income


Report of Gunfire Closes Brooklyn Bridge
LEAD: The police sealed off the Brooklyn Bridge and part of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive for an hour late yesterday morning after a painter on the bridge's promenade reported being shot at while he took a coffee break.


Head of Philip Morris Talks Strategy
LEAD: Hamish Maxwell, chief executive of the Philip Morris Companies, is known as an unassuming man who shuns publicity.


Warsaw Delays Talks With the Opposition
LEAD: The Government said today that talks with the opposition have been delayed until after Oct. 24, and it urged its partners in the dialogue to disavow ''extreme elements'' before the talks begin.


Queen Elizabeth in Madrid
LEAD: Queen Elizabeth II, on the first state visit to Spain by a British sovereign, visited Parliament today and paid tribute to Spain's peaceful transition to democracy after the death of Franco in 1975. ''The democratic Parliament before me, and the manner in which it was achieved, will stand out as one of the brightest pages in your nation's long and proud history,'' she said in a speech that drew enthusiastic applause from legislators.


Morgan Stanley Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan Stanley Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
923,785,000
851,899,000
Net inc
52,438,000
72,916,000
Share earns
1.96
2.82
Shares outst
24,573,302
25,323,616
9mo rev
2,947,489,000
2,429,638,000
Net inc
286,342,000
199,580,000
Share earns
11.11
7.83
Shares outst
24,829,084
25,252,897


Congress Approves Making V.A. a Cabinet Department
LEAD: Congress completed action tonight on legislation that will transform the Veterans Administration into the 14th Cabinet department of the Federal Government, giving the nation's millions of veterans a voice in policy making at the White House.


Hartville, Ohio
LEAD: UNTIL he started the 1880 Buffalo Ranch eight years ago, William Tocci had never even tasted buffalo meat.
But then neither had anyone else in this northern Ohio town of 1,800.
It seems, however, that everyone was waiting to try it.
Before long, Mr.
Tocci, a former truck driver, was selling fresh cuts from his freezer and promoting his product in restaurants.


Where One Policeman Fell: A Drug Trade's New Center
LEAD: The shifting tide of narcotics dealing that has for several years engulfed much of the Upper West Side has most recently focused on a few blocks that include the street where a police officer was slain last night during a narcotics arrest.


Molson Picks Outsider To Fill Top Positions
LEAD: The Molson Companies, Canada's second-largest brewing operation after John Labatt Ltd., went outside the industry yesterday to name a new president and chief executive.


Freymiller Trucking reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freymiller Trucking (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
15,666,130
11,835,903
Net inc
310,728
699,750
Share earns
.13
.29
9mo rev
43,036,159
31,106,226
Net inc
619,251
b1,713,841
Share earns
.25
.80
Shares outst
2,450,000
2,139,560


For the President, It's Back on the Trail
LEAD: The Bush campaign hardly needs help, given the latest polls.
But the Vice President is unloading his major weapon in the campaign Wednesday, the Gipper.


White House Is Pressed on Nuclear Plant Safety
LEAD: The White House faced growing pressure today over safety and health problems in the nation's nuclear weapon industry.
The chairmen of five Congressional committees, and the Governor of Ohio, urged the Reagan Administration to resolve the safety issues before reopening two key weapon plants.


Review/Theater; Private Vision of an Anxiety the Audience May Share
LEAD: When an artist builds a wall between himself and his audience, there can be no doubt he is sending a strong message.
But the message transmitted by Richard Foreman in ''What Did He See?'' at the Public Theater could hardly be more mixed.
The wall is huge - it rises from floor to ceiling before the first row of spectators -yet, being made of plexiglass, it is transparent.


Gym Star Retires
LEAD: The University of Oklahoma gymnast Kelly Garrison-Steves, a two-time N.C.A.A. champion and a member of the United States Olympic team, announced her retirement from the sport yesterday.
Garrison-Steves, 21 years old, who has been in the sport for 14 years, said: ''I feel it's time to relax.
I have achieved all the goals I've set for myself.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1988
From '87
Alcan Aluminium Ltd.
$ 258,000,000
+ 111.5
American Cyanamid Co.
64,100,000
- 3.3
American Home Products
240,700,000
+ 10.7
Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc.


Frozen Food Express Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frozen Food Express Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
27,581,000
21,733,000
Net inc
1,203,000
706,000
Share earns
.43
.27
9mo rev
75,414,000
63,096,000
Net inc
2,680,000
1,650,000
Share earns
1.00
.63


Review/Pop; A Subdued Elton John Gives Songs Center Stage
LEAD: Elton John the flashy showman was replaced by Elton John the seasoned singer, tunesmith and keyboardist when he opened five sold-out nights at Madison Square Garden on Monday.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-13


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Restaurant Account Goes to Bayer Bess
LEAD: Grisanti Inc. has called on Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago, to promote its chain of Italian and Mexican restaurants.
The budget is in the area of $3 million.


Lackluster Defense Worries the Devils
LEAD: The Devils have lost their last two games by not playing like the Devils of last spring and they have reasons to be concerned.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Fallon McElligott Wins Weyerhaeuser Paper
LEAD: The Weyerhaeuser Paper Company has named Fallon McElligott of Minneapolis, a unit of the Ogilvy Group, as its agency of record for an account worth more than $3 million in annual billings.


U.S.-Soviet Trade Concern
LEAD: An American company and a Soviet agriculture board today said they had formed a United States-based concern that would trade agricultural goods between the Soviet Union and North America.
The new company, called


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Miami Dolphins have agreed to contract terms with the kicker Tony Franklin, a nine-year veteran released by the New England Patriots during preseason.
Franklin made a club record 32 of 41 field goals in 1986 but only 15 of 26 last year. ''I'm looking forward to playing in Miami,'' the barefooted kicker said.


Maurice Richter, Pathologist, 91
LEAD: Maurice Richter, a former chairman of the pathology department at New York University Medical Center, died of bladder cancer Saturday at Friendship Village, a retirement center in Tempe, Ariz.
He was 91 years old.


Oregon Officials Investigate Brutal Child Beatings at Farm
LEAD: Children at a farm described as an athletic camp for ghetto youngsters were ritualistically beaten, left to go hungry and forced to watch as an 8-year-old girl was flogged to death, Oregon authorities said today.


PHILIPPINE CRITICS ASSAIL U.S. ACCORD
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino today welcomed the signing of a compensation agreement for American bases here, but a growing clamor of editorials and political statements denounced it as a poor deal.


Lessons
LEAD: This was supposed to be the year that education became, in the words of Governor Kean, a ''prime focus'' of the Presidential campaign.
George Bush started out promising to be the ''education President,'' and Michael S. Dukakis quickly vowed to be ''our nation's No. 1 advocate for good schools and good teaching.


Aristech Chemical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aristech Chemical Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
278,000,000
239,700,000
Net inc
41,600,000
18,700,000
Share earns
1.67
.72
9mo sales
806,700,000
676,900,000
Net inc
b153,300,000
48,300,000
Share earns
6.11
1.87


Zia Crash: Two Views
LEAD: In the weeks after Pakistan's President, Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, and the United States Ambassador to that country were killed in a plane crash there in August, it seemed as if the United States and Pakistan were destined to reach different conclusions about the cause of the crash.


A U.S. PROP FOR MEXICO;
LEAD: For the second time in six years, the United States has initiated a multibillion-dollar rescue for debt-ridden Mexico.
But this time, Washington is also propping up a political system that many here believe is itself foundering.


Trading Halts to Begin
LEAD: A plan to use coordinated market halts, or circuit breakers, will be implemented by the major American stock and commodity exchanges at the end of business today.


Paris Raises Rates to Bolster Franc
LEAD: The Bank of France today raised its interest rates to help bolster the franc after the French currency fell in recent days in response to a wave of strikes and a widening trade deficit.


Indian Jet Carrying 135 Crashes; Some Aboard Are Said to Survive
LEAD: An Air-India jetliner with 135 people on board crashed and exploded today in central India, the airline said.


Review/Music; An East-West Message
LEAD: Kazuko Inoue, a pianist, is interested not only in new music but also in a social agenda that includes pointing up connections between East and West and emphasizing the importance of surmounting the terrors of the nuclear age.
Thus the program she and her Inoue Chamber Ensemble played at Weill Recital Hall on Monday evening was devoted mostly to new works by American, Chinese and South


Down Byways in Search of Man Ray
LEAD:  Man Ray  American Artist  By Neil Baldwin  449 pages. Clarkson N. Potter. $25.


American Cyanamid Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Cyanamid Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,094,100,000
1,039,400,000
Net inc
64,100,000
b66,300,000
Share earns
.71
.72
9mo sales
3,488,900,000
3,140,800,000
Net inc
242,800,000
b215,400,000
Share earns
2.70
2.35


McAllen, Tex.
LEAD: THE first major harvest of a redder breed of grapefruit began last week in the Rio Grande Valley orchards that cluster here.
This means that the Rio Red, a sweet and ruddier variety, will be available for the first time in markets in many parts of the United States.


Hearing Set in North Case
LEAD: The judge in the Iran-contra case today ordered a hearing on Oliver L. North's assertion that the National Security Council, where he worked, was exempt from a Congressional ban on helping arm the Nicaraguan rebels.
The hearing, scheduled for Nov. 3 by Judge Gerhard A. Gesell of Federal District Court, will focus on defense assertions that Mr.


America's Vogue for Things Russian
LEAD: IT was a ball that would have made the Czar proud.
Gathered recently in the Phipps mansion in Old Westbury, L.I., 658 guests, including a few descendants of Russian nobility, donned their finest heirlooms to celebrate the splendor of old St.
Petersburg.


Peru, in Disarray, Directs Its Fury at the President
LEAD: With Peru in its worst economic crisis this century, the country's fragile democracy has been battered in recent weeks by rumors that President Alan Garcia had decided to resign and that the armed forces were planning to topple him.


Butler Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Butler Manufacturing Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
174,433,000
182,113,000
Net inc
5,817,000
4,739,000
Share earns
1.29
.97
9mo sales
464,246,000
446,662,000
Net inc
11,452,000
7,491,000
Share earns
2.54
1.53


Corrections
LEAD: A map in some copies on Monday with an article about Jonas Savimbi, the Angolan guerrilla leader, misplaced the town of Jamba, where his rebels have their headquarters.
Angola has two towns named Jamba; the rebel headquarters are about 50 miles north of the Angolan-Namibian border and 50 miles west of the Angolan-Zambian border.


Northrop Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northrop Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,356,500,000
1,459,000,000
Net inc
28,800,000
34,100,000
Share earns
.61
.73
9mo sales
4,071,100,000
4,286,000,000
Net inc
190,300,000
59,300,000
Share earns
4.05
1.27


Payment Protest
LEAD: Greg Norman of Australia, the world's No. 1-ranked golfer, defended appearance payments for players yesterday in the face of controversy over a proposed levy on Australian club golfers.


South Korean Chief, at U.N., Calls For World Talks and Unification
LEAD: The President of South Korea, the only country over which the United Nations has formally gone to war, addressed the General Assembly for the first time today.
He called for an international conference to end the division of the Korean peninsula.


Lilly, Eli &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lilly, Eli &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
904,600,000
845,800,000
Net inc
171,400,000
b150,000,000
Share earns
1.20
1.02
9mo sales
3,027,400,000
2,738,900,000
Net inc
585,300,000
b505,500,000
Share earns
4.08
3.44


P.B.A. Lawyer Quits After Investigation
LEAD: A Lawyer who was under investigation for his management of the escrow funds of the New York City Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, has given up his law practice, Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, said yesterday.


Fedders Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fedders Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
34,240,000
22,996,000
Net inc
b3,569,000
c2,801,000
Share earns
.20
.15
9mo sales
153,987,000
99,074,000
Net inc
b15,561,000
c10,628,000
Share earns
.97
.69


Reading Between the Lines
LEAD: THE moral to the Mickey Hatcher story is: Never go a day without checking out a newspaper or two.
The ink might come off on your hands, but you never know what information might stick to you as well.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASKETBALL  MIAMI (NBA) - Waived Connor Henry and Tony Fairley, guards.
Signed Jamie Waller, guard.
FOOTBALL  ATLANTA (NFC) - Released Leander Knight, defensive back, and Reggie Camp, defensive end.
Signed Evan Cooper, safety.
GREEN BAY (NFC) - Placed Walter Stanley, wide receiver, on injured reserve.


Difference of Opinion Among Dukakises
LEAD: Something Mrs.
Dukakis did not enjoy - and is still angry about -was the first question of last week's Presidential debate.
Bernard Shaw, the anchor at the Cable News Network who was moderator of the event, asked Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis if he would still oppose the death penalty if Mrs.
Dukakis were raped and murdered.


'Soft Landing' for New York City
LEAD: Dotty Feinberg finally bought a new fur coat yesterday.
A year ago, when the Dow Jones industrial average dropped 508 points in a single day, she put off the purchase.


Delta Air Selling Trust Certificates
LEAD: Delta Air Lines offered $253.4 million worth of equipment trust certificates through a syndicate led by Salomon Brothers.
The certficates will finance leases on seven Boeing 757 and 767 planes in Delta's fleet.


2 Policemen Are Shot and Killed In Separate Manhattan Incidents
LEAD: Two police officers - one an undercover officer negotiating a routine drug deal, the other in uniform and coming from the scene of a medical emergency - were shot and killed in upper Manhattan last night, the police said.


Familiar Pattern as Jets Falter
LEAD: For the often-traumatized Jets fans and the team's beleaguered coach, it seems to be happening again: the quick start, the slow but sure fade, the sudden and growing injury list.


G.E. Engine Order
LEAD: The General Electric Company landed a $150 million order from All Nippon Airways of Japan to provide G.E. engines for six Boeing 747-400 jet planes.
Officials at G.E.'s jet engine plant in this Cincinnati suburb said the order was for the company's CF6-80C2 engine.
They said it is the best-selling engine worldwide for the 747-700 wide-body jets.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M.


Maytag Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maytag Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
490,700,000
472,600,000
Net inc
b37,586,000
c39,214,000
Share earns
.49
.51
9mo sales
1,408,000,000
1,396,000,000
Net inc
b105,965,000
c122,230,000
Share earns
1.38
1.50


INSIDE
LEAD:  131 May Be Dead in Crash


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Hearx, a hearing-care chain in West Palm Beach, Fla., to Barbara Gordon Associates, Lake Worth, Fla.


No Buyer for Big Ruby
LEAD: A 48-carat ruby, the largest ever presented at auction, did not sell yesterday at Sotheby's.
The auction house had estimated that the jewel, which is called the Mandalay Ruby and was being auctioned for an unidentified owner, would sell for $15 million.
That would be a record for a jewel. ''I imagine we put a value on it that was just too high,'' said John D.


BOOK NOTES
LEAD:  The Assassination


Soviet Official Says Talks on Arms Should Emphasize Cuts in Navies
LEAD: A senior Soviet official said today that more emphasis should be put on cutting naval strength in current disarmament negotiations.


Dukes Up, Mike!
LEAD: To the Editor:


Oregon Court Finds Peyote Use Is Legal In Indian Ceremony
LEAD: The use of a hallucinogenic drug derived from peyote in Indian religious ceremonies is protected by the Constitution's guarantee of religious freedom, the Oregon Supreme Court ruled today.


Esprit Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Esprit Systems (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 2
1988
1987
Sales
4,484,000
6,008,000
Net loss
687,000
b76,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Experts Say Treatments Affect Recall
LEAD: Sukhreet Gabel's psychiatric treatments, mental illness and the stress she has been under, in part because of the Bess Myerson trial, could have distorted her recollection of events, experts say.
But, they add, it is impossible to determine whether the factors affected the accuracy of her testimony against her mother and Ms.


Ford Estate Proposal Backed
LEAD: A retired judge appointed to look after the financial interests of minor and unborn heirs to Henry Ford 2d's $350 million estate supports a proposed settlement to a lawsuit blocking investment of the family trust.
The retired judge, Robert Hewitt, told Judge Vaughn Rudnick of Palm Beach County Circuit Court that the proposal protects the financial interests of minor heirs.


Ford Plant in Wales
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company announced plans to open a $:725 million, or $1.27 billion, car engine plant in Wales that will create at least 3,000 jobs in the economically depressed area.
The investment, Ford's biggest yet in Britain and the largest ever in a motor engine plant, was announced at Britain's International Motor Show in this industrial city.


Trisha Brown Honored
LEAD: Trisha Brown was inducted into the Order of Arts and Letters by the French Government yesterday in a ceremony at the Office of Cultural Services for the French Consulate in New York.
Ms.
Brown, a noted post-modernist choreographer who is based in New York, has frequently performed with her company in France.


50 Are Dead or Missing In Colombian Flooding
LEAD: Officials said today that 50 people were dead or missing in flooding in northern Colombia caused by a powerful hurricane.


Dukakis Gets A Needed Boost For Campaign
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis was just a few minutes into his speech when it happened, a sudden outbreak of what the Democratic Presidential campaign so badly needs these days: enthusiasm.


Coleman Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coleman Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
158,992,000
146,759,000
Net inc
3,894,000
2,945,000
Share earns
.55
.42
9mo sales
516,874,000
465,645,000
Net inc
22,704,000
17,280,000
Share earns
3.23
2.45


An Anniversary the Press Didn't Miss
LEAD: It began as a trickle and grew into a flood.
The New York Stock Exchange's press office has been inundated with requests for interviews, briefings and photo opportunities, as the nation's news organizations prepared for the first anniversary of the stock market crash.


U.S. Gets Taste of Managua Embargo
LEAD: Shrimp and lobster fleets from this Caribbean port have been helping Nicaragua evade the economic embargo imposed by the United States.


Environment Will Expire if We Don't Act Now; Clean Air in '89?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
55,526,000
47,273,000
Net inc
2,561,000
1,498,000
Share earns
.42
.24
9mo sales
145,318,000
124,616,000
Net inc
6,170,000
3,172,000
Share earns
1.01
.50


State by State; Where Political Humor Is Still Alive
LEAD: Jim Hightower came up with two of the better lines of the 1988 Presidential campaign - two of the few that seem likely to survive from a contest more notable for faux pas than bons mots.


Wells Fargo &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wells Fargo &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
131,700,000
155,000,000
Per share
2.36
2.77
9mo net inc
376,600,000
b60,400,000
Per share
6.75
-
b-Net loss  The year-ago third quarter earnings included a tax benefit from the second quarter 1987 special addition to the loss allowance made in connection with loans to developing countries.


EATING WELL
LEAD: THE following conversation, overheard in an Italian restaurant on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, crystallizes the image problem that plagues pasta.


Tandy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandy Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
936,953,000
838,226,000
Net inc
64,909,000
64,255,000
Share earns
.72
.71


Prices of U.S. Securities Inch Up
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes inched a bit higher yesterday in another session of thin, listless trading.


Byron Janis Recital
LEAD: The pianist Byron Janis will perform an all-Chopin recital at 8 P.M.
Nov. 29 at Alice Tully Hall.
The program will consist of five nocturnes, three mazurkas, ''Valse Brillante'' in A flat and the Sonata No. 3 in B minor.
Tickets are $25 and $17.50.
Information: 874-6770.


Strike in Peru Lifts Copper; Oil Glut Depresses Prices
LEAD: Prices of copper soared to new life-of-contract highs yesterday as renewed labor unrest in Peru, a significant supplier, prompted scare buying by domestic and foreign industrial users as well as speculators.


Mr. Dukakis's Modest Housing Plan
LEAD: Governor Dukakis chose Levittown, L.I., to announce a new housing plan, and the site evoked memories of successful housing policies that turned hundreds of thousands of Americans into homeowners.
Unfortunately, Mr.
Dukakis can't promise nearly that much.


Manville to Have $1 Billion to Spend
LEAD: The Manville Corporation, the building materials company ready to emerge from bankruptcy, will come out of Chapter 11 with $1 billion to spend on acquisitions and new ideas, company officials said. ''The competition is feeling it in the marketplace with Manville coming back,'' W. Thomas Stephens, president and chief executive, told a group of analysts.


Warner-Lambert Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warner-Lambert Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,031,362,000
885,403,000
Net inc
b87,679,000
75,321,000
Share earns
1.29
1.06
9mo sales
2,910,538,000
2,542,257,000
Net inc
262,756,000
229,564,000
Share earns
3.86
3.20


Citicorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citicorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,103,000,000
3,172,000,000
Net inc
394,000,000
b528,000,000
Per share
1.13
1.78
9mo rev
9,257,000,000
8,837,000,000
Net inc
1,111,000,000
c1,803,000,000
Per share
3.17
-


The Word Wore Out
LEAD: It isn't easy to grasp why ''liberal'' has become such a bad word in the United States.
But the reasons seemed more evident when a group of Europeans gathered at Harvard with some Americans last weekend to look back over 20 years at ''May '68: The Vision and the Reality.''


Plans for Single UNIX Standard Set Back
LEAD: Efforts to unite the computer industry behind a single standard version of the UNIX operating system appeared stymied today when 18 computer companies announced that they would form an alliance supporting American Telephone and Telegraph's UNIX System V, Release 4.0 as the basis for the next generation of software.


U.S. Savings Bonds for College: Easy, Sound
LEAD: To the Editor:


Marine Midland Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marine Midland Banks Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b46,900,000
49,281,000
9mo net inc
b119,305,000
c209,973,000
b-After tax benefits of $12,008,000 for the quarter and $29,884,000 for the 9 months.


Afghan Leadership Reported at Odds
LEAD: A factional power struggle appears to have broken out in Afghanistan's Communist leadership, delaying a meeting of the ruling party and complicating Soviet efforts to resume a troop withdrawal, Western diplomats and Afghan rebels here say.


Choose:
LEAD: Land-based nuclear missiles are a critical part of America's deterrent, but neither Presidential candidate has presented a plausible plan for keeping them that way.
The present force of Minuteman missiles was deployed more than 15 years ago and needs upgrading.
Michael Dukakis says he favors modernization, yet he opposes both available new missiles, the Midgetman and the MX.


Morgan Stanley Profit Off
LEAD: The Morgan Stanley Group's profits fell 28 percent in the third quarter, the company said yesterday, pointing to a falloff in underwriting and commission income that was only partly offset by strong mergers and acquisition activity.


Albert J. Rosen, Executive, 86
LEAD: Albert J. Rosen, a retired shirt manufacturer, died of heart failure Monday at his home in Hewlett Bay Park, L.I.
He was 86 years old.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; New AIDS Ads Are Displayed
LEAD: The Federal Government's Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta has displayed a new set of powerful commercials in its two-year-old ''America Responds to AIDS'' campaign, several of which address, for the first time, the uncomfortable subject of marital infidelity.
One spot, entitled ''Married


Heroics in 9th Inning Again, This Time by McGwire
LEAD: Two games had come and gone, but the Oakland Athletics were still waiting for someone to step forward, to give them the lift that Kirk Gibson had given the Los Angeles Dodgers in the opener of the 85th World Series last Saturday.
Tonight, after 26 innings of drowsy offense from the A's, Mark McGwire finally did it.


Frustration Ends With One Swing
LEAD: Tony LaRussa had grown tired of all these fly balls.
The warm afternoon had become a cool evening, and balls hit to the power alleys or to center field at the Oakland Coliseum were becoming harmless outs.


Champion Spark Plug Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion Spark Plug Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
166,700,000
157,900,000
Net inc
2,400,000
b4,700,000
Share earns
.07
.12
9mo sales
554,100,000
535,600,000
Net inc
14,500,000
b19,300,000
Share earns
.41
.50


Bush Heads for New York City
LEAD: Switching his schedule in an effort to win a state he had written off, George Bush will visit a Roman Catholic school in Queens.
Page B6.


A Work-Ethics Code for Lawyer Temps That Bars Fee-Splitting
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; New Ruling In Agency Breakup
LEAD: A NEW YORK State Supreme Court justice ruled yesterday that Lord, Einstein, O'Neill &amp; Partners is temporarily free to recruit and accept employees from Lord, Geller, Federico, Einstein, the advertising agency that has been suffering since six top executives left last March to form the new shop.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Coping With a Bad Year


Late Rally Pushes Dow to Post-Crash High
LEAD: A rally late in the afternoon yesterday pushed the Dow Jones industrial average to its highest point since the market crashed a year ago today.


John F. Finn Jr., Lawyer, 83
LEAD: John F. Finn Jr., a retired lawyer and former judge, died of leukemia Monday at Community Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 83 years old and lived in Sea Cliff, L.I.


Frederic Ewen, 89, Ex-Professor of English
LEAD: Dr.
Frederic Ewen, an author, lecturer and former English professor at Brooklyn College, died of a heart attack yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Home Loan Bank Offering
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Bank Board priced a $4.235 billion note offering in five separate issues yesterday.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Avon Products Inc., a worldwide beauty company, promoted Paul B. Markovits, Stuart A. Ochiltree and Robert W. Pratt to executive vice presidents.


Environment Will Expire if We Don't Act Now
LEAD: To the Editor:


Testing 'Smart' Roads To Avoid Traffic Jams
LEAD: Americans are now spending more than 1.6 billion hours a year waiting in traffic jams, a number that the Federal Highway Administration expects to grow to 8.1 billion hours by the year 2005.
Most traffic experts think it is unlikely that enough new highways can be built to alleviate the problem.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Anheuser-Busch Cos., St.
Louis, withdrew a letter of intent under which it would have bought a malt plant in Pocatello, Idaho, from Penwest Ltd. of Bellevue, Wash.


Edelman Has Sold Stake in Lonrho
LEAD: The New York corporate raider Asher B. Edelman said he had sold all of his holdings in the British conglomerate Lonrho P.L.C., but he shed no light on the reason for his move. ''The Edelman Group has disposed of all of its Lonrho interests in the marketplace, neither to a private buyer nor the company,'' a statement said.


Citizens &amp; Southern Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens &amp; Southern Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
53,327,000
46,847,000
Per share
.84
.75
9mo net inc
151,772,000
108,265,000
Per share
2.40
1.73


Yugoslavia's President Says Crisis Harms the Country's Reputation
LEAD: President Raif Dizdarevic warned the Communist Party's Central Committee today that the ''passion, vengefulness and aggressiveness'' that marks Yugoslavia's present politics was harming the country's position before the world.


Norwest Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norwest Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
53,900,000
46,600,000
Per share
1.14
.96
9mo net inc
155,300,000
b93,100,000
Per share
3.33
-
b-Net loss and included a $204 million provision for loans to less developed countries.


Kohlberg Seen as Contender for Kraft
LEAD: The nation's wealthiest buyout firm, Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, may join in the bidding for Kraft Inc., people familiar with Kohlberg disclosed yesterday.


Senate Passes a Lobbying Bill
LEAD: The Senate approved a compromise bill today that would bolster lobbying restrictions against former Federal officials and for the first time would apply to former members of Congress.


Washington Talk: The Senate; As Adjournment Nears, Cutting a Judicial Deal
LEAD: As the 100th Congress nears adjournment, one of the more anxious observers is James R. McGregor, a state trial court judge in Pittsburgh.
He has been nominated as a Federal district judge by President Reagan, and has the strong backing of Senator Arlen Specter, a Republican from his home state.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


U.S. Warns Europeans To Cut Farm Subsidies
LEAD: The United States warned today of escalating trade wars with the European Community if the Europeans do not agree to a timetable this year for long-term elimination of agricultural export subsidies.


Ethyl Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ethyl Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
522,555,000
440,449,000
Net inc
62,202,000
46,260,000
Share earns
.51
.37
9mo sales
1,495,995,000
1,249,599,000
Net inc
172,165,000
140,398,000
Share earns
1.42
1.13


Loral Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loral Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
364,596,000
336,899,000
Net inc
20,981,000
17,348,000
Share earns
.84
.70
6mo sales
702,455,000
654,682,000
Net inc
40,609,000
32,987,000
Share earns
1.62
1.34


Bush, in a Change, Sets Queens Campaign Stop
LEAD: Sensing an opportunity to win a state he had written off, Vice President Bush has picked a Roman Catholic high school in a blue-collar, conservative Democratic area of Queens for his first campaign appearance in New York City tomorrow.


Flexsteel Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flexsteel Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
40,153,692
39,304,738
Net inc
1,876,535
1,928,455
Share earns
.26
.27


Olin Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olin Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
540,000,000
468,000,000
Net inc
19,000,000
15,000,000
Share earns
.90
.64
9mo sales
1,685,000,000
1,427,000,000
Net inc
77,000,000
62,000,000
Share earns
3.62
2.64


Cuomo Takes to the Road for Dukakis, Stressing the Need for Vision
LEAD: Mario Cuomo, who last year refused to rule out a Presidential bid of his own and early this year declined to endorse a candidate in the Presidential primary, has shed his reluctance recently and has spent the last few weeks campaigning vigorously for Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alcan Aluminium Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,158,000,000
1,707,000,000
Net inc
258,000,000
122,000,000
Share earns
1.61
.72
9mo rev
6,306,000,000
4,929,000,000
Net inc
676,000,000
297,000,000
Share earns
4.14
1.71


Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
251,864,000
228,862,000
Net inc
28,744,000
25,325,000
Share earns
.96
.83
9mo sales
713,937,000
629,652,000
Net inc
68,986,000
60,109,000
Share earns
2.30
1.97
Shares outst
29,944,000
30,446,000


New Inquiry On Air Route To Tokyo Set
LEAD: The Department of Transportation yesterday ordered yet another reconsideration of an award of a contested route between Seattle and Tokyo, taking the route away from Continental Airlines Inc. and appointing a career officer in the agency to take a new look at the convoluted proceeding.


Lagerfeld: Fashion's Statesman
LEAD: Karl Lagerfeld, one of the world's most prolific fashion designers, is perched on a gilt chair sipping orange juice in his 18th-century house on the Left Bank.
His signature ponytail is now steel gray, and instead of a custom-tailored frock coat, he is wearing a loose black suit by Comme des Garcons with a black shirt by Matsuda.


WINE TALK
LEAD: SOME years ago Baron Elie de Rothschild, then managing partner of Chateau Lafite-Rothschild, was given a very old Lafite to taste. ''Well,'' he said, after a pause, ''it's wine.''


A Town Celebrates the Lowly Lima Bean
LEAD: IN the seashore resort of Cape May, N.J., which is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean and Delaware Bay, mid-October is synonymous with Victorian Week tours of grand homes, tulip-bulb planting, migrating birds and the last days to sit on porches in still-warm but waning sunlight.
Separated from Cape May by Wilbraham Park is West Cape


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.34
8.37
7.07
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.37
7.33
6.25
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.54
7.42
6.25
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.66
8.67
9.22
30-YR.


PENTAGON IS URGED TO BE MORE ACTIVE IN ECONOMIC POLICY
LEAD: An independent advisory panel has urged the Secretary of Defense to take a more assertive role in setting economic policy to head off ''an increasing loss of technological leadership to both our allies and adversaries.''


Pipeline Company Prices Note Issue
LEAD: The Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Company priced an offering of $250 million eight-year notes.


Jockeys Strike at Aqueduct Over Pay; Substitutes Are Hired
LEAD: The 26 jockeys who had been named to ride at Aqueduct today plan instead to picket the track while at least 18 replacement jockeys ride in the nine opening-day races.


McLain Pleads Guilty
LEAD: Denny McLain, the former Detroit Tiger pitcher who was baseball's last 30-game winner, pleaded guilty to Federal racketeering and cocaine charges yesterday, 14 months after an appeals court overturned his conviction stemming from a 1984 indictment alleging he engaged in loan-sharking, gambling and drug dealing.


Pillsbury, Rejecting Offer, Says It Will Study Options
LEAD: The board of directors of the Pillsbury Company unanimously rejected Grand Metropolitan P.L.C.'s $5.23 billion takeover bid today, calling it ''inadequate and not in the best interests of the company and its shareholders.''


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Addendum
LEAD: *
People magazine will be increasing its rate base 1.7 percent, to 3 million from 2.95 million, and raising ad rates 7.8 percent, with the Jan, 9, 1989, issue.


BRIDGE
LEAD: Qualifying play in the World Team Olympiad ended here this afternoon, setting up quarter-final playoffs beginning Wednesday.


MCI Communications' Net Increases Nearly Sixfold
LEAD: Continuing a string of sharp earnings gains, the MCI Communications Corporation said yesterday that its net income in the third quarter of this year rose almost sixfold on a 40.8 percent increase in revenues, compared with the corresponding period last year.


Kansas Judge Bars Doctors' Release of Positive Test for AIDS Virus
LEAD: A Kansas judge issued a permanent injunction yesterday barring a man's doctors from informing his former wife that he had tested positive for the AIDS virus.


Court Hearing On Macmillan
LEAD: The Delaware Supreme Court yesterday agreed to hear an appeal by Maxwell Communications challenging a lockup provision and various other facets of a buyout proposal by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company for Macmillan Inc.
At the same time, Judge


Tough Wine Course Has New Students
LEAD: THE English wine trade's equivalent of the Ph.D. is coming to the United States.


Analysts Suggest Targets in Food
LEAD: THE startling bid Monday of $90 for each share of Kraft Inc. stock sent the stock of other food companies soaring yesterday.
Led by Kraft, which shot up $28.125, to $88.25, Gerber Products rose $4.375, to $57.75; CPC International $2.25, to $55.50, and General Mills $2.125, to $54.50.
Borden Inc and Quaker


2 Wall St. Brokerages Subpoenaed in Ellis Case
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission recently subpoenaed at least two Wall Street brokerage firms for information in one of the longest and largest insider trading investigations in history.


Pfizer Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pfizer Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,382,900,000
1,297,900,000
Net inc
216,800,000
185,800,000
Share earns
1.29
1.10
9mo sales
4,017,200,000
3,644,600,000
Net inc
649,700,000
553,600,000
Share earns
3.86
3.26


Driver Goes on a Rampage; Rams 17 Cars With Tow Truck
LEAD: A Police Department driver was jailed awaiting arraignment today on charges of going on a rampage with his tow truck, ramming 17 cars, pushing them into row houses and injuring at least five people.


Manufacturers Hanover Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers Hanover Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b197,700,000
c129,100,000
Per share
3.77
2.73
9mo net inc
b741,200,000
d1,160,000,000
Per share
14.28
-
b-Included for the quarter an after- tax gain of $98 million from the sale of a London office building, $9.9 million, after taxes, from the sale of previously unissued stock in Banco Manufacturers Hanover (Portugal) S.A., and $9.4 million, after taxes, from the sale of the corporation's interest in Eastern


Emulex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emulex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Revenue
36,161,000
28,775,000
Net inc
3,489,000
1,612,000
Share earns
.30
.13
Shares outst
11,496,000
12,755,000


Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,024,933,000
876,900,000
Net inc
39,882,000
31,874,000
Share earns
.26
.23
9mo rev
2,979,234,000
2,550,673,000
Net inc
93,790,000
74,028,000
Share earns
.63
.53


Roman Kozak, Writer About Rock, Dies at 40
LEAD: Roman Kozak, a former rock editor at Billboard magazine and the author of a book about the New York rock club CBGB, died of cardiac arrest last Thursday in Las Vegas, Nev.
He was 40 years old and lived in New York City.


Surgery for 2 Yanks
LEAD: Two Yankee infielders underwent relatively minor surgery in the last five days.
Willie Randolph, the second baseman, had an arthroscopic procedure to repair torn cartilage in his right knee on Monday at New York University Medical Center.
Last Friday at the Medical Center, Mike Pagliarulo, the third baseman, had surgery to relocate the ulnar nerve in his right elbow.


Kraft Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kraft Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
2,838,300,000
2,545,500,000
Net inc
148,700,000
c126,900,000
Share earns
1.20
.92
9mo sales
8,274,900,000
7,294,200,000
Net inc
b1,052,200,000
c391,800,000
Share earns
8.20
2.86


Profits Down For Citicorp, 3 Other Banks
LEAD: Major banks reported conflicting results yesterday.


A JEWISH OFFICIAL LAUDS BERLIN TALK
LEAD: Edgar M. Bronfman, the president of the World Jewish Congress, said today that his meetings with East German leaders had left him ''totally satisfied'' with East Germany's attitude toward the mass killing of Jews under the Nazis and its readiness to pay at least symbolic compensation.


BUSINESS DIGEST: October 19, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


Protest Against Elders IXL Bid
LEAD: Scottish &amp; Newcastle Breweries P.L.C., the British brewer, said today that it was printing ''hands off'' on millions of its beer bottle labels in protest against a hostile takeover bid by the Australian brewing giant Elders IXL Ltd.


Secondhand Clothes
LEAD: Nancy Reagan stole the show six years ago at Washington's annual Gridiron dinner when she sang ''Secondhand Clothes,'' to the tune of Barbra Streisand's popular ''Secondhand Rose.'' It was a graceful response to those who criticized her practice of accepting expensive designer dresses as loans and gifts.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority offered $400 million worth of bonds yesterday.


Amalgam of Agony and Anger Downwind From Uranium Site
LEAD: The farming, laboring, shopkeeping families around here seem just as conservative and just as patriotic as the small-town stereotype would have it.
But the uranium processing plant down the road, and what the Federal Government has told them about its safety, has them sounding like something else entirely.


Dukakis Ads: Blurred Signs, Uncertain Path
LEAD: One major reason for Michael S. Dukakis's campaign difficulties has been an inability to produce timely, effective and consistent television advertising, judging by the laments of Democrats and the gloating of Republicans, As seen through the eye of his own advertising, the Democratic Presidential candidate was an economic manager.


Symbol Is Winner In MSI Data Fight
LEAD: A heated takeover battle in the lucrative portable computer industry came to a close as Symbol Technologies Inc. and the Telxon Corporation announced that they had forged a settlement in their quest for control of MSI Data Corporation.
The deal allows Symbol to acquire MSI, based in Costa Mesa, Calif., in a $23-a-share friendly merger.


Environment Will Expire if We Don't Act Now; Politics Is Missing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jefferson Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Bankshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,810,000
3,314,000
Per share
.83
.72
9mo net inc
10,464,000
9,657,000
Per share
2.29
2.09


Auditor Asserts Contractor Tried to Impede His Search
LEAD: The procurement scheme by the Sundstrand Corporation, the Illinois military contractor that agreed last week to plead guilty to the largest military fraud in history, was designed by upper- and middle-management Sundstrand executives, according to the Government auditor who led Federal prosecutors to the case.


Review/Television; Helping People to Read
LEAD: Something can be done to reduce illiteracy - that is the message of ''First Things First,'' a heartening one-hour documentary that can be seen tonight at 9 on Channel 13.
A little good news is most welcome about a condition that is keeping millions of Americans from breaking out of poverty and costing the nation heavily in the forms of crime, welfare and an unskilled work force.


Hexcel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hexcel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
90,986,000
81,889,000
Net inc
3,694,000
3,071,000
Share earns
.53
.45
9mo sales
293,239,000
252,617,000
Net inc
11,450,000
8,790,000
Share earns
1.66
1.31


Bridge
LEAD: One favored American team grabbed a narrow last-ditch victory while another went down to defeat at the World Team Olympiad here tonight.


A WAR CRIMES CASE STIRS FRANCE ANEW
LEAD: A former Cabinet minister has been indicted for crimes against humanity in connection with the wartime deportation of 1,690 Jews, lawyers for relatives of the deportees said today.


Kodak Buys I.B.M. Copier Agreements
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company has agreed to buy the International Business Machine Corporation's existing copier service, sales and lease agreements in 16 countries.
The deal follows a similar one in April that transferred I.B.M.'s United States copier service and sales agreements to Kodak, as of July 1, said a Kodak spokesman, Ron Roberts.


Reforestation Money Spent on Firefighting
LEAD: The Forest Service has raided a key reforestation trust fund to cover more than $500 million in firefighting expenses over the last two years, and the agency's budget director said today that he was not sure where money would come from next summer.


Dollar in a Narrow Range; Gold Mixed in Late Trading
LEAD: The dollar strengthened slightly in United States trading yesterday after barely budging abroad, but foreign-exchange traders said the late movement was caused largely by internal market conditions, not by outside news.


Helen O'Bannon, 49, Pennsylvania Official
LEAD: Helen B. O'Bannon, senior vice president of the University of Pennsylvania and a former Secretary of Welfare in Pennsylania, died of cancer yesterday at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.
She was 49 years old and lived in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.


McGraw-Hill Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McGraw-Hill Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
471,178,000
455,130,000
Net inc
58,756,000
52,400,000
Share earns
1.21
1.03
9mo rev
1,310,532,000
1,252,539,000
Net inc
130,535,000
114,867,000
Share earns
2.69
2.26


Last Gasps in Congress; Burying a Good Idea on Drugs
LEAD: The 100th Congress drags on, mainly for meaningless posturing on drugs.
But one provision in the drug bill offered by the Senate, a commitment to expanded spending for drug treatment, deserves endorsement.
It could well be the centerpiece of a sounder bill debated in calmer circumstances.


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: I HAVE a recipe suggesting that you fill half a pumpkin with Gruyere cheese, cream and chicken broth and bake it in the oven until the whole thing turns into soup-in-the-shell.
Call me unimaginative, but I can't see myself serving this to one grown man who came late to basil and two little boys who once trashed an entire pot of meatballs because they found a bay leaf in the tomato sauce, and having everyone go, ''Wow!


Iran-Contra Counts Dropped
LEAD: A Federal district judge today dismissed charges that a former C.I.A. agent, Joseph F. Fernandez, had participated in an illegal conspiracy to help arm the Nicaraguan rebels, but gave prosecutors a chance to bring the case anew in Virginia.


Mercantile Bankshares Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Bankshares Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
14,215,000
12,688,000
Per share
1.10
.99
9mo net inc
39,809,000
33,992,000
Per share
3.10
2.67


Microsoft Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microsoft Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
176,393,000
102,636,000
Net inc
36,582,000
21,259,000
Share earns
.65
.38


Substitutes Replace Striking Jockeys at Aqueduct's Opener; Regulars Picket In Pay Dispute
LEAD: The regular jockeys picketed yesterday outside the Aqueduct gate and, when it was race time, clambered up onto a flatbed truck to make themselves tall enough to watch what was happening on the other side of the fence.


Wang Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wang Laboratories Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
723,100,000
693,000,000
Net inc
13,100,000
22,500,000
Share earns
.08
.14


Review/Theater; Diderot's Dialogue, With Contemporary Parallels
LEAD: As a protean man of ideas during the Enlightenment, Denis Diderot was a philosopher, encyclopedist, critic and playwright - and an influence on generations of thinkers and artists in each of his various fields.
One of his most consequential works is ''Rameau's Nephew,'' an apparently fictive dialogue that was unpublished in


S &amp; L's: The Price of Prevarication
LEAD: Federal regulators sell off seven more bankrupt savings and loans at a loss of $2 billion.
Or is it two more S &amp; L's at a loss of $7 billion?
Like drug smuggling and toxic waste leaks, reports that more thrift institutions have failed have become commonplace and no longer ignite indignation.


Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,627,000,000
1,572,000,000
Net inc
8,200,000
53,900,000
Share earns
.02
.54
Shares outst
87,100,000
99,700,000
9mo rev
7,640,000,000
4,961,000,000
Net inc
1,390,000,000
196,400,000
Share earns
1.39
2.16
Shares outst
86,800,000
91,100,000


U.S. Says Resolution On Baby Trafficking Results From 'Lies'
LEAD: The United States has protested a resolution by the European Parliament that condemns the United States over a supposed practice of buying babies in Latin America to use their organs in transplants.


Prosecutor Cites Drexel Role in Princeton/Newport Case
LEAD: A Federal prosecutor in court proceedings yesterday charged that Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. had engaged in a criminal conspiracy with officials from a New Jersey investment firm to manipulate stock prices and defraud customers.


Phelps Dodge Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phelps Dodge Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
511,400,000
377,400,000
Net inc
94,300,000
b58,200,000
Share earns
2.93
1.77
9mo rev
1,633,600,000
1,105,600,000
Net inc
279,600,000
b100,300,000
Share earns
8.70
3.10


Bolster Gorbachev, Italian Says
LEAD: Europe can reap ''unimaginable commercial advantages'' by giving Mikhail S. Gorbachev economic aid to carry out his program of restructuring the Soviet economy, Prime Minister Ciriaco De Mita said today.


Dolphins Winning Despite Marino
LEAD: The Miami Dolphins are surging.
Yet their famed quarterback, Dan Marino, is, statistically, having his worst season.


Edmonton Warms Up as Fans Welcome Gretzky's Return
LEAD: When Wayne Gretzky announced on Aug. 9 that he was leaving the Edmonton Oilers for the Los Angeles Kings, this city fell into shock.
Allegations of betrayal filled the prairie air, and even Gretzky's father, Walter, suggested that his son's giving up of his homeland for the United States was bad for Canada, and possibly bad for the National Hockey League's most famous player.


Rohm &amp; Haas Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rohm &amp; Haas Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
619,800,000
540,900,000
Net inc
49,800,000
39,300,000
Share earns
.75
.57
9mo sales
1,940,400,000
1,671,300,000
Net inc
187,800,000
158,800,000
Share earns
2.82
2.30


Mariner Offer to Piniella
LEAD: Lou Piniella, dismissed 12 days ago as manager of the Yankees, received an offer this week to manage the Seattle Mariners and said today that he would make a decision by the weekend.


Continental Sells Two Subsidiaries
LEAD: The New York-based Continental Corporation announced agreements to sell two life insurance subsidiaries in separate transactions that are expected to yield a total of $185 million in cash.
One unit, Loyalty Life, based in Michigan, will be sold to the NFU Acquisition Company.
The other subsidiary, Commercial Life, will be sold to two separate buyers: the UNUM Corporation and the Sun Life Insurance Company of America, a unit of Kaufman &amp; Broad Inc.


Health; Personal Health
LEAD: One of my most beautiful friends is hardly what our society would call a classic beauty.
At 5 feet, 4 inches tall and 120 to 125 pounds, she is absolutely average, statistically speaking.
Clearly, she is not centerfold material: her belly protrudes a bit, her waist and neck are somewhat foreshortened, her thighs are slightly flabby and her face is round but lacks the delicacy of a cherub.


Area in Queens Awaiting Bush, Many Indecisive
LEAD: Pondering what George Bush means to him and what he means to George Bush, Thomas J. Macaluso, 37 years old, a real-estate broker in Middle Village, Queens, and the father of two boys, rolled back in his chair and, with his feet propped up, moved some papers away on the oak-top desk he had bought when the business grew.


Dukakis Makes Strong Response To G.O.P.'s Ads
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis took his case to Main Street today, waving two Republican leaflets that attack his record and telling a cheering, flag-waving crowd: ''Friends, this is garbage.''


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: FINE hand-knotted rugs are often works of art, yet many owners choose to use them every day.
Handmade antique and silk rugs, which are both precious and fragile, should be used daily only with great caution and should be cared for professionally.
But most fine hand-knotted wool rugs, those less than 50 years old, can withstand normal household use, and as long as they are in good condition, they can be cleaned and cared for by amateurs.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Support for Rather


Calmat Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calmat Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
179,983,000
168,224,000
Net inc
18,234,000
15,514,000
Share earns
.58
.50
9mo rev
492,164,000
510,381,000
Net inc
44,041,000
62,604,000
Share earns
1.41
2.03


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,365,782,000
1,345,311,000
Net inc
134,087,000
b211,729,000
Share earns
2.43
4.23
b-Includes a gain of $16,847,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


American Savings Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Savings Bank of New York (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,606,000
11,555,000
Per share
.72
1.71
Shares outst
8,700,000
6,000,000
9mo net inc
23,633,000
34,529,000
Per share
3.29
5.10


A Car Bomb in Southern Lebanon Kills 7 Israeli Soldiers and Hurts 8
LEAD: Seven Israeli soldiers were killed and at least eight were wounded today in a car-bombing attack on an Israeli military convoy in southern Lebanon.


Bush, in Michigan, Travels Two Roads on the Campaign Trail
LEAD: Vice President Bush traveled two distinct roads on the campaign trail today, proposing an early summit meeting to bolster the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and using the slaying of two Detroit police officers to question Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's opposition to the death penalty.


Sweden's Police Chief Quits Over Unsolved Palme Case
LEAD: Sweden's police chief, Niels Erik Ahmansson, resigned today after the country's Attorney General criticized him for incompetence in the unsolved killing of Prime Minister Olof Palme.


AMR Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMR Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,328,314,000
1,975,441,000
Net inc
150,282,000
87,130,000
Share earns
2.50
1.41
Shares outst
59,042,000
62,141,000
9mo rev
6,456,297,000
5,315,919,000
Net inc
360,109,000
199,212,000
Share earns
5.99
3.30
Shares outst
58,960,000
61,038,000


Senate Backs Childrens' TV Regulation
LEAD: The Senate gave final legislative approval today to a bill that would reimpose regulations on children's television, but President Reagan has expressed dislike for the bill and a veto seems likely.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''My children have often asked me why I never received a Nobel Prize.
I used to tell them it was because the Nobel committee couldn't make up its mind which of my projects to recognize.''  - Leon M. Lederman.  [ B12:6. ]


Results Plus
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Maple Leafs 4, Sabres 2: Gary Leeman scored a short-handed goal and assisted on Ed Olczyk's tie-breaking power-play goal late in the second period last night as Toronto got 37 saves from Ken Wregget to beat Buffalo.
Olczyk scored his second goal of the game and sixth of the season into an empty Buffalo net with 8 seconds remaining to account for the final margin.


Parker Hannifin Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker Hannifin Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
595,654,000
512,846,000
Net inc
23,298,000
22,240,000
Share earns
.48
.46
Shares outst
48,724,079
48,367,016
All prior period amounts, except dividends per share, have been restated for the acquisition of Gull Inc., which was accounted for as a pooling of interests.


Dodgers One Victory Away From Winning It All
LEAD: The Los Angeles Dodgers were underdogs, but their circumstances were far worse than that tonight.
They were battered beyond belief, left to play the Oakland Athletics without their best player, without their right fielder and, suddenly, without their catcher.


Problems at Weapon Plants Conceded
LEAD: Energy Secretary John S. Herrington acknowledged yesterday that severe problems with safety, equipment and management are wracking the nuclear weapon industry in the United States.
And he conceded that despite efforts to improve the safety of the system, he still does not feel that he has total control of the


American Brands Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Brands Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,880,400,000
2,493,900,000
Net inc
b147,000,000
c128,400,000
Share earns
1.53
1.13
Shares outst
93,193,697
110,210,977
9mo sales
8,279,800,000
6,675,300,000
Net inc
b452,000,000
c366,600,000
Share earns
4.50
3.22
Shares outst
97,839,265
110,095,900


Washington Talk: Briefing; Merit Award at State
LEAD: The Federal Government hands out a huge variety of merit honors annually but since 1985, Secretary of State George P. Shultz has been giving his own distinguished service award to people in his department who he believes have advanced United States policies.
On Tuesday he presented the 1988 Shultz award to Edward J.


Baseball Notebook; Rumors About Mattingly Trade Won't Go Away
LEAD: Bob Quinn, the Yankees' general manager, is not at the World Series, but he heard about the Don Mattingly report long distance.


Paine Webber Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paine Webber Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
642,438,000
628,624,000
Net inc
20,928,000
14,814,000
Share earns
.50
.44
9mo rev
1,816,032,000
1,895,638,000
Net inc
41,848,000
65,010,000
Share earns
.77
2.01


Eskimos Try to Buy Time for Trapped Whales    After being repaired, the barge was delayed when it became bogged in mud. (AP)


Campaign Finance; PAC's Discard Ideology and Bet on Incumbency
LEAD: Until she quit early this year to run for Congress, Patricia L. Williams was the executive director of the board of realtors here.


Europe Offers Assurance Of 'Free and Open' Trade
LEAD: As it prepares to create one market among its own member nations by 1992, the European Commission today declared that it had a ''fundamental stake in the existence of free and open international trade'' and dismissed fears of looming European protectionism as ''senseless and groundless.''


Trademark Bill Passed By House
LEAD: Reflecting the growth in comparative advertising, the House today passed and sent to the Senate a sweeping rewrite of American trademark law.
The bill would expand the right of a business to sue competitors that attack it in advertisements.


Police Officer, 29, Is Arrested Seized on Drug Charge
LEAD: A 29-year-old police officer who was appointed to the force two years ago was arrested yesterday and charged with criminal possession of drug paraphernalia, the police said.


Middle South Utilities Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Middle South Utilities Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,095,335,000
1,075,049,000
Net inc
171,755,000
186,391,000
Share earns
.84
.90
9mo rev
2,701,923,000
2,676,316,000
Net inc
352,767,000
381,553,000
Share earns
1.72
1.87


A Plant as Changeable as Autumn Itself
LEAD: AUTUMN, from almost any point of view, is a season of many great excellences in the lives of gardeners.
The weather is pleasant in its variations.
A day that is a reminder of summer may be followed by one that is a foretaste of winter.


West Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 2
1988
1987
Sales
69,019,000
56,992,000
Net inc
3,729,000
3,163,000
Share earns
.23
.20
9mo sales
212,799,000
136,762,000
Net inc
b12,168,000
13,086,000
Share earns
.75
.81


Transactions
LEAD:  Basketball


Southwestern Bell Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwestern Bell Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,234,600,000
2,087,400,000
Net inc
323,300,000
314,100,000
Share earns
1.08
1.04
9mo rev
6,266,500,000
5,849,900,000
Net inc
754,900,000
800,600,000
Share earns
2.51
2.66


Corrections
LEAD: The New York Times college football rankings on the sports statistics page in some editions on Tuesday gave an incorrect record for Notre Dame.
The university has a 6-0 won-lost record.
The other information about the team, including its No. 3 position in the ranking, was based on the correct record.


Review/Theater; 650 Years Between Parallel Lives
LEAD: There are entertaining moments in ''The Green Death'' by Peter Mattaliano, and a few laughs, but those are small satisfactions in a play billed as a black comedy that drags its way through more than two hours of confusion.
The most memorable incident in the production at the Actor's Outlet Theater is the change of scenery in the first act.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.60
8.33
6.47
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.42
7.37
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.58
7.54
6.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.70
8.66
9.13
30-YR.


Hasbro Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hasbro Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
368,427,000
396,436,000
Net inc
18,079,000
11,172,000
Share earns
.31
.19
9mo rev
962,956,000
966,658,000
Net inc
51,295,000
41,440,000
Share earns
.88
.71


Air Products &amp; Chemicals Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Air Products &amp; Chemicals Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
622,005,000
543,577,000
Net inc
50,374,000
39,075,000
Share earns
.92
.70
Yr sales
2,431,866,000
2,132,176,000
Net inc
213,747,000
b155,587,000
Share earns
3.90
2.76


Earnings Up At Microsoft And Apple
LEAD: Belying rumors of a slowdown in personal computer sales, Apple Computer Inc. and Microsoft Inc. today both reported strong gains in earnings and revenues.
Wang Laboratories Inc., a minicomputer company, reported a decline in earnings, which it attributed to the cost of new product introductions.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Common Stock


Brawley Aftermath: Less Black Justice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hanna, M A Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hanna, M A Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
275,618,000
135,165,000
Net inc
b24,900,000
c10,000,000
Share earns
1.59
.75
9mo sales
777,781,000
240,122,000
Net inc
b70,100,000
c26,500,000
Share earns
4.45
1.93


Signet Banking Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Signet Banking Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
59,635,000
24,050,000
Per share
2.24
.92
9mo net inc
124,173,000
6,028,000
Per share
4.69
.20
The latest quarter included a tax benefit of $3 million relating to LDC loan-loss provisions and a gain of $29 million from the sale of Landmark.


Health; Cholesterol Lower In California Eggs
LEAD: Hens fed a secret diet have produced the first eggs certified by the state of California as lower in cholesterol than regular eggs.


GANG CHIEF GUILTY IN RIVAL'S SLAYING
LEAD: The leader of El Rukn, a street gang, who is already serving a long sentence for conspiring to commit terrorist acts, faces up to 80 years in prison for ordering the slaying of a rival gang leader.


Harold O. N. Frankel, Retired Lawyer, 84
LEAD: Harold O. N. Frankel, a retired Manhattan criminal lawyer, died Tuesday at his son's home in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 84 years old and moved to Tucson from Manhattan last year.


Family Dollar Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Family Dollar Stores Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
170,244,705
140,755,965
Net inc
5,163,866
4,358,947
Share earns
.19
.15
Yr sales
669,493,241
560,339,004
Net inc
27,333,913
24,802,432
Share earns
.98
.86


Campaign Trail; Lampooning Paper Makes Quayle News
LEAD: ''Quayle Becomes President.'' '' 'Uh-Oh,' Says Worried Nation.'' That headline appears on a free, single-page broadsheet, The Washington Possible, that lampoons Dan Quayle and was circulated yesterday in Washington, New York and Los Angeles.
Nearly 20,000 copies of the ''newspaper,'' whose appearance vaguely resembles that of The Wasington


Rival Prods Moynihan, But in Vain
LEAD: Robert R. McMillan's slogan for his low-budget challenge of Senator Daniel P. Moynihan is: ''He won't just talk - he'll get results for New York State.''


Buyout Firm Adds a Partner
LEAD: Clayton &amp; Dubilier Inc., a New York firm specializing in leveraged buyouts, said yesterday that Joseph P. Flannery, the former chairman and chief executive of Uniroyal Inc., had joined the firm as a partner.


Wisconsin Is Ready to Sail
LEAD: The modernized battleship Wisconsin will be recommissioned Saturday, the Navy said today.
The 887-foot vessel has been modernized at Ingalls Shipbuilding in Pascagoula, Miss., where 32 Tomahawk cruise missiles, 16 Harpoon surface-to-surface missiles and four Phalanx defensive weapons systems have been added to its battery of 16- and 12-inch guns.


Consolidated Rail Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Rail Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
876,000,000
800,000,000
Net inc
83,000,000
62,000,000
Share earns
1.21
.90
9mo rev
2,586,000,000
2,407,000,000
Net inc
228,000,000
b220,000,000
Share earns
3.31
3.20


Jersey Voters to Decide Fate Of Bond Issue for Education
LEAD: In addition to voting Nov. 8 for a President, a United States Senator and Representative and local officials, New Jersey voters will also be asked to approve $350 million in capital spending for education.


Note and Bond Prices Are Down
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds retreated in quiet trading yesterday in a session that stood in marked contrast to a year ago, when the stock market crash sparked a huge rally in the credit markets.


Emporia Journal; Where Eloquence Seems a Birthright
LEAD: On the slender shoulders of Barbara White Walker has fallen the right and obligation to take command of a country newspaper that once made a little Kansas town a household word and that, nearly a century ago, gave America the Sage of Emporia.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Review/Opera; A Revised 'Hoffmann'
LEAD: The mania for critically revised editions is getting out of hand in the world of opera. ''The Tales of Hoffmann'' by the Music Center Opera here -though its admirable features include a strong performance by Placido Domingo in what may be his best role -offers an uninspiring example of what can happen when musicology takes the lead without a strong counterbalance of good theatrical horse sense.


164 Killed in 2 Plane Crashes in India; 5 Survive
LEAD: At least 164 people were killed today in the crashes of a Boeing 737 and a smaller turboprop aircraft on domestic flights.
The two planes went down near airports, one in western India and the other in the northeast.


3 American Physicists Get Nobel for Landmark Work
LEAD: The Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded yesterday to three Americans for their landmark experiment a quarter century ago using the first laboratory-made beam of neutrinos, elusive particles that play a fundamental role in the structure of matter.


Scott Paper Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott Paper Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
1,150,500,000
1,034,000,000
Net inc
b170,700,000
58,500,000
Share earns
2.22
.76
9mo sales
3,441,000,000
3,020,800,000
Net inc
320,000,000
166,300,000
Share earns
4.18
2.17


Recipe for a Trilogy: Mix Carefully
LEAD: Though ''New York Stories'' began with Woody Allen and came to include segments directed by Francis Ford Coppola and Martin Scorsese, it is riskier financially than many films.
Even Robert Greenhut, the film's producer, said of anthologies, ''The track record hasn't been wonderful.'' For every classic like the Italian ''Boccaccio '70,'' there are clunkers like ''Twilight Zone - The Movie.


Bristol-Myers Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bristol-Myers Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,516,161,000
1,378,337,000
Net inc
232,325,000
200,185,000
Share earns
.81
.70
9mo sales
4,492,965,000
4,040,510,000
Net inc
633,450,000
535,573,000
Share earns
2.20
1.87


LAWSUIT IS SETTLED OVER FORD ESTATE
LEAD: Kathleen DuRoss Ford, third wife and widow of the automobile magnate Henry Ford 2d, has reached a settlement with Ford family members that will guarantee her at least $10.5 million a year for life from his $350 million estate, her attorney announced today.


House Passes a Sludge Bill To Ban Sea Dumping by '92
LEAD: The House today followed the Senate in giving final approval to a bill banning the dumping of sludge at sea by 1992.


Scecorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scecorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,029,342,000
1,518,159,000
Net inc
391,655,000
211,795,000
Share earns
1.79
.97
9mo rev
4,713,792,000
4,188,272,000
Net inc
655,200,000
568,030,000
Share earns
3.00
2.61


Sports People; Givens Seeks No Money
LEAD: Robin Givens will not seek a settlement from Mike Tyson, the heavyweight champion, her New York-based attorney, Raoul Felder, said. ''Robin is waiving all claims,'' Felder said. ''She will not be asking for nor will she take any money.'' Felder said that on Tuesday, while awaiting a settlement offer from Tyson's attorney, Howard Weitzman, Givens called to tell him she wanted nothing from Tyson in settlement of their divorce.


American Air Parent Posts A Record Net
LEAD: The AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines Inc., reported record earnings of $150.3 milion, or $2.50 a share, in the third quarter, up 72.6 percent over the corresponding period last year, which was also a strong quarter.


A FOE OF PINOCHET GOES FREE IN CHILE
LEAD: A former Foreign Minister has been freed after spending more than a year in jail as an ''apologist for terrorism.''


Now, Neighbors Recall Doubts on Youth Farm
LEAD: When members of the Ecclesia Athletic Association first moved to a farmhouse near here in the summer of 1987, a neighbor, Kenneth Teuscher, did what he could to assist them in setting up their retreat for ghetto youngsters.
He helped them plant a garden and build a fence, even letting them use some of the land on his cattle ranch for tents.


Penn Central Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penn Central Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
359,600,000
312,800,000
Net inc
b37,800,000
17,600,000
Share earns
.53
.22
Shares outst
70,900,000
78,400,000
9mo sales
1,077,900,000
890,000,000
Net inc
b84,100,000
c3,800,000
Share earns
1.18
.05
Shares outst
71,100,000
78,400,000


New Petition by Drexel
LEAD: Lawyers representing Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and several executives yesterday again petitioned an appeals court to have a Federal judge removed for what they contend is a conflict of interest and bias in the securities-fraud case against the firm.


Statistics; Profit Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
July.-Sept.
Change
1988
From '87
American Brands Inc.
$ 147,000,000
+14.5
Ameritech
281,100,000
-6.6
AMR Corp.
150,300,000
+72.6
Bellsouth Corp.
419,600,000
+0.2
Bristol-Myers Co.
232,300,000
+16.0
Consolidated Rail Corp.


A Matter of Money
LEAD: Following is a comparison of minimum jockey fees based on the $87,300 Ashley T. Cole Stakes, the feature race yesterday at Aqueduct.
The central issue in the dispute between the jockeys and the horse owners is the fee paid for second- and third-place finishes.
The jockeys want 5 percent of the owner's share of the total purse.


Bonn Plans Card Phone
LEAD: West Germany will replace half its coin-operated public telephone booths with card phones by 1995, Post Minister Christian Schwarz-Schilling said today.


First Interstate Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate Bancorporation (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
214,400,000
78,759,000
9mo net loss
14,637,000
508,482,000
The latest quarter included a provision for the spinoff of about $400 million in non-performing assets and the addition of $180 million for loan and foreclosed property reserves of its Texas subsidiary.


Young Rembrandt
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Last Gasps in Congress; Cleaning Up Its Own Lobbies
LEAD: Is it too much to ask that House committee staff members wait a year after leaving Congressional employment to lobby their old colleagues?
Apparently so, in the view of some staff members and a few powerful House chairmen.
Their last-ditch special pleading is the only major obstacle to a bill to extend landmark ethical reforms to


Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
64,915,000
54,914,000
Net inc
2,450,000
2,557,000
Share earns
.24
.24
9mo rev
195,171,000
166,289,000
Net inc
8,295,000
b39,271,000
Share earns
.80
3.80


Judge's Daughter Is 'Smiling Through Tears'
LEAD: Sukhreet Gabel, a key prosecution witness in the Bess Myerson trial, described herself on a television show yesterday as ''smiling through tears.''


Campaign Trail; A Little Help From the Other Side
LEAD: Virtually every power broker in Washington turned out for a party the other night honoring Robert S. Strauss, a prime power broker, on his 70th birthday.
Mr.
Strauss, former chairman of the Democratic National Committee, told the group that on the way to the party his wife, Helen, had said he had better think of something to say to all those heavyweights.


MCI Communications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCI Communications Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,356,000,000
994,000,000
Net inc
104,000,000
17,000,000
Share earns
.38
.06
9mo rev
3,706,000,000
2,901,000,000
Net inc
224,000,000
41,000,000
Share earns
.78
.14


Festive Evening for the Folk Art Museum
LEAD: WHILE other New York charities are talking about curtailing the lavishness of their benefit parties, the Museum of American Folk Art has gone the other way.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about the crash of a Ugandan airliner near Rome misidentified Uganda's capital in some editions.
It is Kampala.


Pain and Prejudice
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Julius J. Ferretti, Inventor, 92
LEAD: Julius J. Ferretti, the inventor of a 1923 matchbook-making machine and of several air pollution control devices, died Monday in a nursing complex in Bridgeport, Conn., where he lived.
He was 92 years old.


Outfitting An AIDS Agency's New Space
LEAD: AS the first voluntary organization in New York to address the AIDS epidemic, the Gay Men's Health Crisis has been accustomed to facing seemingly insurmountable odds.


Life Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Life Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
31,572,000
31,772,000
Net inc
2,471,000
3,561,000
Share earns
.18
.26
9mo sales
95,758,000
90,589,000
Net inc
9,234,000
8,714,000
Share earns
.68
.64


Independent Bank Corp (Mass) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank Corp (Mass)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,480,000
2,581,000
Per share
.49
.51
9mo net inc
6,830,000
6,559,000
Per share
1.35
1.31


JUDGE DENIES PLEA IN PACEMAKER SUIT
LEAD: A Federal district judge today rejected a plea agreement reached by prosecutors and the Cordis Corporation, which is accused of 23 counts of selling defective cardiac pacemakers from 1980 to 1985.


Review/Dance; The Ballet Hispanico Evokes Dance Halls Of 1930's Argentina
LEAD: Ballet Hispanico opened a two-week season Tuesday night with a mixed bill enhanced by a vibrantly theatrical series of tango vignettes by Graciela Daniele, a choreographer better known on Broadway than in concert dance.


Illinois Tool Works Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Tool Works Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
480,661,000
419,810,000
Net inc
34,508,000
26,426,000
Share earns
.65
.51
9mo rev
1,429,363,000
1,246,326,000
Net inc
104,363,000
79,460,000
Share earns
1.99
1.54


West Germany Detains War Criminal Suspect
LEAD: A former pro-Nazi Latvian police commander who had faced deportation from the United States on charges of World War II atrocities was detained by the West German authorities today.


Technitrol Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technitrol Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
23,125,000
10,998,000
Net inc
1,463,000
1,315,000
Share earns
.75
.66
9mo sales
47,102,000
31,793,000
Net inc
4,077,000
3,838,000
Share earns
2.09
1.91


Engelhard Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Engelhard Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
614,419,000
612,257,000
Net inc
16,924,000
14,743,000
Share earns
.38
.33
9mo sales
1,655,567,000
1,751,105,000
Net inc
44,472,000
57,123,000
Share earns
.99
1.32


Campaign Trail; A Little Advice From an Old Warrior
LEAD: In the final weeks of the 1984 Presidential campaign, Walter F. Mondale knew that President Reagan would overwhelmingly defeat him.
But Mr.
Mondale, instead of yielding, decided to campaign with an intensity that startled his advisers and, he acknowledges, himself.
Mr.
Dukakis, he says, should do the same because he has a far better chance of beating Vice President Bush than he had of defeating Mr.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The Disarray In Dukakis's Ad Team
LEAD: GOV.
MICHAEL S. DUKAKIS'S campaign advertising team was supposed to be right up there with the 1927 New York Yankees, a ''murderers' row'' of creative stars managed by the industry's best account executives, sending hard-hitting spots into America's living rooms.


Talking Deals; Why Pillsbury Added Advisers
LEAD: PILLSBURY is getting ready to call on a bevy of Wall Street experts to defend itself against the surprise takeover offer from Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., according to a filing late Tuesday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Koch Attacks Goldin on Foster-Care Issue
LEAD: Mayor Koch yesterday accused his longtime rival, Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin, of ''using kids for politics'' by taking reporters and photographers into a city child-welfare office on Monday after Mr.
Goldin's investigators were denied access because of confidentiality rules.


Broadcasters Shouldn't Quake Before Congress
LEAD: To the Editor:


Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
625,587,000
543,085,000
Net inc
80,421,000
c75,506,000
Share earns
1.00
1.21
9mo sales
1,378,857,000
1,190,377,000
Net inc
324,000
bc4,640,000


Republic New York Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic New York Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
38,700,000
42,300,000
Per share
1.12
1.30
9mo net inc
119,600,000
b4,900,000
Per share
3.52
-
b-Net loss and included losses of $64.8 million on lesser developed country (LDC) debt, a special loan loss provision for LDC's of $100 million and an extraordinary loss on the early extinguishment of long-term debt of $15.9 million.


The Dirty Little Secret
LEAD: Class, it has been said, is the dirty little secret of American society.
In the 1988 Presidential campaign, race is the dirty little secret: a highly significant factor that no one mentions out loud.


Gene-Implant Tests With Humans Are Put Off to Resolve Questions
LEAD: In a letter mailed today, Dr.
James B. Wyngaarden, the director of the National Institutes of Health, said he was delaying final approval of the first Government-endorsed experiments to transplant genes into human patients because of ''unresolved questions.''


Review/Theater; 4 Reasons to Be Childless
LEAD: By giving it a gay political spin, Daniel Curzon's comedy ''My Unknown Son,'' at the Kaufman Theater, feverishly attempts to find humor in the truism that the children you get may not be the children you dreamed of having.


First Fidelity Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fidelity Bancorporation (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
71,631,000
65,040,000
Per share
1.22
1.14
9mo net inc
210,070,000
120,836,000
Per share
3.62
2.00


Hercules Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hercules Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
687,000,000
657,000,000
Net inc
b26,800,000
c584,100,000
Share earns
.58
10.24
9mo sales
2,053,000,000
2,015,000,000
Net inc
b113,900,000
c783,200,000
Share earns
2.39
13.75


Ahmanson, H F &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ahmanson, H F &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b56,130,000
c43,378,000
Share earns
.57
.44
9mo net inc
b135,066,000
c167,068,000
Share earns
1.37
1.70
b-Includes gains of $5.3 million, or 5 cents a share, for the quarter and $18.5 million, or 19 cents a share, for the 9 months on the sale of loans and mortgage-backed securities.


S.E.C. May Broaden Takeover Disclosures
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission began debate today on whether to require more disclosure by those who are financing hostile corporate takeovers or proxy contests through limited partnerships, a move that some on Wall Street as well as some on the commission feel could make it more difficult to raise money for a tender offer.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Aetna Life and Casualty Co., Hartford, named Brian E. Scott president of its new standard markets department in its Commercial Insurance division.


Inside-Trade Inquiry Is Set By the British
LEAD: The British Government said today that it would investigate the possibility of insider trading in the stock of Consolidated Gold Fields P.L.C. just before the British mining giant received a hostile takeover offer by a company with South African interests.


BROADCAST CURBS ORDERED ON ULSTER
LEAD: The Government today banned British radio and television from broadcasting interviews with members of outlawed Protestant and Roman Catholic paramilitary groups in Northern Ireland.


Output Is Main OPEC Topic
LEAD: With pressure growing to limit oil production, ministers from eight OPEC nations will meet Thursday for further talks on disarray in the oil market.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in The Living Section yesterday with an article about Karl Lagerfeld described a sketch by him incorrectly.
It was a design for the Karl Lagerfeld 1989 summer collection, not for Chanel.


Yacht Navigates a Mystery
LEAD: The mystery of why Cuba detained an American vessel carrying the 1988 America's Cup challenger New Zealand was cleared up yesterday when the vessel, the Tampa Seahorse, arrived in New York Harbor with its piggyback cargo.


Woman, 38, Found Strangled In Her Home on East 81st St.
LEAD: A 38-year-old woman was found strangled in her ground-floor apartment at 421 East 81st Street, the police said.


Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,689,000,000
2,466,000,000
Net inc
296,000,000
249,000,000
Share earns
1.30
1.09
9mo sales
8,002,000,000
7,054,000,000
Net inc
882,000,000
702,000,000
Share earns
3.88
3.07


Bancorp Hawaii Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp Hawaii Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
28,733,000
14,246,000
Per share
3.02
1.50
9mo net inc
58,338,000
39,365,000
Per share
6.16
4.19
In the latest third quarter, the sale of Bank of Hawaii's Waikiki building produced an after-tax gain of about $28 million, partially offset by several non-recurring adjustments.


Noxell Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noxell Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
133,344,000
126,233,000
Net inc
11,800,000
10,095,000
Share earns
.29
.25
9mo rev
403,341,000
377,024,000
Net inc
38,823,000
33,148,000
Share earns
.96
.82


Associated Banc-Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Associated Banc-Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,912,000
3,260,000
Per share
.52
.45
9mo net inc
11,055,000
9,638,000
Per share
1.49
1.32


TRAINING IS CITED AT ATOMIC AGENCY
LEAD: A group that monitors nuclear safety said yesterday that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission had failed to issue regulations on worker training at nuclear reactors as required by law and that better training would reduce the number of mishaps.


President Stumps Through Ohio To Bolster G.O.P. Drive for Senate
LEAD: Focusing his attention on the fight for Senate seats, President Reagan today campaigned through Ohio, urging voters not to ''cancel their vote for George Bush by re-electing diehard liberals to Congress.''


Parker Drilling Company reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker Drilling Company (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
22,334,000
24,292,000
Net inc
b122,904,000
c31,157,000
Share earns
3.52
-
Yr rev
95,273,000
112,627,000
Net inc
b62,614,000
c89,571,000
Share earns
1.83
-


Official Denies Anti-Semitism
LEAD: An Education Department official denied today that she was motivated by anti-Semitism when she recommended withholding money from a Holocaust program that did not present Nazi views.


U.S. Court Holds Marcos and Wife In Contempt for Defying Subpoena
LEAD: Former President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines and his wife, Imelda, have been held in contempt of court for failing to obey a grand jury's subpoenas in Manhattan, a Federal appeals court said yesterday in upholding the contempt citations.


Draft Report on Global Warming Foresees Environmental Havoc in U.S.
LEAD: Global warming caused by industrial pollutants in the atmosphere is likely to shrink forests, destroy most coastal wetlands, reduce water quality and quantity in many areas and otherwise cause extensive environmental disruption in the United States over the next century, according to a draft report by the Environmental Protection


American Electric Power Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Electric Power Co Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,287,000,000
1,261,000,000
Net inc
172,315,000
148,155,000
Share earns
.89
.77
9mo rev
3,609,000,000
3,638,000,000
Net inc
466,527,000
413,140,000
Share earns
2.41
2.13


How Connecticut Candidates Stand on the Issues
LEAD: In the contest for United States Senator from Connecticut, the Republican incumbent, Lowell P. Weicker Jr., and his Democratic challenger, Attorney General Joseph I. Lieberman, hold similar positions on many issues.


Ameritech Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritech Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,506,000,000
2,425,300,000
Net inc
281,100,000
301,100,000
Share earns
2.07
2.16
9mo rev
7,398,900,000
7,098,400,000
Net inc
927,700,000
865,900,000
Share earns
6.80
6.14


New York City's Water Bond Issue
LEAD: The New York City Municipal Water Finance Authority yesterday offered $275 million in water and sewer system revenue bonds through a syndicate led by the Paine Webber Group.


Bankers Trust New York Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers Trust New York Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
162,100,000
146,400,000
Per share
2.01
2.03
Shares outst
80,599,000
72,263,000
9mo net inc
462,200,000
b283,300,000
Per share
5.80
-


Ex-Teammate Stops Devils
LEAD: The Devils suffered their third consecutive loss in the young season tonight, but this one may have been the most painful because they were shut out by a goaltender they traded away last season.


Sports People; N.B.A. Willing to Talk
LEAD: The National Basketball Association is willing to discuss sending its players to the Olympics if the International Basketball Federation decides that admitting N.B.A. professionals to Olympic competition would benefit the sport worldwide, Commissioner David Stern said yesterday in Madrid.
Stern said N.B.A.


Income Sags at Shearson; Paine Webber's Net Is Up
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. yesterday reported sharply lower third-quarter earnings, continuing a string of lower results for brokers.
Paine Webber Group Inc. reported a large profit increase but said it resulted from selling a stake in an auto-rental company.


General Dynamics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Dynamics Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,267,700,000
2,279,600,000
Net inc
96,400,000
111,500,000
Share earns
2.29
2.62
9mo sales
7,010,000,000
6,941,300,000
Net inc
268,800,000
342,000,000
Share earns
6.39
7.99


Quietly, Rye Conducts Its Social Experiment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Thornburgh Is Said To Plan a Reversal Of Order by Meese
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh has decided to overrule or severely restrict an order signed by his predecessor, Edwin Meese 3d, to appoint special prosecutors when members of Congress face charges of major wrongdoing, according to Justice Department officials.


Puget Sound Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puget Sound Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
11,280,000
530,000
Per share
.70
.03
9mo net inc
29,853,000
19,281,000
Per share
1.85
1.22
The year-ago third quarter earnings were sharply reduced by a $15 million pre-tax charge related to certain real estate loans in Alaska and Texas.


Foremost Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foremost Corp of America (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
946,000
c13,141,000
Share earns
.08
1.02
9mo net inc
b19,901,000
c34,207,000
Share earns
1.61
2.66
b-After a loss of $666,000 from discontinued operations.


Men Who Colonized America's Image of Itself
LEAD:  An Empire of Their Own  How the Jews Invented Hollywood  By Neal Gabler  Illustrated. 502 pages.
Crown Publishers. $24.95.


North Korean, at U.N., Sees No Quick Thaw
LEAD: A senior North Korean official told the General Assembly today that he held out little hope for an early improvement in his country's brittle relations with South Korea.


Campaign Trail; The Dukakis Plan: Take to Airwaves
LEAD: As if in response to Mr.
Mondale - and other Democrats - the Dukakis campaign is not only sending hundreds of volunteers and staff workers from Boston and Washington to key states, but also putting into action a strategy for the final weeks in which the Governor will focus on television, radio and newspaper interviews and nationally televised speeches.


Surely Lincoln-Douglas Roll in Their Graves
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Hutu Is Appointed Burundi Prime Minister
LEAD: A new Cabinet was formed in this turbulent Central African nation today, headed by a Prime Minister from the country's oppressed Hutu tribe, Burundi's Ambassador to Kenya, Marc Nteturuye, said.


Life with Mies and Le Corbusier
LEAD: THE furnishings are recognizable, even to those with only a passing knowledge of modern design: Le Corbusier's chrome and leather armchair, Mies van der Rohe's stainless steel and glass Barcelona table, the odd Italian lamp and the right accessory - a Peruvian textile fragment, an antique kilim, mohair pillows, an Alvar Aalto vase filled with daisies, an African mask.


Australian Trade Deficit
LEAD: Australia is well on the way to an economic recovery with all signs showing continued improvement in its trade situation, Paul Keating, the country's Treasurer, said today.
Mr.
Keating made the statement after the release of official statistics showing the nation's current account deficit had narrowed to $990 million (Australian), or $804 million (United States), in September.


Ex-Cadbury Executive Takes Key Post at Leaf
LEAD: A Finland-based company that has been snatching up a number of American candy brands yesterday named James A. Hanlon, a former Cadbury executive, to run its North American operations.


2 in Politburo Ousted in Rift On Security in Afghan Capital
LEAD: The Afghan Communist Party dismissed two Politburo members today as rebels showered rockets on Kabul, killing at least nine people.


Review/Jazz; Harper Brothers' Debut
LEAD: The Harper Brothers' debut concert at Birdland on Monday night was as much a coming-out party as it was a show.
The five-piece band, led by Winard Harper on drums and his brother, Philip Harper, a trumpeter, has a handful of musicians who are too young to vote; family members were in the audience, as was a solid group of people involved in jazz.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Chain of City Weeklies Sold
LEAD: American City Business Journals Inc., a chain of weekly publications, ageed Tuesday to be acquired by TA Associates Communications, a Boston-based group that invests in media holdings, for $124.7 million in cash and debt.


3 Apartheid Foes Leave U.S. Consulate
LEAD: Three anti-apartheid leaders who escaped from detention and took refuge in the American Consulate 37 days ago walked out today, apparently on the advice of Nelson R. Mandela.


To A's, Hits Just a Memory
LEAD: After the first two games, the party line was that the unexpected offensive difficulties of the Oakland Athletics were the distorted result of a mere two games.
The music blaring over the public address system helped to transmit the message: ''Don't Worry, Be Happy.''


Newhall Land &amp; Farming Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newhall Land &amp; Farming Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
70,102,000
48,345,000
Net inc
b21,597,000
11,604,000
Share earns
1.08
.56
9mo rev
138,464,000
112,782,000
Net inc
43,568,000
23,289,000
Share earns
2.19
1.12


Kraft Director In a Dual Role
LEAD: The chairman of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, John F. McGillicuddy, has found himself in a dual role in the $11.5 billion bid for Kraft Inc. by the Philip Morris Companies.


Put a Song in Your Portfolio: 'Happy Birthday' Is for Sale
LEAD: ''Happy Birthday to You'' may seem as if it belongs to everyone, but the song is actually under copyright, and that copyright will soon have a new owner.


Bearings Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bearings Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
143,470,000
124,929,000
Net inc
3,702,000
b4,953,000
Share earns
.72
.90
b-Includes a gain of $2,151,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Workman Publishing Set To Buy Algonquin Books
LEAD: In a reversal of the usual takeover pattern in book publishing, where big houses gobble up smaller ones, the Workman Publishing Company of New York has reached an agreement in principle to acquire Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, N.C.
The purchase price was not disclosed.


Sports of The Times; Tom Lasorda's Emotional Edge
LEAD: IN the minutes before last night's World Series game, the Dodgers were in their clubhouse at the Oakland Coliseum, watching NBC's pre-game show.


Modine Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Modine Manufacturing Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1988
1987
Sales
106,792,000
100,006,000
Net inc
7,482,000
7,014,000
Share earns
.49
.47
6mo sales
207,273,000
193,568,000
Net inc
14,534,000
13,874,000
Share earns
.96
.93


Arvin Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arvin Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
324,392,000
332,638,000
Net inc
8,328,000
11,428,000
Share earns
.40
.56
9mo sales
1,019,223,000
1,041,002,000
Net inc
5,443,000
38,061,000
Share earns
.16
1.96


US Surgical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US Surgical Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
70,450,000
63,126,000
Net inc
5,864,000
5,224,000
Share earns
.51
.42
9mo sales
214,661,000
184,626,000
Net inc
17,339,000
15,085,000
Share earns
1.49
1.21


4 Publishers List Results For Quarter
LEAD: Three leading publishing companies - McGraw-Hill Inc., the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation and Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. - yesterday reported moderately higher earnings for the third quarter.
A fourth company, Multimedia Inc., reported that its earnings fell slightly in the period.
McGraw-Hill


House Approves Credit Bill
LEAD: The House today approved a bill requiring issuers of credit cards to give consumers more and earlier details about interest rates and other costs.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-14  Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos have been held in contempt of court for failing to obey a grand jury's subpoenas that require them to provide their fingerprints and other material for the investigation, a Federal appeals court said.
Page A1


F.D.A. ANNOUNCES CHANGES TO SPEED TESTING OF DRUGS
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration today announced new procedures for approving drugs, saying they would make new treatments available more quickly to people with such life-threatening diseases as AIDS or cancer.


Ward Orders Officers to Use Protective Vest
LEAD: Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward, stunned by the shooting deaths of two young policemen Tuesday night in separate incidents, yesterday ordered all uniformed police officers on patrol duty to begin wearing bulletproof vests at all times.


Alberto-Culver Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alberto-Culver Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
165,247,000
144,294,000
Net inc
8,144,000
6,114,000
Share earns
.62
.43
Yr sales
604,708,000
514,491,000
Net inc
b26,891,000
18,163,000
Share earns
1.99
1.28


Market Place; Willcox &amp; Gibbs Called Underrated
LEAD: EVEN though Willcox &amp; Gibbs is soon likely to report its 23d consecutive quarter of increased sales and earnings, it does not get the investor appreciation it deserves, analysts say.
The stumbling block is that, like many conglomerates, investors are not sure what kind of company it is.


407.48-Carat Diamond Fails to Sell at Christie's
LEAD: The largest diamond ever to go up for auction - a 407.48-carat stone the size of a large strawberry - did not sell yesterday at Christie's.


3 West Germans Wins Nobel Prize in Chemistry
LEAD: Three West German scientists were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry yesterday for research revealing the three-dimensional structure of closely linked proteins that are essential to photosynthesis, the chemical reaction on which all higher forms of life depend.


Federated's Sales Decline in Period
LEAD: Federated Department Stores Inc. said that its sales for the nine weeks ended Oct. 1 fell by 3.7 percent, to $732.5 million, from $761 million in the corresponding period in 1987, and that its gross profit margins were lower.
But Federated, a unit of the Campeau Corporation, said the results were largely offset by lower expenses because of a cost-cutting program.


Park Ave. High School Pays $35,500 in Taxes and Reopens
LEAD: More than two weeks after it was closed for failing to pay back taxes, a Russian high school in Manhattan reopened yesterday when officials paid the Government $35,500 in a jubilant transaction at the front gate.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Battle for a Treaty
LEAD: Over the last 19 years Senator William Proxmire, the Wisconsin Democrat, gave 3,000 speeches on the Senate floor in an often lonely battle to win United States approval of the international treaty outlawing genocide.
He finally achieved that goal in a Senate vote last Friday in the last days of his political career.


Federal Drug Agent Is Wounded And Dealer Is Killed in Shootout
LEAD: A Federal drug agent was wounded last night during a shootout in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn in which one of four drug dealers was killed, the police said.


Alltel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alltel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
214,282,000
187,857,000
Net inc
28,416,000
25,252,000
Share earns
.83
.74
9mo rev
625,510,000
554,958,000
Net inc
88,891,000
69,810,000
Share earns
2.61
2.04


Charles Raffa, 84, Cuomo's Father-in-Law
LEAD: Charles Raffa, Governor Cuomo's father-in-law, died yesterday at the Jewish Institute for Geriatric Care in New Hyde Park, L.I., after a long illness.
He was 84 years old and lived in Queens.


Ball Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ball Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
292,700,000
267,400,000
Net inc
14,800,000
18,900,000
Share earns
.64
.80
9mo sales
840,000,000
839,300,000
Net inc
43,600,000
b53,600,000
Share earns
1.88
2.26


Whittle Seen In Time Deal
LEAD: Whittle Communications, the magazine publishing partnership based in Knoxville, Tenn., is expected to announce today that it will sell a half-interest in the company to Time Inc.


A Cocaine Addict Confesses To at Least 600 Burglaries
LEAD: A man the police call ''a one man crime wave,'' has admitted to committing 600 to 700 burglaries in the city over the last two years, the authorities said.


Georgia Gulf Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia Gulf Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
278,708,000
176,407,000
Net inc
53,052,000
27,940,000
Share earns
3.70
1.92
9mo sales
777,025,000
505,579,000
Net inc
139,182,000
56,669,000
Share earns
9.70
3.87


Heritage Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,002,000
2,323,000
Per share
.42
.33
9mo net inc
8,345,000
7,114,000
Per share
1.18
1.02


50 Years of Jazz, in the Hands of Gerald Wilson
LEAD: Gerald Wilson, the 70-year-old dean of California big band jazz, is standing before the American Jazz Orchestra in a dingy rehearsal hall near Times Square.
He counts off the time, the orchestra starts together, and immediately he waves on the brass section as if he were a third base coach urging a runner home.


Oakland's Stars in the Front Office
LEAD: The success of the Oakland Athletics this year is usually attributed to the slugging of Jose Canseco, the pitching of Dennis Eckersley and the fielding of Walt Weiss.


U.P.I. Offers New Services
LEAD: Following through on its plan to expand into new areas, United Press International today announced a package of regional business news and stock indexes that the financially troubled company hopes will attract corporate customers.


Health; Psychologists Gain Entry to Institutes
LEAD: Reversing their practice of more than a half century, the major psychoanalytic training institutes have agreed to open their doors to therapists who are not psychiatrists.
The agreement came in a settlement of a lawsuit brought against the institutes by four psychologists.


Apple Bank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Bank for Savings (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
6,348,000
b7,065,000
Per share
1.38
1.54
9mo net inc
17,296,000
b19,495,000
Per share
3.77
4.25
b-After pre-tax charges of $3,583,000 for the quarter and $13,138,000 for the 9 months due to asset restructuring, and tax credits of $2.5 million and $5,015,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


6 Scientists Win Nobel Prizes
LEAD: Three Americans were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics yesterday for research that improved the understanding of elementary particles and forces, while three West Germans won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for unraveling the structure of proteins that play a crucial role in photosynthesis.


Slices of Life in a 'Five Year Diary'
LEAD: You may have been to a few movies that seemed 40 hours long.
Now you can see one that really is.
It's called ''Five Year Diary,'' and it took seven years to make.
It takes eight days to show.
And it has its premiere Friday at the American Museum of the Moving Image in Astoria, Queens.


Washington Talk/Working Profile: Lauro F. Cavazos; In Search of a National Commitment to Education
LEAD: When young Lauro F. Cavazos was ready to enter the third grade, his family moved from a house on the 800,000-acre King ranch, where his father was a cattle foreman, to the nearby town of Kingsville, Tex.
The boy had attended the ranch's two-room, Hispanic elementary school.
Now, his father said, Lauro would be the first Hispanic child to attend the town's


How to Remember the Cabinet
LEAD: When Congress voted Tuesday to create a needless new Department of Veterans Affairs it also created three problems.


Yugoslavia Party Meeting Ends Without New Policies to Solve Crisis
LEAD: The Yugoslav Communist Central Committee ended a three-day emergency session today without proposing new policies to pull this country out of its deep economic, political and ethnic crisis.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 14
Oct. 7
Oct. 16
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
7.0
6.7
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.8
2.8
Gasoline stocks
220.1
220.3
223.2
Distillate stocks
130.1
130.1
126.1
Crude imports, daily
5.2
5.2
4.5
Product imports, daily
2.4
2.0
1.3
Crude stocks
327.1
324.1
333.6
Crude production, daily
8.0
7.9
8.3
Refinery utilization (%)
83.8
83.7
82.7
$


Incidence of AIDS, High Now and Growing Fast, Alarms Central America
LEAD: The number of AIDS cases has reached alarming proportions in Central America, health officials in the region say, and the virus is continuing to spread rapidly throughout the area.


Multimedia Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multimedia Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
107,952,000
102,498,000
Net inc
4,455,000
b4,940,000
Share earns
.36
.40
9mo rev
322,218,000
299,552,000
Net inc
13,784,000
7,446,000
Share earns
1.13
.61


Federal-Mogul Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal-Mogul Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
295,475,000
267,936,000
Net inc
11,282,000
8,413,000
Share earns
.90
.66
9mo sales
908,827,000
806,741,000
Net inc
b32,363,000
28,091,000
Share earns
2.59
2.20


Serbian Nationalism Could Rip Yugoslav Fabric; The Montenegrins
LEAD: To the Editor:


Merchants National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
11,188,000
10,099,000
Per share
.78
.69
9mo net inc
32,878,000
4,659,000
Per share
2.28
.32
The year-ago 9 months' results reflect the effect of a special provision for losses associated with the company's Latin American debt.


Kaman Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaman Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
190,067,000
175,806,000
Net inc
7,061,000
6,271,000
Share earns
.40
.36
9mo rev
576,128,000
518,702,000
Net inc
20,424,000
17,706,000
Share earns
1.15
1.01


Events: Mums, Quilts and Modernism
LEAD:  Chrysanthemum Show, the New York Botanical Garden, the Bronx. 212-220-8700.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. Our house has a septic tank for sewage disposal, and every time there is heavy rain we get a sewage odor in one of the bathrooms.
There is no such problem with the bathroom at the other end of the house, and all appliances flush and drain properly.
The problem disappears within an hour or two after the rain stops; there is no sign of a leak under the house or in the ground near the septic tank.


PPG Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PPG Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,360,000,000
1,260,000,000
Net inc
112,900,000
91,300,000
Share earns
1.03
.76
9mo sales
4,190,000,000
3,860,000,000
Net inc
365,300,000
280,600,000
Share earns
3.32
2.34


Dana Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dana Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,174,300,000
1,020,600,000
Net inc
40,700,000
36,500,000
Share earns
1.00
.82
Shares outst
40,700,000
44,600,000
9mo sales
3,698,400,000
3,091,300,000
Net inc
118,500,000
123,400,000
Share earns
2.91
2.76


Bellsouth Corporation Bellwether Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bellsouth Corporation Bellwether Exploration (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,456,700,000
3,111,200,000
Net inc
419,600,000
418,600,000
Share earns
.89
.87
9mo rev
10,019,700,000
9,076,300,000
Net inc
1,246,200,000
1,253,300,000
Share earns
2.61
2.61


Political Memo; Dukakis Campaign Battling In Last Democratic Trench
LEAD: When Democratic Presidential candidates believe they have fallen behind, as Michael S. Dukakis does, they abandon the brave midsummer talk about making inroads in the Deep South and end up right here, in the Midwest, hoping that the three big states of Illinois, Ohio and Michigan will all go their way and push them toward the White


Mellon and First Interstate Report Losses
LEAD: The Mellon Bank Corporation and First Interstate Bancorp yesterday announced large losses in the third quarter as they made preparations for new companies to be spun off from the parent concerns.


Ford to Expand Plant in Missouri
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would spend $200 million for a modernized paint shop at its light-truck assembly plant near Kansas City, Mo.
About 330,000 square feet will be added to the plant in Claycomo, north of Kansas City.
The expansion will include a new enamel paint system.


Health: Gynecology; New Tests Can Detect Viruses That Signal Risk of Cervical Cancer
LEAD: Amid frightening reports that certain viruses that cause genital warts may play a role in cervical cancer, researchers are developing new tests that can detect the viruses soon after they enter the body.
A woman who tests positive for one of the viruses should be monitored by her doctor so that any early abnormalities found in her cervix could be treated, removing the threat of cancer.


Trans-Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans-Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,114,466
5,028,230
Net loss
314,809
376,815
9mo sales
18,668,362
15,718,228
Net loss
131,057
510,150


Government Has Failed to Bolster Guard Against Spies, Report Says
LEAD: A succession of damaging spy cases has largely failed to bring about improvements in the Government's procedures for protecting its secrets, a Congressional report concluded today.


Students in a Moscow School Debate the Once-Undebatable
LEAD: For years the study of Soviet history at Secondary School 831 in Moscow was less an exercise in understanding the country's heritage than in denying it.


Construction Of Housing Up by 1.5%
LEAD: A rebound in apartment construction offset a decline in single-family home building last month as overall housing activity rose a modest 1.5 percent.


Hirohito's Condition Worsens
LEAD: The condition of Emperor Hirohito worsened today as he coughed up blood for the first time since his intestinal hemorrhaging began a month ago, Imperial Household officials said.
Doctors gave the 87-year-old Emperor nearly two pints of blood that stablilized his condition, they said.
The Emperor's daughter, Atsuko Ikeda, said he was awake but hardly responded to her when she visited him, Kyodo News Service said.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline on Tuesday about the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's efforts on behalf of the Dukakis campaign characterized their extent incorrectly.
He has been campaigning steadily since Labor Day; his effort was not ''late.''


Sports People; Inquest to Be Ordered
LEAD: An inquest will be ordered before the end of the week into the cocaine death of the football player David Croudip, Gwinnett County Coroner Randolph D. Simpson said yesterday.
Croudip, a defensive player and captain of the special teams for the Atlanta Falcons, died Oct. 10.
Although there is no dispute that Croudip died as a result of taking cocaine, Simpson said, questions about the circumstances of his death have been raised by conflicting stories told by Croudip's wife, Holly.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Foreign Service to End
LEAD: Allan E. Gotlieb, Canada's Ambassador to the United States since 1982, who is being replaced on Jan. 1, is leaving his Government's service.
Mr.
Gotlieb, widely regarded as an effective ambassador who pressed his government's interests in meetings at both the White House and on Capitol Hill, also was a popular host who, with his wife, aggressively entertained Washington's elites.


Contractor Is Guilty Of Bribing Inspector On Asbestos Repair
LEAD: A man who until two years ago headed the largest demolition business in the country was convicted yesterday of bribing a Federal inspector to overlook violations of laws on asbestos removal.


Copper Surges Amid Fears Tied to Peru Labor Problems
LEAD: Prices of copper futures soared nearer to record highs yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange amid fears that a work stoppage in Peru would further reduce supplies, already tight.


Pitney Bowes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pitney Bowes Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
571,916,000
505,315,000
Net inc
54,049,000
c45,984,000
Share earns
.68
.58
Shares outst
79,224,314
79,210,517
9mo rev
1,676,146,000
1,472,759
Net inc
b164,487,000
131,543,000
Share earns
2.09
1.66
Shares outst
78,890,027
79,157,277


Winners of Nobel Prizes for Unlocking Secrets in Physics and Chemistry
LEAD:  PHYSICS  Leon Max Lederman


Health: Immunization; Medicare to Offer Free Flu Shots To Test Merit of Preventive Program
LEAD: A little-noticed Federal project is ready to provide free influenza shots to millions of elderly Americans this winter in the beginning of what health officials view as a landmark preventive health effort that could save thousands of lives and billions of dollars.


Beverly Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beverly Enterprises Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
510,178,000
533,821,000
Net loss
11,484,000
bc3,579,000
Share earns
-
.06
9mo rev
1,508,411,000
1,593,984,000
Net loss
12,325,000
c8,082,000


Dow Chemical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Chemical Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,150,000,000
3,357,000,000
Net inc
632,000,000
330,000,000
Share earns
3.36
1.72
9mo sales
12,383,000,000
9,780,000,000
Net inc
b1,763,000,000
b888,000,000
Share earns
9.32
4.62


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: THE girl was the youngest in her kindergarten class, having passed the age cutoff by just two weeks.
Although her reading level was well above those of the other children in the room, her teachers felt that her social skills were not up to par because she was so young.
Last spring they recommended that the girl spend another year in kindergarten.


Masters of Disguise
LEAD: HALLOWEEN season is soon upon us.
If you're undecided about appropriate dress for the occasion, don't despair.
Robert Gordon's 65-year-old Gordon Novelty Company sells every costume and mask imaginable.
The store also carries accessories of every sort - bushy black eyebrows, medieval swords, tiaras, Captain Cook eye patches, fangs, feather boas,


Kennametal Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kennametal Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
111,679,000
94,075,000
Net inc
6,002,000
4,946,000
Share earns
.58
.48


ARCO Chemical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ARCO Chemical Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
696,000,000
503,000,000
Net inc
126,000,000
66,000,000
Share earns
1.27
.66
9mo sales
1,955,000,000
1,445,000,000
Net inc
360,000,000
195,000,000
Share earns
3.62
1.96


Ailing Dodgers Succeed
LEAD: This is success: You take the lead in the World Series, three games to one, with Orel Hershiser ready to pitch the clincher.


Nashua Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nashua Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
240,320,000
214,564,000
Net inc
8,072,000
6,460,000
Share earns
.12
.07
Shares outst
9,622,000
9,839,000
9mo sales
739,617,000
629,128,000
Net inc
24,071,000
19,457,000
Share earns
.31
.19
Shares outst
9,639,000
9,793,000


Dukakis Does A Little Better In 2 New Polls
LEAD: Two surveys released yesterday paint a somewhat better view of the Presidential race for Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis than was presented in a poll earlier this week, which showed an overwhelming lead for Vice President Bush.


Northeast Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
8,576,000
7,948,000
Per share
1.09
1.01
9mo net inc
24,028,000
25,789,000
Per share
3.06
3.28


Mellon Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mellon Bank Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
166,000,000
b16,000,000
Per share
-
.47
9mo net loss
113,000,000
610,000,000
b-Net income  The latest third quarter's results included a gain of $21 million resulting from the company's sale of about $6 billion in mortgage servicing rights to Salomon Brothers Inc.


Sports People; New Hearns Opponent
LEAD: James Kinchen will replace Fulgencio Obelmejias as the opponent for Thomas Hearns on a Nov. 4 boxing card in Las Vegas, Nev.
Hearns was seeking his fifth world title against Obelmejias, the World Boxing Association supermiddleweight champion (168-pound limit).
But Obelmejias said he had suffered an injury to his ribs when he announced Tuesday that he was pulling out of the bout.


Serbian Nationalism Could Rip Yugoslav Fabric
LEAD: To the Editor:


Scorsese's Passion Now: Dostoyevsky
LEAD: As the crew of Martin Scorsese's new film heads off to lunch, Nestor Almendros stays behind on the set and says, ''He reminds me of Truffaut a lot.'' Mr.
Almendros, the renowned cinematographer who worked on many of Francois Truffaut's films, hadn't even been asked any questions yet, but he knows an intriguing line when he drops one.


3 Officials at Salomon Leaving to Start Firm
LEAD: Three senior officers in Salomon Brothers' bond department are leaving to form their own firm, the latest in a yearlong series of defections that have shaken what was once the most powerful securities firm on Wall Street.


Vanbiesbrouck Meets the Test
LEAD: John Vanbiesbrouck, a long, very visible scar on his left wrist, admits he is not fully recovered from the frightening accident he suffered last June.
He insists, though, that he is 100 percent capable as a goaltender.
It is a subtle, but significant distinction, and it is one he had to convince his coach and teammates of before the season began.


Guilty Plea in Lottery Scheme
LEAD: A man accused of masterminding a scheme to claim a $15.2 million lottery jackpot with a fake ticket pleaded guilty today in Dauphin County Court.


Man Convicted of Rape on DNA Evidence
LEAD: In the first trial in New York State in which a defendant was linked to a crime through an analysis of his own genetic material, a 46-year-old man was convicted yesterday of sexual attacks on three women in Queens last year.


b-Includes net gain from disontinued operations of $6,190,000.
LEAD:  c-Includes $984,000 from discontinued operations.
Figures for 1987 are restated to reflect discontinued operations.


Joslyn Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Joslyn Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
51,398,000
40,459,000
Net inc
3,028,000
b14,474,000
Share earns
.64
-
9mo sales
156,926,000
118,374,000
Net inc
10,023,000
b8,166,000
Share earns
2.10
-


Allied Irish Offer To First Maryland
LEAD: A special advisory committee to the board of First Maryland Bancorp said the company should reject a $327.6 million offer from Allied Irish Banks P.L.C. to buy the 50.3 percent of stock in the bank it does not already own.
But the committee also recommended that the bank should continue discussions with


Drug Center Applauds Nixon as Fighter
LEAD: Former President Richard M. Nixon walked into the dining room of the Daytop Village Swan Lake center here today, and more than 400 teen-agers and young adults rose to give him an ovation.


Ameritrust Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritrust Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
22,500,000
18,500,000
Per share
.56
.44
9mo net inc
b77,400,000
c22,400,000
Per share
1.93
-
b-Included a gain of $10 million, or 25 cents a share, from the sale and leaseback of real estate; a charge of $4.5 million on the sale of an interest in Central Bancorp., and a gain of $8.6 million, or 21 cents a share, from settlement of certain pension obligations.


Yields Rise In Week
LEAD: Yields for certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds rose in the week ended yesterday.


Buffalo Hospital Revenue Bonds
LEAD: The New York State Medical Care Facilities Finance Agency yesterday offered $170 million worth of revenue bonds for Buffalo General Hospital.


A Student Is Charged With Stealing a Skull
LEAD: Syracuse University art student has been accused of taking a skull from a mausoleum and boiling it in his dormitory to prepare it for a sculpting class.
The skull possibly was that of a man who served as the Mayor of Syracuse more than 100 years ago.


Substitutes Replace Striking Jockeys at Aqueduct's Opener
LEAD: New York's regular jockeys picketed Aqueduct Race Track on opening day yesterday as a sometimes ragged crew of 24 replacement riders rode in the afternoon's nine races before a small and sometimes angry crowd of horseplayers.


UST Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UST Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
157,900,000
147,200,000
Net inc
43,900,000
35,000,000
Share earns
.77
.60
9mo sales
462,300,000
422,400,000
Net inc
122,800,000
97,300,000
Share earns
2.14
1.67


Zurn Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zurn Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
119,988,000
100,858,000
Net inc
5,608,000
4,603,000
Share earns
.46
.38
6mo sales
223,227,000
209,632,000
Net inc
10,693,000
9,289,000
Share earns
.88
.76


A Hunt Deal Is Reported
LEAD: A lawyer for Minpeco S.A., a commodities company owned by the Government of Peru, said today that Lamar Hunt had agreed to settle his portion of $132 million in damages awarded to Minpeco last August by a Federal jury in New York for $17 million.


Beethoven's 10th Is Played in London
LEAD: A reconstruction of the first movement of Beethoven's planned 10th Symphony, pieced together by an English music scholar from fragments of the composer's original manuscript and sketches, has had its premiere here to mixed reaction from music critics.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Herrington on A-Plants  The Energy Secretary acknowledged vast problems with the nuclear weapon industry and told of his efforts to address them.
Page A16.
Delay for Gene Therapy  The head of the National Institutes of Health, citing ''unresolved questions,'' said he was delaying experiments to transplant genes into human patients, a major step toward long-awaited gene therapy.


Sundstrand Suspended by Pentagon
LEAD: The Pentagon today suspended the Sundstrand Corporation as a Government contractor, temporarily cutting the company off from new contracts because of its admission last week of procurement fraud.


Sports People; Waiting for Robinson
LEAD: Larry Brown, the San Antonio Spurs' coach, said in a conference call yesterday with National Basketball Association writers that he was optimistic that David Robinson would be released from the Navy soon, perhaps in time to play this season, which opens Nov. 4.
Robinson's two-year tour of duty is scheduled to end in mid-May.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Marine Memorial
LEAD: Sunday, which is the fifth anniversary of the terrorist bombing at the Marine barracks in Beirut, will be marked by ceremonies at Camp Lejeune, N.C., and at Arlington Cemetery, according to Paul L. Corby, the chairman of the newly established Beirut Veterans of America.


'Don't Just Write About Us. Know Us.'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Teamsters Now Assert They Support Quayle
LEAD: The International Brotherhood of Teamsters today clarified its position on the 1988 election, saying it was endorsing Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana along with Vice President Bush.


THE WORLD SERIES: How It Happened; Victory Goes to Swiftest
LEAD: Mike Scioscia, the Los Angeles catcher, called it a ''scratch-type lineup,'' a ''mish-mush'' lineup.
They were probably two of the kinder comments made about the collection of players the Dodgers used for the fourth game of the World Series.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Walter F. Guarino has joined Albert Frank-Guenther Law as executive vice president and general manager.


Calm Is Deceptive in Berber Town in Algeria
LEAD: When rioting began in Algiers this month over food shortages and other issues, the shelves in this Berber stronghold were well stocked and the unrest seemed remote.


Review/Music; At Tully, Mostly Other Bachs
LEAD: Lincoln Center discovered the drawing power of period-instrument ensembles a few seasons ago and now offers an annual early music subseries on its Great Performers schedule.
The first of this season's presentations was a concert by Musica Antiqua Koln and the Rheinische Kantorei on Sunday evening at Alice Tully


CONGRESS STRIVES FOR DRUG ACCORD AS MEMBERS LEAVE
LEAD: House and Senate leaders struggled today to speed up a compromise on the final version of drug legislation as some frustrated lawmakers, particularly on the Senate side, abandoned the capital to campaign in their home states.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,066,299,000
920,789,000
Net inc
134,800,000
115,721,000
Share earns
.72
.62
9mo rev
3,134,928,000
2,767,612,000
Net inc
375,896,000
b334,583,000
Share earns
2.01
1.80


Constar International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constar International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
146,735,000
122,052,000
Net inc
3,073,000
c2,041,000
Share earns
.50
.30
9mo sales
424,741,000
323,862,000
Net inc
b6,427,000
c7,026,000
Share earns
.98
1.05


Pittway Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pittway Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
191,477,000
152,127,000
Net inc
10,312,000
7,796,000
Share earns
2.25
1.70
Shares outst
4,589,301
4,589,927
6mo sales
381,765,000
310,765,000
Net inc
21,590,000
16,204,000
Share earns
4.70
3.53
Shares outst
4,590,142
4,589,618


Nancy's Flub-Dubs
LEAD: The first woman to bear the title ''First Lady'' was Mary Todd Lincoln.
Maligned as a Southern sympathizer, and suffering mental strain that ultimately led to her institutionalization, she infuriated her husband by her obsession with finery acquired at public expense. ''Flub-dubs!'' President Lincoln once shouted when presented with a list of expenses for mansion furnishings and dresses.


Snap-On Tools Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Snap-On Tools Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
208,897,000
189,075,000
Net inc
27,240,000
22,249,000
Share earns
.65
.53
9mo sales
643,317,000
559,193,000
Net inc
86,151,000
64,707,000
Share earns
2.06
1.56


Rebel Attacks on the Rise in Salvador
LEAD: In a surge of guerrilla violence, leftist rebels briefly seized a southeastern town on Tuesday night and detonated two powerful car bombs in one of the capital's wealthiest neighborhoods.
At least 3 people were killed and 15 were wounded, three seriously.


Southern Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,123,919,000
2,147,499,000
Net inc
379,758,000
330,092,000
Share earns
1.22
1.10
9mo rev
5,590,904,000
5,535,823,000
Net inc
698,087,000
b503,771,000
Share earns
2.25
1.68


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanley Works (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
470,034,000
454,354,000
Net inc
25,727,000
b21,022,000
Share earns
.59
.48
Shares outst
43,214,000
43,556,000
9mo sales
1,422,799
1,304,640
Net inc
73,122,000
b60,472,000
Share earns
1.69
1.39
Shares outst
43,197,000
43,504,000


Stone &amp; Webster Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stone &amp; Webster Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
81,049,000
78,591,000
Net inc
b11,493,000
13,887,000
Share earns
1.51
1.87
9mo rev
242,482,000
235,849,000
Net inc
b29,768,000
39,660,000
Share earns
3.91
5.35


Metro Matters; 35-mm. Crime: Shooting Photos On the Subway
LEAD: Somewhere in Cedar Grove, N.J., lives a fugitive from Transit Authority justice.


Lima Journal; Miguel Dukakis for President! 'Mom' Is So Proud
LEAD: When Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis traces his fluent Spanish and his interest in Latin America to his time as an exchange student here, an elderly Peruvian woman with strong political views visibly swells with pride over how well her ''North American son'' has done.


Kaisertech Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaisertech Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
690,500,000
551,000,000
Net inc
b78,300,000
c13,400,000
Share earns
1.66
.31
9mo rev
1,769,100,000
1,579,300,000
Net inc
b166,200,000
cd406,800,000
Share earns
3.45
-


Review/Dance; Phaedra's Tragedy in 2 Retellings
LEAD: For the final week of its season, which concludes Sunday night, the Martha Graham Dance Company has introduced two more works by Miss Graham. ''Celebration,'' the 1934 stunner revived last year, is very much a plus. ''Phaedra's Dream,'' created in 1983, is something of a minus.


Carl Low Is Dead at 71; Stage and Screen Actor
LEAD: Carl Low, an actor who appeared widely on stage and in films and television, died of cancer yesterday at Nyack (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 71 years old and lived in Nyack.


Trinity Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinity Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
198,434,000
144,555,000
Net inc
5,073,000
1,064,000
Share earns
.28
.06
6mo sales
387,500,000
274,962,000
Net inc
10,160,000
2,167,000
Share earns
.56
.13


A Foundation Aide Is Arraigned in Theft Of Over $1.7 Million
LEAD: A private foundation that donates more funds to AIDS research than any other in the nation was bilked of more than $1.7 million by the manager of the foundation's major real-estate assets, the Manhattan District Attorney, said yesterday.


Judge Fatally Shot in Court; Estranged Husband Is Held
LEAD: A county judge was fatally shot in her chambers today by her estranged husband, an off-duty police officer, who fired at other officers before surrendering, the police said.


Digital Profits Are Off by 17%
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation said today that its profits fell 17 percent, to $223.4 million, for the quarter ended Oct. 1 because of lower-than-expected sales of its high-end computer systems.


Hawkeye Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawkeye Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,489,000
1,960,000
Per share
.23
.11
9mo net inc
8,074,000
b12,147,000
Per share
.75
1.14
b-Included a gain of $7,446,000 from the extinguishment of debt.


Boatmen's Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boatmen's Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
20,726,000
19,719,000
Per share
1.05
1.00
9mo net inc
62,217,000
59,837,000
Per share
3.15
3.05


Loctite Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loctite Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
106,437,000
93,982,000
Net inc
11,935,000
8,835,000
Share earns
.66
.49


Storm Leaves Misery in Its Wake


The Long Arm of a Lawsuit Arrests History
LEAD: In Robert Redford's movie, ''The Milagro Beanfield War,'' there is a wonderful symbol of how the dissemination of a free press sustains a civilized society.
A bunch of tough guys sets out to burn every copy of a township's news sheet because it has an item that a local Mr.
Big does not want Hispanic farmers to read.


Discipline and Silence for a 'New Age' Priest
LEAD: An obscure Roman Catholic priest, popular on the New Age lecture circuit but about to be silenced by the Vatican, today cast himself in the mold of Galileo, St.
Thomas Aquinas and other Catholics who have been disciplined over the centuries by the church hierarchy.


Imo Delaval Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imo Delaval Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
163,787,000
92,115,000
Net inc
8,053,000
4,680,000
Share earns
.46
.33
9mo sales
488,500,000
263,708,000
Net inc
19,294,000
b15,510,000
Share earns
1.25
1.09


Security Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
6,522,000
4,879,000
Per share
.85
.64
9mo net inc
17,458,000
13,900,000
Per share
2.30
1.82


Appeals Court to Study Drexel Claim
LEAD: A Federal appeals court yesterday blocked Federal Judge Milton Pollack from issuing any rulings in the Drexel Burnham Lambert securities fraud case while it evaluates charges by the investment firm that the judge has violated conflict of interest laws.


Cambodia Peace Plan Eludes Asian Nations
LEAD: Officials from Southeast Asian nations failed today to agree on a plan to end the 10-year-old Cambodian conflict, but the participants pledged to meet in December to try again.


CBS Records Unit to Move
LEAD: CBS Records Inc., in the first significant management shift directed by its new corporate parent, the Sony Corporation, plans to move its classical music division from New York to Hamburg, West Germany.


THE LAW: At the Bar
LEAD: Sometimes it seems that for every lawyer happy with his or her lot, there are five others wishing they were somewhere else, like off writing novels or Broadway musicals.
The fictional counterpart of these unhappy lawyers isn't Perry Mason; it's Walter Mitty.


Stake in Pennwalt
LEAD: Centaur Partners, a New York general partnership, said it had increased its stake in the Pennwalt Corporation to one million common shares, or 8.6 percent of the company.
The group, led by Melvyn J. Estrin and Abbey J. Butler, had raised its stake last week to 8.5 percent.
Pennwalt, a chemical company based in Philadelphia, earlier this month completed the sale of its worldwide pharmaceutical business.


Protesters for Homeless Enter Quayle's Office
LEAD: Police today arrested 19 demonstrators from Minnesota who crowded into Senator Dan Quayle's office on Capitol Hill to demand more aid to the homeless.


Sotheby's to Auction von Bulow Collection
LEAD: SOTHEBY'S lips are sealed, but mention its Oct. 28 and 29 sale entitled ''Property From a Private Collection'' to any serious dealer or collector and the reaction will immediately be nods or winks.
Word is out in the art and antiques world that the sale's handsome hardback catalogue shows the furniture, paintings, silver and objects belonging to Claus and Martha (Sunny) von Bulow.


In Paris, Fashion Takes On a Jaunty Air
LEAD: In the first days of the spring and summer ready-to-wear showings, several designers made their mark.
Christian Lacroix proved he was a sparkling fashion original, even without the pouf that catapulted him to fame just two years ago.
Patrick Kelly got a rousing reception on Wednesday at his first presentation here in the courtyard of the


CONGRESS PASSES FRAUD CRACKDOWN AND HOMELESS AID
LEAD: In a burst of energy created by its impending adjournment, Congress today approved in rapid succession bills to ban plastic weapons, assist the homeless, rewrite American trademark law and crack down on procurement fraud against the Government.


Review/Film; The Autumn Before Womanhood
LEAD: It would be easy to think ill of a film that equates life's great mysteries with a secret formula for tomato sauce, but in the case of ''Mystic Pizza,'' it would also be a mistake.
Though in essence this is little more than a girls' romance novel brought to life, it has been filled with heart and humor.


Review/Television; Peanuts Become Pilgrims
LEAD: ''This is America, Charlie Brown!'' plops down the Peanuts characters on the gangplank of the Mayflower.
We never know how they came to be among the Pilgrims, but that storybook conceit is nothing next to the program's most unusual feature. ''The Voyage of the Mayflower,'' the first episode in this eight-part series, is an animated history lesson for very young children, but a lesson with a surprisingly somber and realistic layer beneath its candy coating.


BankAmerica Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankAmerica Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b190,000,000
54,000,000
Per share
.97
.25
9mo net inc
b461,000,000
c1,015,000,000
Per share
2.40
-
b-Included tax credits of $45 million for the quarter and $107 million for the 9 months.


MCA Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCA Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
806,727,000
770,598,000
Net inc
54,260,000
47,347,000
Share earns
.74
.62
9mo rev
2,061,561,000
1,915,217,000
Net inc
89,202,000
115,446,000
Share earns
1.22
1.52


Lincoln Journal; Nebraska's First Man Enjoys the Last Laughs
LEAD: Bill Orr, who is married to Gov.
Kay A. Orr, went to cash a check the other day at a local bank.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.36
8.64
7.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.45
7.42
5.35
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.57
7.58
6.00
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.67
8.70
8.86
30-YR.


Constellation Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constellation Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,811,000
4,600,000
Per share
.94
.75
9mo net inc
15,328,000
12,311,000
Per share
2.48
2.02


LSB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSB Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
884,000
891,000
Per share
.55
.55
9mo net inc
2,640,000
2,713,000
Per share
1.63
1.67


New Bellevue Director Is Selected by Agency
LEAD: A Houston hospital executive was named yesterday as the new executive director of Bellevue Hospital Center, the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation announced.


American Petrofina Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Petrofina Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
696,063,000
662,525,000
Net inc
35,157,000
21,167,000
Share earns
2.66
1.60
9mo sales
1,959,222,000
1,.812,424,000
Net inc
99,955,000
69,676,000
Share earns
7.57
5.28


November Palestinian Parley
LEAD: An often-postponed special session of the Palestine National Council has been pushed back yet again and is now scheduled to be held in Algiers on Nov. 8 or Nov. 10, Palestinian officials said this week.
The officials had set the meeting for Oct. 31 but rescheduled the session so as not to interfere with a Nov.


Chemical Waste Management Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Waste Management Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
184,941,000
156,137,000
Net inc
b33,059,000
24,057,000
Share earns
.33
.24
9mo rev
482,354,000
404,989,000
Net inc
b81,825,000
63,183,000
Share earns
.82
.63


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Dauphin Deposit Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dauphin Deposit Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
10,350,000
9,183,000
Per share
.84
.74
9mo net inc
30,182,000
27,604,000
Per share
2.45
2.24


Review/Art; The Letters of Artists: Some Belles, Some Not
LEAD: ''Show and Tell: Artists' Illustrated Letters,'' at the Grey Art Gallery, is a large, subtly detailed and often amusing and revealing collection initiated and organized by Prof.
Colin Eisler. ''Illustrated letter,'' in this context, means a letter from an artist in which image takes precedence, from time to time, over text.


Rorer Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rorer Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
244,552,000
224,881,000
Net inc
15,207,000
13,571,000
Share earns
.48
.41
9mo sales
716,423,000
647,363,000
Net inc
34,932,000
31,884,000
Share earns
1.11
.97


Clorox Company reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clorox Company (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
350,744,000
302,477,000
Net inc
42,516,000
39,363,000
Share earns
.77
.72


Mass-Mailing Company Executive Is Guilty of Postal Fraud Schemes
LEAD: The president of a major mass-mailing and bill-collection company in New York City was convicted yesterday of engaging in schemes that prosecutors said defrauded the Postal Service of more than $5 million in postage between 1975 and 1985.


Kraft Reviewing Options To Philip Morris Takeover
LEAD: Kraft Inc. is undertaking an intense review of all its options before deciding what to do about the Philip Morris Companies' $11.5 billion cash takeover bid it received on Monday.


Reception Cool in Sale Of Nippon Phone Stock
LEAD: The Japanese Government sold its third huge stake in the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation today, but found that the offering created none of the frenzy of buying that resulted when it first began selling off shares of the telecommunications giant.


The Road From Racism
LEAD: How far have race relations progressed in America?


Campaign Trail; Meat and Potatoes Of Election '88
LEAD: So Michael Dukakis and George Bush have some ideological differences.
That's the least of it.
There's the culinary gap, too.
On the campaign trail, the Vice President treats room service like an Iran-contra question: with total avoidance.
Instead, he consumes inordinate quantities of pork rinds, taco salads and tuna sandwiches on Air Force Two during the day, then almost invariably eats dinner at a restaurant selected by local politicians or people on his staff, where he mingles with patrons in some impromptu campaigning.


The Dodgers' Improbable Dream Comes True
LEAD: The last pitch of the season sailed through the strike zone and seemed to freeze in time.
Orel Hershiser, his work finally done, took several steps off the mound, tilted his head back and looked into the darkened sky.
Then, suddenly, he was hoisted into the air.
He allowed himself a smile.
The night belonged to Hershiser but also to the Los Angeles Dodgers.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  Vampiring 101


Western Digital Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Digital Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Revenue
246,966,000
140,097,000
Net inc
12,854,000
b12,160,000
Share earns
.45
.43
b-Includes a tax benefit of $160,000.


A's Left to Puzzle Over Series That Didn't Add Up
LEAD: By every measurement on the field and in the stands at the Oakland Coliseum, this has been a special baseball season.
A franchise that once seemed headed to another town attracted nearly 2.3 million fans.
A team that had established the goal of a championship as far ago as spring training was chasing greatness less than a week ago.


Oil Falls in Uneasy Session As OPEC Conferees Gather
LEAD: Iran set the stage for a showdown in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries today, saying it would not allow its enemy Iraq an equal oil production quota.


Review/Opera; Lyricism and Lorengar
LEAD: The continuance of favorite singers in their mature years is something an opera house owes its artists and their public, but it requires a special imagination for repertory. ''Manon Lescaut'' was probably not the right choice for Pilar Lorengar, who has sung 13 roles in San Francisco over the last quarter-century.


Tyson May Box in U.S.
LEAD: Mike Tyson's title defense against Frank Bruno, which has shifted dates several times, appears to be heading for a change of sites.


Devils to Take On Penguins' Lemieux
LEAD: Now that Wayne Gretzky's first visit back to Edmonton as member of the Los Angeles Kings is done with, Mario Lemieux may start receiving the headlines he deserves.


Sovran Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sovran Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
61,923,000
55,660,000
Per share
1.04
.93
9mo net inc
174,964,000
157,464,000
Per share
2.94
2.66


Di Giorgio Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Di Giorgio Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
258,464,000
233,010,000
Net inc
2,478,000
c2,723,000
Share earns
.47
.32
Shares outst
5,270,000
8,572,000
9mo sales
758,087,000
700,840,000
Net inc
6,894,000
bc7,711,000
Share earns
1.17
-
Shares outst
5,881,000
8,556,000


Mueller, Paul Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mueller, Paul Co
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
19,778,000
16,871,000
Net inc
b1,127,000
c4,828,000
Share earns
.97
-
9mo sales
52,714,000
36,779,000
Net inc
b5,570,000
c6,117,000
Share earns
4.77
-


Hit-and-Run Case Envelops Several in Florida
LEAD: Thwarted by a judge's ruling that they cannot force a lawyer to name a client involved in a hit-and-run death, prosecutors ordered that sworn statements be taken today from nine people with cars similar to the one in the accident.


Equifax Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equifax Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
189,273,000
167,020,000
Net inc
9,605,000
7,217,000
Share earns
.39
.34
9mo rev
543,310,000
493,635,000
Net inc
25,536,000
21,745,000
Share earns
1.12
1.02


Nashua Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nashua Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
240,320,000
214,564,000
Net inc
8,072,000
6,460,000
Share earns
.84
.66
Shares outst
9,622,000
9,839,000
9mo sales
739,617,000
629,128,000
Net inc
24,071,000
19,457,000
Share earns
2.50
1.99
Shares outst
9,639,000
9,793,000


Perles's Reward
LEAD: Last January, Coach George Perles of Michigan State rejected a $2.2 million offer to coach the Green Bay Packers.
Yesterday, a report by the university indicated that Perles was rewarded for his loyalty to the Spartans.
In a 10-year contract, Perles has an annual salary of $105,000, plus the use of two automobiles and a country-club membership.


Discovery Engine's Cooling System Had Small Leak, NASA Reports
LEAD: One of the engines that powered the space shuttle Discovery into orbit last month developed a small cooling-system leak and will be replaced for the ship's next scheduled flight in February, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said today.


Seamen's Prices $200 Million Offer
LEAD: The Seamen's Capital Corporation yesterday priced a $200 million offering of mortgage-backed securities.


Zenith Electronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zenith Electronics Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
681,600,000
591,800,000
Net inc
3,000,000
b25,100,000
Share earns
.11
-
9mo sales
1,845,000,000
1,677,100,000
Net loss
8,700,000
23,800,000


U.S. to Investigate Black Youth's Death on S.I.
LEAD: Federal authorities said yesterday that they would look into whether there had been any civil rights violation in the death earlier this month of a black youth who was killed by a car on Staten Island.
The youth was killed shortly after he and some friends had argued with a group of white men.


Rubber Stamp Is Gone in Texas Judicial Election
LEAD: Few Texans can identify Eugene Cook, Karl Bayer, Barbara Culver or most of the 13 candidates running for six seats on the Texas Supreme Court.


First Florida Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Florida Banks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
12,449,000
11,948,000
Per share
.78
.74
9mo net inc
35,612,000
34,993,000
Per share
2.24
2.18


How It Happened; Reversal Of Roles At Plate
LEAD: The Athletics did not try to make excuses for their unproductive swinging, but Lefebvre did mention one possible reason for it.


Navy Stands Firm
LEAD: Navy Secretary William L. Ball 3d has rejected a request from Ens.
David Robinson to be released from active duty to start his professional basketball career this season.
Robinson, a 7-foot-1-inch all-American at the United States Naval Academy who played with the United States Olympic team this summer, had petitioned the Secretary to be released before completing a two-year commitment to the service in return for increasing the length of his commitment to the Naval Reserve.


Judge Upholds Riders' Actions
LEAD: A Queens Supreme Court justice yesterday upheld the right of Aqueduct Race Track's striking jockeys to organize and picket, and rejected the track's contention that the riders are staging an illegal boycott.


Michigan National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michigan National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
24,202,000
19,970,000
Per share
1.57
1.30
9mo net inc
69,727,000
53,267,000
Per share
4.55
3.49


For Children
LEAD:  Shows, Nature, Museums  STORY HOUR IN FRENCH, a program for ages 6 to 8, including picture books and old and new tales, 4 P.M. today, at the French Institute-Alliance Franc,aise, 22 East 60th Street.
Admission: $1.
Information: 355-6100, extension 215.  ''GHOSTS AND GOBLINS,'' a Lolli-Pops Concert for children by the Little Orchestra Society, directed by Dino Anagnost, with music by Saint-Saens, Ives, Prokofiev and others, 11 A.M.


Calfed Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calfed Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
42,400,000
50,600,000
Share earns
1.69
2.02
9mo net inc
117,200,000
136,400,000
Share earns
4.69
5.45
Year-ago results are restated to reflect accounting changes.


Squibb Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Squibb Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
679,500,000
561,300,000
Net inc
123,000,000
109,200,000
Share earns
1.25
1.04
9mo sales
1,921,000,000
1,563,900,000
Net inc
328,000,000
273,800,000
Share earns
3.30
2.61


Bridge
LEAD: The final of the World Team Olympiad here Friday will be between the open teams representing the United States and Austria.
The Americans will have a 20-imp carryover based on the qualifying match between the two teams.


Review/Dance; The Graham Vocabulary Of Motion
LEAD: Drama in Martha Graham's work is often associated with her reinterpretation of the legends of the past.
The real truth is that dramatic impact comes from her movement vocabulary.


Revco Will Sell Odd Lot to Riklis
LEAD: Revco D.S.
Inc., which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in July, agreed to sell its Odd Lot close-out subsidiary to the Riklis Family Corporation of New York.
Revco said in a statement that it had signed a contract to sell Odd Lot Trading Inc. to two Riklis subsidiaries, OLT-I and OLT-W, for about $37.1 million.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Wednesday about third-quarter bank earnings misstated the timing of Marine Midland Bank Inc.'s tax-loss carryforward, which affected its latest earnings.
The bank took the carryforward in the third quarter this year.


The Slow Bear
LEAD: In the morning, Soviet delegates talked at the United Nations with warm intensity and thoughtful detail of their vision of the organization - stronger, more active in peace, better prepared to prevent war, a place where all problems from disarmament through the poisoning of the air could find decent solution.


HBO &amp; Co (Atlantic, Ga) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HBO &amp; Co (Atlantic, Ga) (O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
47,612,000
44,957,000
Net inc
3,923,000
3,417,000
Share earns
.25
.15
Shares outst
15,613,000
22,602,000
9mo rev
135,826,000
126,096,000
Net inc
7,607,000
6,638,000
Share earns
.49
.29
Shares outst
15,404,000
23,040,000


Corrections
LEAD: An article in some editions on Wednesday about the disqualification of Rabbi Meir Kahane's party from the Israeli elections translated the party's name incorrectly.
The name, Kach, means ''thus'' or ''this way.''


Boeing Jet Orders
LEAD: Three foreign airlines have ordered a total of five jets, worth about $520 million, from the Boeing Company.
Qantas, Australia's international carrier, ordered two 747-400's costing an estimated $320 million.
Qantas now has eight of the latest 747's on order, with options on 17 more.
Icelandair ordered two 757-200's worth $100 million and took an option on a third.


Merger Is Set By Lloyds Unit
LEAD: Lloyds Bank P.L.C., Britain's third-largest commercial bank, said today that it had agreed to merge its financial services arm with Abbey Life Group P.L.C. in return for a majority stake in the British life insurance company.


Review/Art; An Unwavering Vision: Donald Judd at Whitney
LEAD: As welcome as it is, the Donald Judd retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art tries to do too much.
In just three relatively small galleries and one barn of a space, and with only 30 works, it sets out to argue both for the continuity and consistency of the work and for its ultimate resistance to systematic analysis.


Lonrho Shares Up On Stake Rumors
LEAD: Shares in Lonrho P.L.C., the big British conglomerate, rose in heavy trading today, spurred by persistent rumors that the Bond Corporation of Australia or some other big interest was building a stake.
More than 29 million shares changed hands on the London Stock Exchange.


Bell Atlantic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Atlantic Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,610,000,000
2,590,000,000
Net inc
341,000,000
321,800,000
Share earns
1.72
1.62
9mo rev
7,695,100,000
7,695,100,000
Net inc
1,014,200,000
955,400,000
Share earns
5.12
4.80


Sheila Scott, 61, British Aviator
LEAD: Sheila Scott, a British aviator who in 1971 became the first woman to pilot a flight circling the world by way of the North Pole in a light aircraft, died today of lung cancer, her literary agent said.
She was 61 years old.
Miss Scott, a former actress, flew her way into aviation history with more than 100 flying records, trophies and awards.


Still No Daylight For Giant Runners
LEAD: If you wonder why the Giants are struggling with a 4-3 record, playing fairly well one game and not so well the next, look no farther than the running game.
And if you wonder why the running game has been so erratic, look no farther than the health of the offensive linemen who block for the runners.


FMC Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FMC Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
798,200,000
730,000,000
Net inc
31,200,000
26,800,000
Share earns
.87
.86
Shares outst
36,000,000
39,100,000
9mo sales
2,404,800,000
2,282,800,000
Net inc
93,200,000
b175,000,000
Share earns
2.60
3.97
Shares outst
35,900,000
44,100,000


Interco Raises Payouts And Rejects Higher Bid
LEAD: Interco Inc. today rejected as inadequate the Cardinal Acquisition Corporation's sweetened buyout offer and increased dividend payouts under a restructuring program.


Bringing Musicals To Young Audiences
LEAD: They laugh uninhibitedly and they're not ashamed to cry.
They are given to frenzied applause and intermittent cheering, and on occasion they'll even talk back to the actors, so compelled are they by the drama before them.


Applied Magnetics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Magnetics Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
87,217,000
64,589,000
Net inc
6,656,000
5,483,000
Share earns
.43
.35
Yr sales
293,024,000
211,940,000
Net inc
23,731,000
15,911,000
Share earns
1.54
1.10


Court Upholds Resident Rule For the Police
LEAD: New York State's highest court upheld a rule yesterday requiring New York City firefighters, police officers and jail guards to live in the city or one of six nearby New York counties.


Ettore Rella Dies at 81; Wrote Dramas in Verse
LEAD: Ettore Rella, a poet and playwright who championed the use of verse in the theater, died of a stroke on Sunday at Columbia Memorial Hospital in Hudson, N.Y.
He was 81 years old and lived in Hudson.


New York Times Co. Profit Falls 18.1% on Decline in Ads
LEAD: The New York Times Company reported yesterday that, largely because of a slump in advertising volume, its third-quarter earnings declined 18.1 percent, to $26.7 million, or 33 cents a share, on consolidated revenues of $404.1 million.


Glenfed Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenfed Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
31,446,000
b44,112,000
Share earns
1.07
1.50
b-Includes tax benefits of $9,475,000.
The company said effective July 1, it changed its method of accounting for non-refundable fees and costs associated with originating loans to comply with the FASB statement No.


Lilibet of London Visits Cousin Juanito, the King
LEAD: He calls her Lilibet. She addresses him as Juanito.


Candidates Try Their Hand at Humor
LEAD: The two men who have been calling each other terrible names sat down together tonight to eat an elegant dinner, separated only by John Cardinal O'Connor.


Books of The Times; Blunt's Treason: How, How Much, How Long?
LEAD:  Mask of Treachery  By John Costello  Illustrated. 765 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $22.95.


Pittston Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pittston Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
398,281,000
378,619,000
Net inc
b14,678,000
c4,940,000
Share earns
.38
.12
9mo sales
1,170,369,000
983,985,000
Net inc
b33,428,000
c11,006,000
Share earns
.87
.29


What to Do About Alleged Mosque Bias
LEAD: To the Editor:


Britain Moves to Limit Right of Silence for Ulster Terrorist Suspects
LEAD: The British Government moved today to limit the right to remain silent for suspects accused of terrorist crimes in Northern Ireland's courts.
The move would allow judges to draw negative inferences against defendants who refuse to talk to the police or to the courts.


Precision Castparts Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Precision Castparts Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
109,430,000
100,027,000
Net inc
8,670,000
8,914,000
Share earns
.51
.56
6mo sales
219,930,000
203,540,000
Net inc
15,470,000
17,801,000
Share earns
.92
1.10


TW Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TW Services Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
934,704,000
572,679,000
Net inc
24,890,000
18,638,000
Share earns
.51
.38
9mo rev
2,628,277,000
1,617,368,000
Net inc
49,665,000
41,520,000
Share earns
1.02
.85


New TV Spots Asssail Dukakis on Furloughs
LEAD: An independent political committee today unveiled stark television advertisements showing a victim and the sister of a victim of crimes by a prisoner who was let out on furlough under a program supported by the Democratic Presidential nominee, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Edberg and Becker Advance: Top-seeded Stefan Edberg won easily, but second-seeded Boris Becker struggled yesterday as both advanced to the quarterfinals of the Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo.
Edberg, the defending champion, won the first set against Chris Pridham easily, then used a strong service game to fight off the Canadian, who is ranked 119th in the world, 6-1, 7-5.


Chesapeake Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chesapeake Corporation (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
188,358,000
179,417,000
Net inc
14,286,000
b3,633,000
Share earns
.70
.17
9mo sales
534,378,000
509,922,000
Net inc
36,113,000
b15,002,000
Share earns
1.76
.73


Wind Is Buoying Hope For 3 Trapped Whales
LEAD: An easterly wind that was breaking pathways in Artic ice buoyed hopes today for three whales trapped in Artic ice off the coast here.


2D SUSPECT LINKED TO 1963 BOMBING
LEAD: Law-enforcement officials here and in Alabama said today that they were interviewing a second potential suspect in the racially inspired 1963 bombing of a Birmingham church in which four black children died.


Drug Makers' Profits Rise
LEAD: Two more large drug companies reported double-digit increases in net income in the third quarter.
The Squibb Corporation, based in Princeton, N.J., said net income had risen 12.6 percent from a year earlier.
Earnings at the Schering-Plough Corporation, based in Madison, N.J., increased 27.9 percent.


Talks Resume On Tax Law
LEAD: Negotiations that broke off earlier this week on legislation to make technical corrections in the 1986 tax law were on again today, reviving prospects for final action before Congress's expected adjournment on Friday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Grand Bay Hotels Ads To Robinson, Yesawich
LEAD: The Grand Bay Hotels of New York and Miami, operated by the Continental Companies, based in Miami, has named Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine of Orlando, Fla., to handle its advertising.
The total budget exceeds $1 million.
Warren/Kremer Advertising, in New York, was the former agency.


Dominion Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
20,927,000
20,074,000
Per share
.54
.52
9mo net inc
211,251,000
199,581,000
Per share
1.60
1.51


Textron Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Textron Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,736,200,000
1,721,600,000
Net inc
62,800,000
c55,100,000
Share earns
.72
.60
9mo rev
5,367,600,000
5,383,900,000
Net inc
b170,400,000
c206,300,000
Share earns
1.93
2.38


Russians in Marathon
LEAD: For the second time in the 19-year history of the event, runners from the Soviet Union will take part in the New York City Marathon on Nov. 6.
In 1982, four Soviet runners took part.
This year's runners will include Tatyana Polovinskaya, who finished fourth in the women's Olympic Marathon in Seoul, South Korea, with a Soviet record of 2 hours 27 minutes 5 seconds; Raisa Smekhnova, Alevtina Chasova and Irina Petrova.


Community Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bankshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
602,000
596,000
Per share
.36
.35


Americans Win Paris With a Cancan
LEAD: Mikhail Baryshnikov and American Ballet Theater were the toast of Paris Wednesday after they bowled over a high society audience with an effervescent cancan in a production of ''Gaite Parisienne.''


American Medical Internaional Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Medical Internaional Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
791,817,000
732,097,000
Net inc
18,255,000
c17,176,000
Share earns
.23
.19
Yr rev
3,111,542,000
2,882,440,000
Net inc
b115,301,000
d105,409,000
Share earns
1.41
1.20


Indian Point 3 Is Shut Down
LEAD: The New York Power Authority shut down its Indian Point 3 nuclear power plant early today after a small amount of radioactive water mixed with water that turns the turbine generator.
There was no public health threat, the authority said in a statement.
The release of radioactive gas into the atmosphere was less than 0.1 percent of the level permitted by the Federal Government in normal plant operations.


Japan's U.S. Property Investment Has Only Begun
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reviews/Theater; Light Banter and Dark Feelings in Gurney's 'Cocktail Hour'
LEAD: ''Nobody goes to the theater anymore,'' says Bradley, the well-off 75-year-old WASP father who presides over ''The Cocktail Hour,'' the new A. R. Gurney comedy at the Promenade.
As far as Bradley (Keene Curtis) and his wife, Ann (Nancy Marchand), are concerned, modern plays contain too much screaming and disrobing to lure them to Manhattan from their home in upstate New York.


Bank of Boston reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Boston (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
79,200,000
74,000,000
Per share
1.14
1.09
9mo net inc
239,600,000
61,000,000
Per share
3.47
.80
The impact of FASB 91 reduced per share earnings in the latest periods by 8 cents in the third quarter and 20 cents in the 9 months.


McDonald's Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonald's Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,460,656,000
1,313,083,000
Net inc
191,349,000
163,802,000
Share earns
1.02
.86
9mo rev
4,115,042,000
3,627,741,000
Net inc
494,383,000
b466,862,000
Share earns
2.62
2.45


QUAYLE PARALLEL DRAWS OBJECTIONS
LEAD: NBC has stopped broadcasting a promotional spot for a sex-and-politics mini-series, ''Favorite Son,'' after Republican officials complained that the ads seemed to be referring to Senator Dan Quayle.


Foes Save Funds for Final TV Blitz, Reports Show
LEAD: Both Vice President Bush and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts entered the final five weeks of the Presidential campaign with more than half of their $46.1 million in Federal funds.


James J. McGuire, 82, Retired Police Inspector
LEAD: James J. McGuire, a retired deputy chief inspector of the New York City Police Department and the former head of its Emergency Service Division, died of complications of kidney disease yesterday at his home in the Bronx.
He was 82 years old.


Profits Up at 2 Banking Companies
LEAD: Two major United States banking companies, the BankAmerica Corporation and the Bank of Boston Corporation, yesterday reported improved earnings in the third quarter.


Nabisco Executives Offer $17 Billion for Company
LEAD: Proposing the most expensive takeover in history, an investment group led by top executives of RJR Nabisco Inc. said yesterday that it wanted to buy the tobacco and food giant for $17 billion.
The deal, which would be done in partnership with the Wall Street firm of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., would rely almost entirely on borrowed money.


No Insurers' Windfall
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pennbancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennbancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
9,247,000
8,833,000
Per share
.70
.67
9mo net inc
26,470,000
23,533,000
Per share
2.01
1.79


Van Dorn Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Van Dorn Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
82,122,022
85,613,391
Net inc
2,751,720
3,686,154
Share earns
.33
.40
Shares outst
8,305,387
9,145,800
9mo sales
248,214,928
241,188,301
Net inc
8,876,586
7,891,649
Share earns
1.05
.87
Shares outst
8,426,625
9,142,412


Next President's Difficult Choices
LEAD: HOW much does the outlook for the American economy depend on whether George Bush or Michael S. Dukakis is the next President?
The stock market thinks it matters a great deal.
On Wednesday, the first anniversary of the market's crash, stocks fell sharply on rumors that The Washington Post would publish an article damaging to Mr.


Sundstrand Suspended by Pentagon
LEAD: The Pentagon Wednesday suspended the Sundstrand Corporation as a Government contractor, temporarily cutting off the company from new contracts because of its admission last week of procurement fraud.


T.W.A. Deal For Planes Is Expected
LEAD: Trans World Airlines Inc. will soon lease or buy as many as 60 new airplanes worth up to $1.5 billion to help revamp its aging fleet, a person close to the company said yesterday.


Bush and Dukakis Trade Accusations Over Crime
LEAD: Vice President Bush and Michael S. Dukakis traded charges of poor records on crime as they campaigned through the New York area yesterday on their way to a shared stage at the Alfred E. Smith Memorial Dinner of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese.


Review/Film; The Forked Tongue of Ken Russell
LEAD: Not a worm is left unturned in Ken Russell's buoyant, mischievous and predictably overwrought new film, loosely based on the last novel by the author of ''Dracula,'' Bram Stoker. ''The Lair of the White Worm'' (from Stoker's 1911 novel, published in America under the title ''The Garden of Evil'') incorporates every imaginable worm and serpent double-entendre.


CCB Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CCB Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,014,000
4,364,000
Per share
1.00
.87
9mo net inc
14,623,000
b14,645,000
Per share
2.92
2.92
b-After a gain of $1.6 million from a change in accounting.


Marsh &amp; McLennan Companies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marsh &amp; McLennan Companies Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
562,700,000
533,700,000
Net inc
74,600,000
77,700,000
Share earns
1.04
1.04
Shares outst
71,811,000
74,688,000
9mo rev
1,728,000,000
1,632,800,000
Net inc
245,700,000
249,500,000
Share earns
3.38
3.35
Shares outst
72,666,000
74,482,000


Nuns' Protest Illuminates a Cloistered Order
LEAD: The Carmelite monastery on Route 24 here was built as a sanctuary from the turmoil of daily life, a sylvan setting where nuns could spend cloistered lives in prayer, silence and solitude.


Burlington Northern Names 2 Executives
LEAD: Burlington Northern Inc., the large railroad company, announced yesterday that it would distribute its shares in its new resources unit to holders on Dec. 31 and named new chief executives for itself and the unit.


France Plans Meeting on Chemical Weapons
LEAD: France announced today that it would hold an international conference intended to stiffen and extend a 1925 convention banning the use of chemical and biological weapons.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 452 money market mutual funds increased by $1.18 billion, to $268.76 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 127 institutional funds were up by $348.10 million, to $69.55 billion.
Those of the 223 general purpose funds were up by $325.7 million, to $85.36 billion.


Reprinted Articles
LEAD: The accompanying two articles on the Sundstrand Corporation are reprinted today because a production error resulted in the omission of several passages from the articles in some editions yesterday.


Soviets Are Reported Likely To Let Sakharov Visit U.S.
LEAD: A senior Soviet scientist has told American colleagues that Andrei D. Sakharov will probably be permitted to travel to the United States next month.
It would be the first visit to the West by the physicist and human rights campaigner.


Robert Moberly, 49, Stage and TV Actor
LEAD: Robert Moberly, a stage and television actor who appeared on Broadway and in regional theater, died of AIDS Monday in Los Angeles.
He was 49 years old.


Auditor Says Contractor Tried to Impede Search
LEAD: The procurement scheme by the Sundstrand Corporation, the Illinois military contractor that agreed last week to plead guilty to the largest military fraud in history, was designed by upper- and middle-management Sundstrand executives, the Government auditor who led Federal prosecutors to the case said.


Gillette Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gillette Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
845,700,000
776,700,000
Net inc
63,900,000
58,600,000
Share earns
.57
.51
Shares outst
110,723,000
115,545,000
9mo sales
2,613,500,000
2,300,500,000
Net inc
207,000,000
171,600,000
Share earns
1.82
1.49
Shares outst
113,445,000
115,056,000


COMPANY NEWS;
LEAD: A.&amp;P. raised its bid by $2, to $32 in cash, for each common share of Delchamps Inc., the supermarket chain, which is based in Mobile, Ala.
Delchamps, which last week rejected the previous offer, has seven million common shares outstanding, so the total takeover offer now stands at $224 million.


Dollar Off in Light Trading; Gold Rises Late in the Day
LEAD: The dollar slipped toward the lower end of its recent range in light foreign-exchange trading yesterday.


Fort Howard Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fort Howard Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
492,515,000
469,683,000
Net inc
45,801,000
45,821,000
Share earns
.68
.68
9mo sales
1,422,536,000
1,336,534,000
Net inc
129,009,000
118,438,000
Share earns
1.92
1.76


Four Sites Are Chosen For Needle Exchange
LEAD: New York City's Health Commissioner, Dr.
Stephen C. Joseph, said yesterday that four sites have been selected for his pilot plan to have drug users exchange used needles for clean ones to reduce the spread of AIDS.


As Dukakis Struggles for Comeback, States' Leaders Are Apprehensive
LEAD: As Michael S. Dukakis battles to revive his Presidential campaign, there is a palpable mood of anxiety, frustration and apprehension among the leaders of state Democratic Party organizations.


Open Positions on Short Sales Are Up 3.2% on Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that short interest on the Big Board rose by 3.2 percent in the four-week period that ended last Friday.


American Express Net Falls Despite Gains in Key Areas
LEAD: The American Express Company yesterday announced record third-quarter earnings for its travel and charge-card businesses and for its IDS Financial Services but weaker results at the American Express Bank.


Beatrice Braude, 75; Challenged Blacklist
LEAD: Dr.
Beatrice Braude, a retired professor of French and former radio producer, died Sunday of brain cancer at the Hebrew Home of Greater Washington in Rockville, Md.
She was 75 years old and lived in Washington.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Coca-Cola Co., Atlanta, said John W. Georgas would succeed Claus M. Halle, who plans to retire as president of the company's international soft-drink business as of May 31.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It has been a family business for 700 years.
That is quite a long time.''  - Prince Rainier of Monaco.  [ A4:3. ]


Review/Film; Six Hours of Dickens, With 'Little Dorrit'
LEAD: Television's mini-series have given us a taste for literary adaptations that approximate the entire content of a long work.
They've also evolved into what is virtually a new dramatic form.
They helped prepare Broadway audiences for the Royal Shakespeare Company's eight-and-a-half-hour version of Charles Dickens's ''Nicholas Nickleby'' (1981), and they prompt one to anticipate - with a good deal of excitement - Christine Edzard's six-hour adaptation of ''Little Dorrit.


Northern Trust
LEAD: The Northern Trust Corporation of Chicago, which now operates in Florida, Arizona and California as well as Illinois, will expand into Texas with the acquisition of the Concorde Bank of Dallas, a $70 million institution specializing in private banking services for the wealthy.
Northern Trust, which has $9.4 billion in assets, paid $11.8 million for Concorde, which was founded with $10 million in capital three years ago.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page picture caption on Monday about Gladys Lopez Espinoza's preparation of medicines in Matamoros, Mexico, misidentifed the shop in which she was working.
It was an herberia, or herb shop, where folk remedies are sold.
Many people cross the border to buy medicines that are not readily available in the United States.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Burmah Oil P.L.C., Swindon, England, will spend $46 million to purchase Chem-Trend Inc., a supplier of metalworking fluids and lubricants based near Detroit.


Great Western Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Western Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
68,000,000
56,000,000
Share earns
.53
.44
9mo net inc
189,000,000
198,000,000
Share earns
1.48
1.55


Auctions
LEAD:  'War of the Worlds'


Restaurants
LEAD:  The Water Club


Campaign Trail; Live, From D.C., It's Michael Dukakis
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis has agreed to a 90-minute interview with Ted Koppel on ABC next Tuesday night, part of an ambitious strategy by the Democratic Presidential nominee to step up his appearances over national television in the campaign's final weeks.


Stone Container Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stone Container Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,022,000,000
907,000,000
Net inc
89,100,000
44,500,000
Share earns
1.48
.74
9mo sales
2,762,000,000
2,324,000,000
Net inc
232,500,000
103,200,000
Share earns
3.87
1.82


Final 3 People Picked for Jury For Steinberg
LEAD: The final three members of the jury for the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg were chosen late yesterday, and opening statements are to start Tuesday.


Southern New England Teleommunications reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern New England Teleommunications (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,556,300,000
1,459,600,000
Net inc
151,800,000
138,300,000
Share earns
4.89
4.52


Jeans Executive Cleared in Threat to Judge
LEAD: A Federal jury in Manhattan acquitted the founder of Sasson Jeans, Paul Guez, of threatening the life of a bankruptcy judge.
The jury deliberated less than two hours before finding Mr.
Guez not guilty after a three-day trial.


TV Weekend; 'Jack the Ripper' Promises Solution to Mystery
LEAD: Beginning this evening and continuing on Sunday, both nights at 9, CBS is devoting four hours to a drama called ''Jack the Ripper.'' It seems we have reached the 100th anniversary of the notorious Ripper murders that took place in the East End of London from August to November 1888.
The identity of the murderer has remained secret.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Apollo Harmonies


Caterpillar Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caterpillar Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,743,000,000
2,250,000,000
Net inc
190,000,000
146,000,000
Share earns
1.87
1.47
9mo sales
7,645,000,000
5,939,000,000
Net inc
453,000,000
180,000,000
Share earns
4.46
1.82


Mattingly Draws Interest of 4 Teams
LEAD: Don Mattingly, the subject of trade rumors since he criticized Yankee management in August, is continuing to attract attention from at least two teams in each league, according to General Manager Bob Quinn.
And the Yankees are listening.


Rise in Allies' Lending to Soviets Divides U.S.
LEAD: A surge of foreign bank lending to the Soviet Union is causing sharp divisions within the Reagan Administration and deep disquiet in Congress, where the Senate has already called on the President to study the impact of the credits on national security.


N.F.L. Matchups; No Love Lost in Philadelphia When Cowboys Meet Eagles
LEAD: When the Dallas Cowboys played here last season, Buddy Ryan smacked them squarely in the face until they saw stars.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,066,299,000
920,789,000
Net inc
134,800,000
115,721,000
Share earns
.72
.62
9mo rev
3,134,928,000
2,767,612,000
Net inc
375,896,000
b334,583,000
Share earns
2.01
1.80


New York State Electric &amp; Gas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York State Electric &amp; Gas Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
311,584,000
293,988,000
Net inc
32,656,000
42,910,000
Share earns
.52
.71
9mo rev
1,003,935,000
993,375,000
Net inc
146,267,000
b143,552,000
Share earns
2.43
-


To the Victors, $108,664.77
LEAD: The Los Angeles Dodgers and the Oakland Athletics set records for winning and losing shares for World Series teams, with the winning share exceeding $100,000 for the first time.


Lions Player in Crash
LEAD: Three teen-age boys were killed and Reggie Rogers, a defensive end for the Detroit Lions, was injured seriously early yesterday in a two-vehicle crash in Pontiac, Mich.
The police said the accident occurred at an intersection when a Jeep driven by Rogers struck a car carrying the driver, Kenneth J.


Behind the Surge For Alexander's
LEAD: WITH department store sales lackluster, something else must be responsible for the rise in Alexander's Inc. stock by $12.125 a share since Oct. 7.
It closed yesterday at $75.125, up $3.875, after rising $3 on Wednesday.


Reviews/Theater; Skewers for the Political in Kramer's 'Just Say No'
LEAD: There is political satire, there is political diatribe - and then there is Larry Kramer's ''Just Say No,'' a churlish assault on just about everybody in the governmental line of fire, and others the author might accuse of being guilty by reason of relationship.
Combine beanball pitching and below-the-belt in-fighting and one might begin to have an idea of the show's aim.


Sports of The Times; Lasorda's the Man With Everything
LEAD: The scene of this fantasy is Tom Lasorda's office long after the Dodgers clinched the World Series last night.
Outside, the fans are driving off into the night, wondering how the brawny hometown heroes could lose to these Dodgers in five games.
In the office, everybody is sitting around eating linguine con vongole and listening to Lasorda talk about the Great Pasta Machine in the Sky.


Paper Says Frenchmen Flew Iraqi Missions
LEAD: French pilots flew combat missions with the Iraqi Air Force against Iran for several months in 1983 and 1984 and may have taken part in planning attacks against Iranian targets during the eight-year gulf war, a French weekly has reported.


Israel Seizes Dozens in Effort To Curb a Moslem Movement
LEAD: Trying to neutralize a powerful Moslem fundamentalist group based here, Israeli officials have imprisoned dozens of Palestinian scholars, preachers and others thought to make up its middle and lower ranks.


Digital Equipment Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Equipment Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Revenue
2,941,799,000
2,529,773,000
Net inc
223,374,000
269,942,000
Share earns
1.71
2.03


Monsanto Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monsanto Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,022,000,000
1,902,000,000
Net inc
116,000,000
100,000,000
Share earns
1.67
1.30
9mo sales
6,412,000,000
5,793,000,000
Net inc
546,000,000
392,000,000
Share earns
7.57
5.01


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; CEBA Gives Awards for '88
LEAD: CEBA, Communications Excellence to Black Audiences, presented its 1988 awards for the best advertising aimed at blacks, at a dinner last night at the New York Hilton.


Drug Smuggler Gets Life Term
LEAD: A Miami man has been sentenced to life in prison for smuggling 900 pounds of cocaine from Colombia to Louisiana by boat, the largest maritime confiscation of the drug in the state's history.


Fruit of the Loom Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fruit of the Loom Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
258,000,000
240,000,000
Net inc
15,500,000
13,500,000
Share earns
.25
.22
9mo sales
761,400,000
646,100,000
Net inc
36,400,000
b26,000,000
Share earns
.59
-


WASHINGTON TALK: The Senate; Chiles to Continue Fight Very Close to His Heart
LEAD: The legislative agendas of members of Congress are normally dominated by obligations to the interest of their party, state and constituents.
Only rarely do matters of the heart intrude on lawmakers' calendars, although that has been case of Senator Lawton Chiles of Florida in his efforts to try to reduce the number of infant deaths in


The Race for Congress; Surging Republican Threatens to Cement Two-Party System in Mississippi
LEAD: It was an old-fashioned Democratic fund-raising event - a ''beans and greens'' dinner in the local armory, where former Gov.
Bill Allain dished out the turnip greens, black-eyed peas and ham, and the white-haired women of the Young at Heart Washboard Band serenaded the 150 diners with a version of ''Happy Days Are Here Again.


Soviets Remove Restrictions On Number of Subscriptions
LEAD: After months of public outcry, the Council of Ministers has lifted restrictions on subscriptions to popular newspapers and magazines, Pravda reported today.


Bowater Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bowater Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
348,304,000
303,036,000
Net inc
40,025,000
23,010,000
Share earns
1.06
.59
9mo sales
1,043,071,000
881,804,000
Net inc
118,801,000
51,575,000
Share earns
3.16
1.35


Trustcorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trustcorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
15,200,000
12,200,000
Per share
.92
.74
9mo net inc
39,500,000
34,000,000
Per share
2.40
2.06


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Sine of Impatience
LEAD: Members of Congress, ever more impatient to go home, replaced their FREE THE 100th CONGRESS buttons yesterday with new ones bearing the legend ''Sign or Die,'' a variant on Sine Die, the Latin phrase for adjourning indefinitely.


Gerber Products Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gerber Products Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
275,783,000
256,659,000
Net inc
b21,995,000
c6,744,000
Share earns
1.11
.34
6mo sales
517,203,000
456,565,000
Net inc
b40,413,000
c14,797,000
Share earns
2.04
.75


Review/Opera; Revival of Haydn's 'Armida'
LEAD: In instrumental music, Haydn was a pathbreaker, especially in his pioneering treatment of the string quartet as a conversation among four equal voices.
In opera, he was far less adventurous, hewing fairly faithfully to the formalities of the opera-seria genre that in his lifetime was gasping its last.


Review/Film; The Case Of an Identity Crisis
LEAD: ''Without a Clue,'' opening today at the Guild and other theaters, is an appallingly witless sendup of the Sherlock Holmes-Dr.
Watson stories, based on an idea that wouldn't support a five-minute revue sketch, much less a feature film for Michael Caine and Ben Kingsley.


Dukakis Aide Resigns Over Remark on Bush
LEAD: Donna Brazile, deputy national field director of the Dukakis campaign, resigned last night after telling reporters covering the campaign that they should pursue rumors, which she did not document, about Vice President Bush's personal life.
In resigning, she said: ''Today I made certain comments which I deeply regret.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about the book ''The Cake Bible,'' by Rose Levy Beranbaum, omitted the price and the name of the publisher.
It is $25, from William Morrow &amp; Company, a subsidiary of the Hearst Corporation


Thomas &amp; Betts Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomas &amp; Betts Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
126,102,000
109,036,000
Net inc
13,866,000
12,612,000
Share earns
.82
.75
9mo sales
384,777,000
323,865,000
Net inc
44,846,000
36,567,000
Share earns
2.65
2.17


Angolan Rebel Town Tries to Mend the Maimed
LEAD: Jonathan Muco, a sad young man in a faded campaign hat, waved a small red-and-green paper flag of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola.
His wooden crutch was propped beside him, and the empty right trouser of his green military fatigues flapped as he joined with other maimed guerrillas in the rhythmical praise-singing of their leader, Jonas


5% Perpetual Stake Is Bought by Haft
LEAD: Robert H. Haft, who with his father has attempted takeovers of several leading retail companies, has acquired a minority interest in the Perpetual Financial Corporation, based in Washington.
Mr.
Haft, who purchased 5 percent of Perpetual's stock, said, ''I believe the enterprise has a bright future.


Legal Briefs
LEAD:  Unofficial Official I


Baxter International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baxter International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,708,000,000
1,585,000,000
Net inc
85,000,000
90,000,000
Share earns
.28
.31
9mo sales
5,036,000,000
4,576,000,000
Net inc
267,000,000
233,000,000
Share earns
.90
.79


Sealed Air Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sealed Air Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
85,899,000
75,154,000
Net inc
5,545,000
4,193,000
Share earns
.68
.54
9mo sales
257,005,000
223,392,000
Net inc
18,984,000
15,350,000
Share earns
2.33
1.98


Campaign Trail; Loyalty, of Sorts, To the Ticket
LEAD: With friends like Bob Kerrey, does Michael Dukakis need George Bush?


Great Lakes Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,400,000
4,800,000
Per share
1.12
1.23
9mo net inc
12,900,000
16,000,000
Per share
3.30
4.07


Two Held in Rock-Throwing From I-78 Overpasses
LEAD: A volunteer firefighter and a member of a volunteer rescue squad in New Jersey have been charged with six counts of attempted murder in connection with a series of incidents in which, the authorities say, they deliberately dropped rocks and cinder blocks onto passing cars and then rushed to the aid of the stricken motorists.


CMS Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CMS Energy Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
589,549,000
588,111,000
Net inc
66,781,000
75,417,000
Share earns
.81
.88
9mo rev
2,082,191,000
1,984,786,000
Net inc
198,374,000
159,557,000
Share earns
2.42
1.85


Dodgers Outhit and Outpitch A's to Win Series    Hatcher's homer and Orel Hershiser's pitching led Los Angeles to a 5-2 victory that won the Series, 4 games to 1. Page A19. (The New York Times/G. Paul Burnett)


Schlumberger Ltd NV reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schlumberger Ltd NV (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,235,887,000
1,221,691,000
Net inc
b112,152,000
c1,697,000
Share earns
.42
-
9mo rev
3,887,722,000
3,429,610,000
Net inc
b357,201,000
c36,840,000
Share earns
1.32
.13


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; A Hostage's Birthday
LEAD: Terry Anderson, the Associated Press bureau chief in Beirut who wastaken hostage by terrorists more than three years ago, will be 41 years old on Oct. 27.
To mark the day, a humanitarian organization called No Greater Love is circulating a birthday card, designed by the ''Doonesbury'' cartoonist, Garry Trudeau, for signatures from fellow journalists here.


A.T.&amp;T. Net Rises 16.2% In Quarter
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that its net income rose 16.2 percent in the third quarter on a 3.2 percent increase in revenues compared with the corresponding period last year.


Nynex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nynex Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,180,000,000
3,080,000,000
Net inc
338,900,000
332,100,000
Share earns
1.72
1.62
9mo rev
9,420,000,000
8,980,000,000
Net inc
972,800,000
954,000,000
Share earns
4.90
4.68


Poll Lifts Lieberman From the 'Can't Win' Depths
LEAD: Since announcing as a candidate for the Senate in February, Attorney General Joseph I. Lieberman has been considered an underdog at best.


Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
90,354,000
58,626,000
Net inc
3,936,000
2,657,000
Share earns
.67
.44
9mo sales
232,355,000
179,150,000
Net inc
12,557,000
8,648,000
Share earns
2.12
1.43


Meredith Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meredith Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
190,505,000
144,049,000
Net inc
10,659,000
b21,933,000
Share earns
.56
1.15
b-After a gain of $10,801,000 from an accounting change.


The Garbage Man
LEAD: A charge by one Stuart Piper, the executive director of the Illinois Republican State Central Committee, is a measure of the depths to which the Bush ''Presidential'' campaign has sunk.


Fleming Companies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fleming Companies Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,644,938,000
1,967,665,000
Net inc
9,418,000
12,718,000
Share earns
.35
.48
9mo sales
7,307,425,000
6,538,623,000
Net inc
44,327,000
46,624,000
Share earns
1.66
1.76


U.S. Official Praises Eastern-Bloc Changes
LEAD: The American Deputy Secretary of State said today that he had found ''major institutional change'' taking place on his latest trip through Eastern Europe.
But he acknowledged that some Bulgarian human-rights campaigners might have been arrested Wednesday because they tried to meet with him.


General Development Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Development Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
125,764,000
125,960,000
Net inc
3,278,000
5,928,000
Share earns
.30
.66
9mo rev
376,737,000
343,902,000
Net inc
b27,454,000
17,524,000
Share earns
2.98
1.96


Ex-Officer Linked to Attacks
LEAD: A former New York City police officer, serving a burglary sentence in an upstate prison, admitted today to a spree of sex attacks on women in Suffolk County, a Suffolk police spokesman said.
The former officer, David Wood, 29 years old, of Babylon, was linked to the sex offenses by a recently installed police computer.


Lafarge Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lafarge Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
427,119,000
408,356,000
Net inc
56,980,000
48,954,000
Share earns
1.19
1.15
9mo sales
976,686,000
904,381,000
Net inc
73,105,000
56,283,000
Share earns
1.56
1.24


Irony in Endive: Republicans Endorsed It First
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sun Microsystems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Microsystems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
388,469,000
1912,709,000
Net inc
20,563,000
12,932,000
Share earns
.52
.36


American Business Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Business Products Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
90,505,000
81,164,000
Net inc
3,036,000
b2,292,000
Share earns
.53
.40
9mo sales
265,240,000
242,850,000
Net inc
9,220,000
b6,842,000
Share earns
1.61
1.20


Exchange Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exchange Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
6,106,000
c4,496,000
Per share
.45
.36
9mo net inc
b17,175,000
c12,960,000
Per share
1.29
1.00
b-Included a tax credit of $736,000.
c-Included tax credits of $1,689,000 for the quarter and $2,771,000 for the 9 months.


Citizens Banking Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Banking Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,639,000
4,039,000
Per share
.69
.59
9mo net inc
13,391,000
11,667,000
Per share
1.99
1.73


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.


Time and Whittle Form Alliance
LEAD: Time Inc. has agreed to pay $185 million for a half-interest in Whittle Communications, in a striking alliance between the country's most established magazine company and an independent entrepreneurial operation based in Knoxville, Tenn.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Coach Rick Pitino has appointed Mark Jackson, last season's National Basketball Association rookie of the year, and Patrick Ewing, the 7-foot center, as co-captains of the Knicks.
After missing the first three preseason games with a bruise over his right knee, Ewing scored 27 points Wednesday night in a 95-94 exhibition game loss to the Indiana Pacers.


Warsaw Eases Its Grip on the Press
LEAD: When two journalists from The Reporter, a quiet monthly, interviewed Lech Walesa in Gdansk last month, the censors refused to allow publication, and the paper's editors declined to get pushy about it.


Monaco Journal; He's the Man Who Runs the Bank at Monte Carlo
LEAD: The chief executive officer of Monaco Inc. was urbanely pushing the merits of his ancient enterprise, which occupies a choice piece of Mediterranean seaside property about the size of Central Park.


Spritz Your Bic
LEAD: It was the handiness of it all that bound the Bic Cricket to the heart.
No more flints, no more spilling lighter fluid, no more futile presses from a feeble thumb.
It was the chic of it, too.
One former smoker still cherishes the memory of the Bic she wore slung on a leather thong around her neck.


Indiana, Michigan In Title Rivalry
LEAD: Beware the road!


Shearson Cuts Research Staff
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. has laid off about 13 percent of the investment bank's equity research staff, a spokesman for the company said yesterday.


Mobil Oil to Sell Refinery to Sohio
LEAD: The Mobil Oil Corporation has agreed to sell its refinery in Ferndale, Wash., and its interest in the Olympic Pipe Line Company to the Sohio Oil Company for $152.5 million, plus crude and product inventories.
Mobil also said it had agreed to exchange about 240 Mobil stations and 4 product terminals in Washington, Oregon and northern California for about 330 Sohio-owned and leased service stations in Florida, Michigan, and 6 Middle Atlantic and Northeastern states, plus one product terminal in Tampa,


Icons of the Wild West At Pier Antiques Show
LEAD: WESTWARD HO - the theme of this year's Fall Antiques Show at the Pier - is heralded at the entrance to the fair with a late 19th-century American icon: a covered wagon.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  CHEAP READS


Metropolitan Baedeker; Science Can Tag Along On North Shore Holiday
LEAD: For more than a century, this tiny village on the North Shore of Long Island has swung with the times, readapting itself as a center of the whaling industry, as a summer community that attracted the cream of New York society and, most recently, as a tranquil district of boutiques, antiques shops and art galleries.


Alleghany Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alleghany Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
261,900,000
263,400,000
Net inc
b14,000,000
b31,500,000
Share earns
2.21
4.89
9mo rev
731,300,000
816,400,000
Net inc
32,600,000
c48,200,000
Share earns
5.15
7.49


Imperial Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Corp of America (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b12,980,000
12,213,000
Share earns
.90
.82
9mo net inc
b30,457,000
c37,558,000
Share earns
2.12
2.53
b-Included extraordinary gains of $1,199,000, or 8 cents a share, for the quarter and $2,854,000, or 20 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Times Mirror Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Times Mirror Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
814,779,000
777,515,000
Net inc
b80,965,000
c70,600,000
Share earns
.62
.55
9mo rev
2,407,479,000
2,276,956,000
Net inc
b235,073,000
c211,787,000
Share earns
1.82
1.64


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
989,695
977,581
Per share
.41
.41
9mo net inc
1,931,415
1,887,030
Per share
.80
.79


Soft Money? No - Sewer Money
LEAD: First, let's stop calling it ''soft money.'' That's the benign-sounding term politicians give to the tens of millions of dollars flooding into the campaigns of George Bush and Michael Dukakis from fat cat donors - violating the spirit, if not the letter, of Federal contribution and spending limits.


RJR Nabisco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RJR Nabisco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,160,000,000
3,835,000,000
Net inc
355,000,000
320,000,000
Share earns
1.55
1.24
9mo sales
12,238,000,000
11,347,000,000
Net inc
982,000,000
b839,000,000
Share earns
4.14
3.24


Union Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,680,700,000
1,512,500,000
Net inc
165,000,000
b177,900,000
Share earns
1.44
1.55
9mo rev
4,902,500,000
4,414,600,000
Net inc
456,400,000
b443,200,000
Share earns
4.00
3.87


Owens &amp; Minor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Owens &amp; Minor Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
186,628,000
147,234,000
Net inc
2,188,000
1,679,000
Share earns
.26
.24
9mo sales
514,651,000
420,287,000
Net inc
6,219,000
4,387,000
Share earns
.74
.69


New President At Fiberglas
LEAD: The Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation today named Max O. Weber as president, a title that had been held by William W. Boeschenstein, the company's chairman and chief executive.


Times Square Theaters in Search of Developers


US West Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US West Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,290,000,000
2,130,000,000
Net inc
283,200,000
277,500,000
Share earns
1.55
1.46
9mo sales
6,660,000,000
6,280,000,000
Net inc
b860,000,000
750,500,000
Share earns
4.68
3.95


Estimate Panel Votes Funds for Drug Teams
LEAD: The New York City Board of Estimate voted unanimously yesterday to transfer $32.9 million from a variety of city programs to pay for a widening effort to attack the drug trade in specific neighborhoods.


Man Wired to Explosive Killed in Subway Blast
LEAD: A man with an explosive mechanism concealed under his shirt was killed yesterday afternoon when the device detonated in a Harlem subway station.


Asarco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Asarco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
499,399,000
322,059,000
Net inc
45,944,000
b227,480,000
Share earns
1.09
5.75
9mo sales
1,388,833,000
925,310,000
Net inc
134,486,000
b209,076,000
Share earns
3.19
5.76


First American Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
9,657,000
b3,997,000
Per share
-
.35
9mo net loss
4,090,000
b11,967,000
Per share
-
1.04
b-Net income  The provision for possible loan losses in the latest quarter totaled $16,360,000, compared with $500,000 for the year-ago period.


Horse Racing Notebook; Jockeys Staying Away From Rich N.Y.R.A. Mile
LEAD: The inaugural running of the first stakes race that the New York Racing Association named after itself will be run tomorrow amid one of the greatest crises in the association's history.


Citytrust Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citytrust Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,745,000
5,202,000
Per share
1.37
1.26
9mo net inc
17,215,000
15,640,000
Per share
4.12
3.78
Year-ago figures have been restated to reflect accounting changes.


MARCOS MAY FACE INDICTMENT TODAY
LEAD: A Federal prosecutor is expected to seek an indictment of Ferdinand E. Marcos as early as Friday on charges that he fraudulently acquired Manhattan real estate valued at hundreds of millions of dollars, a Reagan Administration official said today.


Harris Bankcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harris Bankcorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
28,673,000
b20,134,000
Per share
4.31
-
9mo net inc
72,572,000
17,713,000
Per share
10.89
2.66
b-Net loss  The year-ago periods reflected a $50 million special provision for possible credit losses.


GAF Backs $1.47 Billion Heyman Proposal
LEAD: After a year of on-again, off-again negotiations, the GAF Corporation said yesterday that a special committee of independent directors had accepted a $1.47 billion offer from a management group led by its chairman, Samuel J. Heyman.


A Retirement At Dow Jones
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company said yesterday that Ray Shaw, its president and chief operating officer for nine years, would take early retirement next spring for personal reasons.


Campaign Trail; Is It in His Eyes? No, It's in His Kiss
LEAD: Unlike Mr.
Kerrey, crowds in Missouri welcomed the Democratic standard-bearer with exuberance as the Dukakis bus entourage glided through Mark Twain country.
Mr.
Dukakis seemed buoyed by the reception, relaxed and - just as Kitty Dukakis and Iva Turner insist - a far more warm and cuddly fellow than he frequently appears.


No Pretoria Trip for Zairian
LEAD: In an apparent setback to Pretoria's diplomatic offensive in Africa, a visit to South Africa by Zaire's Foreign Minister, Nguza Karl-i-Bond, that had been scheduled for today was suddenly postponed.
Only hours after the South African Foreign Ministry announced the visit Wednesday night, Foreign Minister Roelof F.


Bear Stearns Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bear Stearns Companies (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
471,900,000
464,500,000
Net inc
20,500,000
26,900,000
Share earns
.22
.29
Results for the quarter reflect the change in Bear Stearns' fiscal year to June 30 from April 30.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about a ruling in the trial of Joel B. Steinberg misattributed the Constitutional guarantee of press freedom.
It is embodied in the First Amendment.


General Signal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Signal Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
444,254,000
398,983,000
Net loss
4,422,000
b18,920,000
Share earns
-
.67
9mo sales
1,296,628,000
1,180,838,000
Net inc
4,530,000
48,209,000
Share earns
.16
1.70


Alexander's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alexander's Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 30
1988
1987
Sales
110,918,000
108,052,000
Net loss
2,242,000
813,000
Yr sales
524,844,000
522,870,000
Net loss
2,545,000
b1,314,000
Share earns
-
.27
b-Net income


F.A.A. Orders Test of Takeoff Alarms
LEAD: The takeoff warning systems on almost 2,000 jetliners were ordered yesterday to be subjected to repeated tests after a survey prompted by a Boeing 727 crash in Texas last August showed that ''a significant number'' of the systems on 727's were not working properly.


Senate Approves Joining Copyright Convention
LEAD: After more than 100 years, the Senate approved American participation in the Bern copyright treaty today in an action that will help Americans protect their copyrighted material abroad.


Central &amp; South West Corp reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central &amp; South West Corp (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,512,000,000
2,425,000,000
Net inc
404,000,000
406,000,000
Share earns
3.94
3.94


Baldwin Said It Well On the Death Penalty
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Quartet With 'Lion'


First Wisconsin Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Wisconsin Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
18,800,000
16,600,000
Per share
.82
.70
9mo net inc
b113,600,000
c23,700,000
Per share
5.09
-
b-Included $57.2 million, or $2.68 per share, from the sale of the company's headquarters real estate and from income tax benefits resulting from provisions made during 1987 for less developed countries loan losses.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Art Directors Putting 3 in Hall of Fame
LEAD: MICHAEL TESCH sat in his too-small, too-cluttered office at Ally &amp; Gargano yesterday morning and screened a 1980 commercial that reflected his art director's eye.
From the opening shot, the ad evoked autumnal France - gray and brown hues, grainy film, romantic music with a mere hint of discord.
A young man asks his sultry female companion where her beautiful coat came from.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Andiamo!


Ryder System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryder System Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,267,283,000
1,161,900,000
Net inc
55,295,000
52,736,000
Share earns
.68
.65
9mo rev
3,716,133,000
3,393,041,000
Net inc
b149,260,000
141,396,000
Share earns
1.82
1.73


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1988
From '87
American Express Co.
$ 282,000,000
- 13.0
A.T.&amp;T.
587,000,000
+ 16.2
Amoco Corp.
552,000,000
+ 34.0
Baxter International Inc.
85,000,000
- 5.6
Bear Stearns Cos.


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Telesis Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,381,000,000
2,335,000,000
Net inc
318,000,000
302,000,000
Share earns
.75
.70
9mo rev
7,055,000,000
6,744,000,000
Net inc
939,000,000
800,000,000
Share earns
2.22
1.86


Review/Art; Kenji Fujita's Marriage Of Sense and Nonsense
LEAD: Kenji Fujita's new wall sculptures, on view at Luhring, Augustine &amp; Hodes gallery, combine a Minimalist love of material and physical fact with a taste for the Baroque.
They brim over with gesture and the implied movement that the Minimalists consider anathema, but they insist upon a completely legible, self-evident structure that is the opposite of Baroque.


'Debates' Are a Fraud
LEAD: To the Editor:


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inland Steel Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,016,549,000
844,874,000
Net inc
61,025,000
c5,566,000
Share earns
1.70
.06
9mo sales
3,030,950,000
2,532,586,000
Net inc
b204,539,000
c85,507,000
Share earns
5.76
2.42


All That Glitters Is Not Rolls
LEAD: The City of Beverly Hills declared a $200,000 Rolls-Royce a public nuisance Wednesday and barred its owner from parking it in the same spot on Rodeo Drive for more than an hour at a time.
Judge Edward Kakita of Superior Court issued an injunction against an art gallery owner, David Spellerberg, who parked his chauffeur-driven 1954 Rolls in the one-hour spot in front of his gallery for the last seven months.


Uneasy Mingling: When Small Talk at Parties Tackles Large Racial Issues
LEAD: When Dr.
Alvin Poussaint, associate professor of psychiatry at Harvard University, goes to certain kinds of parties, he tends to be on his guard.


Figgie International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Figgie International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
280,881,000
241,878,000
Net inc
13,537,000
10,876,000
Share earns
1.93
1.54
Shares outst
7,009,983
7,053,913
9mo sales
835,581,000
727,330,000
Net inc
40,471,000
31,385,000
Share earns
5.99
4.44
Shares outst
6,758,446
7,066,495


Lasorda's Darlings
LEAD: They were the Foreign Legion of baseball, the refugees and expatriates, the irregular army that limped and conquered, and they were led by an uncommon pitcher who sat on the bench with his eyes closed between innings and sang hymns to himself.


When Prayers Are Questioned, Not Answered
LEAD: When May Dooley was 5, her parents joined the Hendrickson Avenue Bible Church in Lynnbrook, a strict fundamentalist church.
No drinking, no dancing and lots of churching, four times weekly.
May carried a Bible to Lynnbrook High and, in her free time, passed out religious pamphlets.
If classmates found her weird, she didn't care, for she was saved and destined for the Big H.


About Real Estate; A Surge of Housing on Staten Island
LEAD: New Lane, in the Rosebank section of Staten Island, is already about a hundred years old, despite its name.
This short, scruffy road becomes a dead end at the rocky beach on the island's north shore amid a hodgepodge of worn Victorian houses and graffiti-covered industrial buildings.


CSX Sets $32 Price In Stock Buyback
LEAD: The CSX Corporation set a price of $32 on 40 million shares of stock it offered to buy back last month.
The offer was oversubscribed when it expired at midnight Tuesday, the company said.


WASHINGTON TALK:Briefing; Moving Day
LEAD: Americans have long been a mobile people, but not until 1984 did the Government officially recognize that its own employees were part of that eternal and internal migration.
In that year Congress passed a bill increasing relocation assistance to Government employees facing transfer, who now number 40,000 a year.


Hazel Hertzberg, 70, Professor and Author
LEAD: Hazel W. Hertzberg, who taught history and education at Teachers College of Columbia University and was an authority on American Indian history, died Wednesday while attending a conference in Rome.
She was 70 years old and lived in Palisades, N.Y.


Bid for RJR Nabisco Jolts Bonds
LEAD: The corporate bond market was jolted yesterday by the $17 billion leveraged buyout offer for RJR Nabisco.


A Survivor Tells of the Nightmare of Foster Care
LEAD: To the Editor:


American Express Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Express Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,700,000,000
4,200,000,000
Net inc
282,000,000
324,000,000
Share earns
.66
.74
9mo rev
16,674,000,000
12,947,000,000
Net inc
828,600,000
637,400,000
Share earns
1.94
1.44


New Prize Announced In the Humanities
LEAD: The National Endowment for the Humanities announced the Charles Frankel Prize today.
It is to honor up to five individuals each year for bringing history, literature, philosophy and other humanities disciplines to general audiences.


Taking a Closer Look At a Shakespeare Work
LEAD: A look at the roots of Shakespeare's ''Comedy of Errors'' will highlight a ''Bard-a-thon,'' sponsored by the Riverside Shakespeare Company that begins today at the Shakespeare Center, 165 West 86th Street.


Review/Theater; Out of the Ibsen Closet Comes a New 'Ghosts'
LEAD: The Roundabout Theater earns credit for turning out a production of ''Ghosts'' that, for most of the way, does not tickle the audience into unwanted laughs.
A small tribute, perhaps, but how much better can a company do today with Ibsen's sins-of-the-father drama?
Plays that arouse indignation at first sight, as ''Ghosts'' resoundingly did in 1881, have a way after a while of inviting parody.


Negotiators for House and Senate In a Virtual Accord on Drug Bill
LEAD: The House Appropriations Committee today called for $500 million in new spending for the fight against drugs as the House and Senate struggled to complete details of new drug legislation.


Leader of Camp Denies Children Were Abused
LEAD: The leader of a religious group whose daughter was killed at a camp in Oregon denied today on a television show that children were beaten or abused at the camp.


Paccar Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paccar Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
803,493,000
635,950,000
Net inc
45,961,000
29,613,000
Share earns
1.28
.83
9mo sales
2,270,004,000
1,754,741,000
Net inc
129,442,000
77,043,000
Share earns
3.61
2.15


Campaign Trail; Plenty of Questions, Too Little Help
LEAD: With the free-spirited zaniness that one often associates with San Francisco politics, the city's voters are facing the election in some turmoil.
The acting registrar of voters has decided to quit, declaring she is not in the mood to do her job anymore.


Soviets Promote Ex-Envoy Cool to U.S.
LEAD: A former Ambassador whose policy views include a conspicuous coolness toward the United States has been appointed head of an important Soviet foreign-policy panel, the Government said today.


Digital Equipment
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation has introduced the new Microvax 3300 and 3400 minicomputers, which will offer greater performance than its entry-level Microvax II systems and will replace older models in that line.
Prices for the new models start at $40,950.
The new systems will upgrade an industry favorite.


REAGAN ENVISIONS KOREA TROOP CUT
LEAD: President Reagan said today that there was a possibility that the United States would reduce its military forces in South Korea if, at some future date, they were ''no longer needed'' because of a reduction in tensions in the region.


Disciplined Black Lawyer Posthumously Reinstated to Florida Bar
LEAD: A black man who fought for almost 30 years for the right to practice law in Florida was posthumously reinstated today to the Florida bar by a unanimous State Supreme Court.


Athlone Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Athlone Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
65,439,000
44,504,000
Net inc
b12,752,000
c3,580,000
Share earns
4.82
-
9mo sales
202,095,000
156,184,000
Net inc
b23,126,000
d697,000
Share earns
8.72
.12


Gastineau Tells the Jets He Is Quitting
LEAD: Mark Gastineau of the Jets, one of the National Football League's top pass rushers, suddenly quit football today, apparently distraught because his fiancee has cancer.


U.S. Customs Officers Seize Imported Uniform Patches
LEAD: United States Customs inspectors today seized as illegal an order of 5,000 imported patches that were to have been worn by Customs inspectors commemorating the agency's 200th anniversary in 1989, the head of their union said.


Senator Proxmire's Monument
LEAD: At last, at long last, after 40 years, the United States has joined 97 other countries in a treaty outlawing genocide.
Approval should have come long ago when, with the horror of the Holocaust fresh, Harry Truman first sent the treaty to the Senate.
That approval now comes at all testifies to the tenacity of Senator William Proxmire, Democrat of


Teamsters Are Said to Scrap A Rule on Two-Thirds Vote
LEAD: The International Brotherhood of Teamsters, facing resistance to its major contracts, has abolished a decades-old requirement for a two-thirds membership vote to reject tentative accords negotiated by its officers, union officials say.


INSIDE
LEAD:  New Soviet Aide Picked


Revitalized Cabarets Seek a National Audience
LEAD: WITHIN Manhattan's fiercely competitive cabaret world, this is the triple crown weekend.
Simultaneously, Barbara Cook, Maureen McGovern and Andrea Marcovicci - three of cabaret's brightest stars - have arrived for extended engagements at, respectively, the Ballroom, Michael's Pub and the Oak Room at the Algonquin


Yugoslav Session Deflates Even the Optimists
LEAD: The three-day emergency meeting of the Communist Party Central Committee, which ended Wednesday, has disappointed Yugoslavs in general.
But for many Serbians, anger is even greater than disappointment.


State Street Boston reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* State Street Boston (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
23,789,000
20,812,000
Per share
.65
.55
9mo net inc
68,067,000
60,749,000
Per share
1.83
1.63


Colgate-Palmolive Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colgate-Palmolive Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,193,645,000
1,137,167,000
Net inc
b60,195,000
c53,130,000
Share earns
.88
.78
9mo sales
3,522,341,000
3,221,107,000
Net inc
b191,093,000
c165,635,000
Share earns
2.79
2.40


Fleet-Norstar Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fleet-Norstar Financial Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
80,665,000
69,958,000
Share earns
.80
.70
9mo net inc
234,275,000
180,315,000
Share earns
2.32
1.82


The New York Times Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* The New York Times Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
404,149,000
406,459,000
Net inc
b26,682,000
c32,597,000
Share earns
.33
.40
Shares outst
80,270,000
82,033,000
9mo rev
1,290,883,000
1,241,753,000
Net inc
b117,238,000
c117,841,000
Share earns
1.44
1.44
Shares outst
81,165,000
81,941,000


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Washington in D.C.
LEAD: A favored pastime of tourists visiting the capital has been to pose for a sidewalk photo with cardboard cutout figures of such political celebrities as President Reagan, Vice President Bush, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


Jazz Film Festival Opening
LEAD: This year's Greenwich Village Jazz Festival didn't include a film series, but the idea was only hibernating.
Bruce Ricker, the film maker who has put together the Greenwich Village film series since 1981, has assembled a more ambitious three-week program that begins this weekend at Film Forum 2, 57 Watts Street (431-1590).


Yellow Freight System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Yellow Freight System Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
537,537,000
447,542,000
Net inc
26,742,000
11,570,000
Share earns
.93
.40
9mo rev
1,492,788,000
1,300,671,000
Net inc
50,166,000
29,858,000
Share earns
1.75
1.04


Pretoria Retreats on Measure To Enforce Segregation Law
LEAD: President P. W. Botha has shelved legislation that would have increased financial penalties on blacks and other nonwhite South Africans living in residential areas that are legally reserved for whites.


ITT Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ITT Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,200,000,000
4,800,000,000
Net inc
b230,000,000
c192,000,000
Share earns
1.60
1.27
Shares outst
143,000,000
151,600,000
9mo rev
15,500,000,000
14,300,000,000
Net inc
b637,000,000
c544,000,000
Share earns
4.44
3.57


On Stage
LEAD:  Next for Epstein: 'Robbers'


Dispute on Wastes Poses Threat To Operations at Weapon Plant
LEAD: A political impasse over where to ship its radioactive wastes threatens continued operation of the Government's Rocky Flats nuclear weapon plant, already partly shut because of safety problems, officials said today.


Dining Out Guide: Pizza
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given. (Full menus are offered at all the restaurants mentioned here.)


Charles Schwab Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charles Schwab Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
98,000,000
116,300,000
Net inc
2,700,000
11,500,000
Share earns
.10
.41
9mo rev
290,000,000
340,700,000
Net inc
6,800,000
38,400,000
Share earns
.25
1.37


Review/Music; Prague Symphony's Sounds of Home
LEAD: Visiting orchestras have one of two mandates - either to bring us music we know less of and should know more, or else something that is indissolubly their own.
Much of the Prague Symphony's program at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night was all too familiar, but such pieces as Smetana's ''Moldau'' and the Dvorak Eighth Symphony become suddenly more interesting when we know that the composers and their interpreters spring from a single national source.


Review/Film; A Nice Guy Shot Down in Vietnam
LEAD: Gene Hackman, as Lieut.
Col.
Iceal Hambleton in ''Bat 21,'' radiates something not usually seen on the faces of war heroes: worry.
Hambleton, whose real story is the basis for the film, is seen as a 53-year-old Air Force strategist who was quite literally pulled off the golf course to help out with a reconnaissance mission, during which he was unexpectedly shot down in Vietnam.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, parts of two articles in some editions in Business Day on Thursday dealing with the Sundstrand Corporation were omitted.
Both stories are reprinted today on page D4.


Behind the Wave of Leveraged Buyouts, Huge Profit Potential
LEAD: It is one of the amazing facts of financial life, circa 1988.
Leveraged buyouts, once a minor factor in the takeover game, are now possible at the largest of companies, and investors are clamoring to finance such deals.
If yesterday's proposal for a $17 billion leveraged buyout of RJR Nabisco is successful, it will rank not just as the largest leveraged buyout ever, but also as the largest takeover of any kind.


Zenith Back In the Black
LEAD: The Zenith Electronics Corporation, which has come under sharp criticism from Brookhurst Partners L.P., a dissident shareholder group, today reported third-quarter net income of $3 million, in contrast to a loss of $25.1 million for the comparable period a year ago.


New York Plan to Dredge Hudson for PCB's Draws Fire
LEAD: After more than a decade of planning, state officials have developed a $40 million proposal to remove PCB's from a portion of the Hudson River near here - almost 200 miles north of New York City - and bury them on what is now a dairy farm.


2 Bribed Health Inspectors Draw Jail Terms
LEAD: Two former health inspectors were sentenced yesterday in Brooklyn to brief jail terms for accepting bribes from restaurant owners to overlook violations of the health code.


Dishonest Election Ad
LEAD: To the Editor:


Schering-Plough Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schering-Plough Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
724,400,000
664,200,000
Net inc
94,400,000
73,800,000
Share earns
.84
.63
9mo sales
2,229,500,000
2,035,800,000
Net inc
296,900,000
241,200,000
Share earns
2.65
2.06


Amoco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amoco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,900,000,000
5,800,000,000
Net inc
552,000,000
412,000,000
Share earns
2.15
1.60
9mo rev
17,900,000,000
16,700,000,000
Net inc
1,688,000,000
983,000,000
Share earns
6.56
3.84


No Profitable Ventures for Perot
LEAD: A judge in Virginia ruled today that H. Ross Perot could compete with Electronic Data Systems Inc., his former company, in ventures that make no profits but barred any profit-making ventures until after Dec. 1, 1989.


Pinnacle West Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pinnacle West Capital (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
463,383,000
392,792,000
Net inc
b55,948,000
89,492,000
Share earns
.65
1.06
9mo rev
1,100,473,000
1,009,937,000
Net inc
129,894,000
c223,160,000
Share earns
1.50
2.69


Founder of U.S. Health Sells Out for $28 Million
LEAD: When Frank Bond was a young man managing a finance company in Baltimore, he exercised at a Y.M.C.A.
After he joined a private gym that was easier to get to than the Y.M.C.A., the gym offered him $10,000 a year as an instructor-salesman. ''It seemed kind of strange that you could earn money in a gym,'' Mr.


Piero Fornasetti, 74, Artist, Dies; Created Bold Furniture and China
LEAD: Piero Fornasetti, an Italian artist and designer, died in Milan on Oct. 9.
He was 74 years old.
His son, Barnaba, said in a telephone interview yesterday that Mr.
Fornasetti had had ''heart problems.''


A Push for Peace in Korea
LEAD: Another piece of cold war orthodoxy yielded Tuesday when President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea took the podium at the United Nations.
It marked the first time that the leader of South Korea, the only country the U.N. ever went to war to protect, has ever addressed that body.
And Mr.
Roh used the occasion to launch a courageous and creative diplomatic proposal to bring peace to his peninsula, an effort worthy of the strides he has made toward democracy at home.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-13  President P. W. Botha shelved a law that would have increased financial penalties on blacks and other nonwhite South Africans living in residential areas that are legally reserved for whites.
Page A1


Institutional Investor Post
LEAD: Peter A. Derow, a former president of the CBS Publishing Group, has been named president of Institutional Investor Inc., succeeding Gilbert E. Kaplan, the company's founder, who has been chairman and president.


Tragic Night: Top Detective Looks Back
LEAD: Like most of his superiors and the 100 or so detectives in the hastily assembled task force he was supervising, Deputy Chief John V. Menken did not sleep Tuesday night - or much of Wednesday, for that matter.
He laughs wearily when asked to recall what he was doing during those awful hours.


MAN IN THE NEWS: F. Ross Johnson; A Chief Willing to Gamble
LEAD: In the world of corporate takeovers, many chief executives resist having their company acquired.
Not F. Ross Johnson, chief executive of RJR Nabisco.


Lomas Sets Price On 7-Year Notes
LEAD: The Lomas &amp; Nettleton Financial Corporation, the big mortgage banking company, yesterday offered $175 million of seven-year notes through an underwriting syndicate led by Salomon Brothers.


As Israeli Parties Denounce Bombing, Effect on Vote Worries Some
LEAD: Leaders of both major Israeli political parties today denounced the car-bomb attack that killed seven Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon on Wednesday.
Some Labor Party officials worried that the incident might affect the national elections 10 days from now by pushing some voters to the right.


Safeway Buyout: A Success Story
LEAD: The leveraged buyout is very much the fashion right now, although its critics continue to express concern that it burdens a company with too much debt and leaves it vulnerable should the economy turn sour.


Edward A. Terres, Steamship Executive, 78
LEAD: Edward A. Terres, a retired vice president of States Marine Isthmian Lines, a steamship company, died of liver cancer last Saturday at Alta Bates Hospital in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 78 years old and lived in Oakland, Calif.


Shawmut National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shawmut National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
63,200,000
b66,300,000
Per share
.85
.93
9mo net inc
176,500,000
b115,200,000
Per share
2.40
1.60
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $24.9 million from the settlement of certain pension plan obligations and the revision of acturial pension plan assumptions.


El Salvador: Policy of Deceit
LEAD: ''By most estimates, the war in El Salvador is stuck.
Unhappily, the U.S. finds itself stuck with the war.''


Antonie Stolper, Author, 97
LEAD: Antonie Stolper, an author who was active in refugee affairs during World War II, died Tuesday at her home in Alexandria, Va.
She was 97 years old.


Review/Film; Mamet's Unwiseguys
LEAD: The gofer at the Tahoe airport pumps mob-soldier Jerry (Joe Mantegna) about the identity of Jerry's elderly, aloof traveling companion.
Says Jerry with offhand cool, his eyebrow lifted a significant millimeter, ''He's the guy behind the guy behind the guy.'' The go-fer is impressed.


Lounge Lizard
LEAD: The Lounge Lizard, a jazz group, are to perform tonight and tomorrow at 8:30 and 11:30 at the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street (228-7880).
Tickets are $12.50.


Control Tower Fire Delays Flights At the Dallas-Fort Worth Airport
LEAD: An electrical fire in the control tower at Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport briefly halted flights there yesterday, causing delays, diversions and cancellations.


American Telephone &amp; Teleraph Co Inc (AT&amp;T)(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Telephone &amp; Teleraph Co Inc (AT&amp;T)(N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,746,000,000
8,474,000,000
Net inc
587,000,000
505,000,000
Share earns
.55
.47
9mo rev
25,854,000,000
24,996,000,000
Net inc
1,673,000,000
1,546,000,000
Share earns
1.56
1.42


Holly Will Consider New Tyson Foods Bid
LEAD: Holly Farms, the Memphis-based chicken company that spurned a $920 million buyout plan from its rival Tyson Foods Inc. earlier this week, said today that it would consider Tyson's increased offer of $941 million in cash.


Why Test Homes for Radon? The Risks Are Real
LEAD: To the Editor:


Curtiss-Wright Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Curtiss-Wright Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
47,583,000
55,597,000
Net inc
b8,355,000
c11,341,000
Share earns
1.68
2.33
9mo rev
124,841,000
127,776,000
Net inc
b20,397,000
c26,378,000
Share earns
4.10
5.41


Lie Tests Are Sharply Curbed
LEAD: The Labor Department issued regulations today forbidding most private employers to use lie detectors to screen job applicants and greatly restricting the use of the devices to test present employees.


Boulevard Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boulevard Bancorp Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,404,000
2,412,000
Per share
.50
.37
9mo net inc
8,459,000
7,553,000
Per share
1.27
1.14


Citizens First Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens First Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
8,167,000
6,899,000
Per share
.47
.40
9mo net inc
22,391,000
19,376,000
Per share
1.27
1.13
The per share earnings have been adjusted to reflect a 6-for-5 stock split paid in 1987.


Super Food Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Super Food Services Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Sales
493,976,059
471,046,402
Net inc
5,451,480
4,684,657
Share earns
.75
.66
Yr sales
1,573,142,404
1,534,989,140
Net inc
14,533,404
11,939,542
Share earns
2.02
1.68


Sakharov Says He Will Visit U.S.
LEAD: Andrei D. Sakharov, the physicist and human rights campaigner, announced today that he would travel to the United States next month.
The announcement means that the Soviet authorities have ended their longstanding ban on Dr.
Sakharov's travel to the West.


Sidney Reitman, Lawyer, 73
LEAD: Sidney Reitman, a labor lawyer who was active in the civil rights movement in the 1960's, died of thyroid cancer at St.
Peter's Medical Center in New Brunswick, N.J., on Wednesday.
He was 73 years old and lived in West Orange, N.J.


Donnelly Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donnelly Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
40,898,000
28,852,000
Net inc
866,000
404,000
Share earns
.15
.08


Rush Hour Tie-Up in Jersey


Leo P. Reckford, Laryngologist, 85
LEAD: Dr.
Leo P. Reckford, a laryngologist, died of heart failure Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.


York Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* York Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,569,000
1,829,000
Per share
.97
.66
The per share earnings reflect a 10 percent stock dividend paid Aug. 15, 1988.


Dollar Falls to 4-Month Low With No Move to Intervene
LEAD: The dollar sank to a four-month low yesterday against the West German mark and the Japanese yen after central banks made no move to halt its decline.


Kalman Apfel, Physician, 81
LEAD: Dr.
Kalman Apfel, a retired physician and winner of several national contract bridge titles, including the Harold S. Vanderbilt Cup in 1954, died of a heart attack Tuesday at his home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 81 years old.


Duramed Pharmaceuticals Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duramed Pharmaceuticals Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
7,186,000
3,962,000
Net inc
127,000
b2,363,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo sales
17,267,000
15,176,000
Net loss
1,674,000
1,841,000
b-Net loss


Piniella, Mariners To Talk
LEAD: Lou Piniella said today that he was still undecided about the managerial opening with the Seattle Mariners but that he intends to confer either this weekend or early next week with Woody Woodward, the team's general manager.


Dukakis, in TV Ads, Strikes Back in Kind
LEAD: After taking weeks of pounding from negative advertising by the campaign of Vice President Bush, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts finally fought back yesterday in commercials of his own that accuse Mr.
Bush of ''dragging the truth into the gutter'' and showing ads ''full of lies.''


Cup Sailoff Is Proposed
LEAD: An informal courthouse meeting in New York on Wednesday among attorneys representing yachtsmen from the last America's Cup series has produced a proposal to cancel results of last month's match in San Diego and resail the series next year.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
New Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1988
From '87
Brunswick Corp.
$ 43,200,000
+ 0.9
Honeywell Inc.
(22,200,000)
-
Knight-Ridder Inc.
32,000,000
- 4.2
Marion Laboratories Inc.
48,100,000
+ 37.8
New England Electric System
37,200,000
- 4.1
Northern Telecom Ltd.


Cobe Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cobe Laboratories Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
54,841,000
46,775,000
Net inc
2,278,000
1,995,000
Share earns
.35
.30
9mo sales
167,210,000
139,225,000
Net inc
8,784,000
6,815,000
Share earns
1.34
1.01


Marion Isbell, 83, Founder of Chain Of Ramada Motels
LEAD: Marion W. Isbell, who founded Ramada Inc. and built it into a 500-motel chain, has died at the age of 83.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''President and Mrs.
Marcos are obviously deeply disappointed at President Reagan's failure to prevent this treatment of a longstanding ally.'' - John J. Tigue Jr., a New York lawyer for the Marcoses.  [ 1:6. ]


Mark Twain Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mark Twain Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,545,000
b2,871,000
Per share
.48
.42
9mo net inc
9,147,000
b6,875,000
Per share
1.29
.99
b-After charges from the early extinguishment of debt of $1,000 for the quarter and $772,000 for the 9 months.


Ashton-Digital Software Pact
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Corporation and the Digital Equipment Corporation are expected to announce Monday that Ashton, the software publisher, will make its popular Dbase management program available on Digital's computer line, analysts and sources close to the company said.
The companies have scheduled a news conference Monday in Boston, but Digital and Ashton


Merrill Lynch Unit Seeks Moran, Stahl
LEAD: Merrill Lynch Realty of Stamford, Conn., signed a letter of intent to acquire Moran, Stahl &amp; Boyer Inc., a management consulting firm specializing in business relocation.
Moran, which has offices in New York City and Boulder, Colo., will operate as an independent subsidiary of Merrill Lynch Realty.


Insurer Reopens Bidding For Two Texas Banks
LEAD: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation reopened the bidding today for two troubled Texas banks that were to be acquired by Carl R. Pohlad, the Minnesota investor.


6-Year-Old Killed in Hit-and-Run Accident
LEAD: A 6-year-old Bronx girl was struck and killed yesterday evening by a hit-and-run driver as she and her father tried to cross a Bronx street, the police said.


Plaza Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plaza Commerce Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,593,000
1,032,000
Per share
.23
.16
9mo net inc
3,862,000
2,802,000
Per share
.57
.43
The year-ago results restated to reflect a 20 percent stock dividend declared as of July 29, 1988.


Charity Picks New President
LEAD: The Baron De Hirsch Fund, a Manhattan-based charitable organization, yesterday announced the election of Francis F. Rosenbaum Jr. as its president.
He is the third generation of his family to hold that position.
Mr.
Rosenbaum, a 1948 graduate of Princeton University, is a partner in the New York Stock Exchange firm of Lawrence, O'Donnell, Marcus &amp; Company.


Some Seat Belts Found Inferior (or Lethal)
LEAD: Automobile seat belts save lives.
But Government safety experts and consumer organizations say American manufacturers are using belts that are technologically obsolete, prone to improper use and outlawed in most other nations.
A result, they say, is that front seat belts give inadequate protection and that belts in rear seats actually cause deaths and injuries.


Quaker Oats Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quaker Oats Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,431,600,000
1,267,100,000
Net inc
48,700,000
41,100,000
Share earns
.61
.52


High Farm Income Seen
LEAD: Despite drought, the net cash income of farmers in 1988 is expected to nearly match or exceed last year's record $57.1 billion, unchanged from the outlook a month ago, the Agriculture Department said Thursday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the Nobel Prize in Physics misstated the position held by Melvin Schwartz at Columbia University while he was working on the prize-winning project.


Patents; Floss Has Toothpaste
LEAD: Leonard Lorch, an entrepreneur in Stanford, Calif., has invented a dental floss that has toothpaste encased between two thin ribbons of Teflon fiber.
The floss offers a way to get toothpaste between teeth.
In addition, the Teflon coating is smoother and less likely to cut gums, the inventor said.


Alliant Computer Systems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alliant Computer Systems Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
16,402,000
18,767,000
Net loss
b1,109,000
c438,000
Share earns
-
.03
9mo sales
49,142,000
54,577,000
Net loss
b8,706,000
c5,072,000
Share earns
-
.40


Confession in '63 Bombing Of Church Is Called a Fake
LEAD: State and Federal officials said today that they have disproved the confession of a man who asserted that he and a friend had taken part in the bombing of a black church here in 1963.


Heartland Express Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heartland Express Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,943,589
6,900,627
Net inc
1,306,617
1,005,820
Share earns
.26
.20
9mo rev
25,425,228
18,588,178
Net inc
3,810,596
2,755,734
Share earns
.76
.55


Seacoast Banking Co of Florida reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seacoast Banking Co of Florida (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,182,000
1,017,000
Per share
.34
.29
9mo net inc
3,336,000
3,002,000
Per share
.95
.86


Horizon Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
989,695
977,581
Per share
.41
.41
9mo net inc
1,931,415
1,887,030
Per share
.80
.79


Corrections
LEAD: A racing result listing in Sports Pages on Thursday for Wednesday's ninth race at Aqueduct carried an incorrect identification received from the track for the jockey aboard the winning horse, Le Beau Monde.
He was Dennis Cayo, not Charles Forrest.


Meritor Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meritor Financial Group
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
12,178,000
b379,624,000
9mo net loss
92,077,000
b360,153,000
b-After a tax loss of $13,190,000 for the quarter and a tax benefit of $1,308,000 for the 9 months.


People's Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* People's Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
6,597,000
16,612,000
Per share
.20
-
9mo net inc
28,446,000
46,566,000
Per share earnings not available for other periods because the bank converted to stock ownership on July 6.


Corrections
LEAD: A Company Briefs listing in Business Day on Thursday incorrectly described the sale of Ektelon, a manufacturer of racquetball equipment.
Ektelon is being sold by Browning of Morgan, Utah, to Prince Manufacturing Inc. of Princeton, N.J.


U.N. Calls on Deposed Afghan King
LEAD: The United Nations official assigned to promote a political settlement in Afghanistan has appealed to the exiled Afghan King to help form a government of national reconciliation before the Soviets complete their military withdrawal.


Grossman's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grossman's Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
321,918,000
316,795,000
Net inc
10,054,000
b12,281,000
Share earns
.38
.51
Shares outst
26,246,000
24,308,000
9mo sales
855,803,000
819,466,000
Net inc
12,649,000
b15,589,000
Share earns
.48
.72
Shares outst
26,244,000
21,539,000


MGM/UA Offer
LEAD: A $1 billion bid for MGM/UA Communications by a Monaco-based company was rejected by Kirk Kerkorian, who owns about 80 percent of the movie company, a published report Thursday said.
Elizabeth Dickenson Industries recently made the offer, the company's lawyer, Howard Weitzman, said.


AVX Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AVX Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
101,560,000
70,380,000
Net inc
7,306,000
3,933,000
Share earns
.55
.30
9mo sales
317,343,000
192,089,000
Net inc
20,057,000
11,213,000
Share earns
1.51
.85


Pinochet, in a Switch, Lets Adviser Step Down
LEAD: President Augusto Pinochet reversed himself today and accepted the resignation of his top political adviser, Interior Minister Sergio Fernandez, who opposed the opposition's calls for political change.


Earnings Rise 26.5% at Texas Instruments
LEAD: Despite a mild easing in demand for semiconductors, Texas Instruments Inc. said today that its profits rose 26.5 percent in the third quarter, to $93.7 million, or $1.03 a share, from $74.1 million, or 85 cents a share, in the same period a year ago.


Ira L. Cahn, Publisher, 69
LEAD: Ira L. Cahn, a newspaper publisher and former officer of the New York Press Association, died of complications of diabetes Oct. 15 at Martin Memorial Hospital in Stuart, Fla.
He was 69 years old and lived in Palm City, Fla.


St Paul Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St Paul Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,683,000
5,233,000
Per share
.48
.44
9mo net inc
b15,606,000
c13,837,000
Per share
1.31
1.15
b-Included an after-tax charge of $712,000 reflecting the premium paid on the early redemption of subordinated capital notes.


Keystone Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Financial Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
6,568,000
6,114,000
Per share
.54
.50
9mo net inc
15,525,000
18,422,000
Per share
1.28
1.51


Lions' Rogers Charged
LEAD: An arrest warrant was filed yesterday in Pontiac, Mich., charging the Detroit Lions defensive end, Reggie Rogers, with involuntary manslaughter in connection with a car crash in which three teen-agers were killed Thursday.
Rogers was intoxicated when he sped through a red light and slammed into the teen-agers' car early Thursday, the Oakland County Prosecutor L.


Review/Theater; Waging War on Family and Time
LEAD: The title character in Cassandra Medley's ''Ma Rose'' is an aged matriarch who finds her mind and her life are slowly slipping away.
Stubbornly she wants to hold on to her independence, but she is surrounded by relatives determined to give her a final push.
The play is the story of Ma Rose's battle, and it is also about the conflicts among three generations of women who seem destined to repeat one another's mistakes.


Facing the Mirror of German History
LEAD: ''Auschwitz remains unique.
It was perpetrated by Germans in the name of Germany.
This truth is immutable and will not be forgotten.''


Candidates in Westchester Sting Each Other in a Heated Campaign
LEAD: The 20th Congressional District race heated up this week with charges and countercharges of illegal campaign contributions and indictments.


Buffets Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Buffets Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
19,133,000
12,608,000
Net inc
1,286,000
815,000
Share earns
.21
.13
9mo sales
52,329,000
36,090,000
Net inc
2,994,000
2,338,000
Share earns
.49
.38


How Teen-Ager Adrift Sorts Out Her History
LEAD:  Home Movie  By Ellen Akins  302 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $17.95.


United Banks of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Banks of Colorado (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,500,000
4,200,000
Per share
.19
.25
9mo net inc
8,100,000
b9,600,000
Per share
.43
-
b-Net loss


Social Security Checks Will Rise 4%
LEAD: The nation's 38.4 million Social Security recipients will see their benefits increase by 4 percent starting next January, raising the average retired worker's pension by $21 a month, the Government announced today.


Gentex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gentex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
3,283,017
2,980,944
Net inc
60,669
214,417
Share earns
.01
.04
9mo sales
10,163,321
10,267,016
Net inc
442,743
945,950
Share earns
.08
.16


U.S. Interest Cost Will Rise Until Credit Improves
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York Region's Costs Up 1.4% as Apparel Surges
LEAD: A stronger-than-usual seasonal surge in apparel costs helped push September consumer prices up a sharp 1.4 percent in the New York-northeastern New Jersey area, the Labor Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday.


Knitting Factory
LEAD: Cassandra Wilson, a singer, is to lead a group and Greg Osby, a saxophonist, is to lead his ensemble Sound Theater at 9 and 11 P.M. tonight at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street (219-3055).
Tickets are $8.


Flowers Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flowers Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
170,446,000
166,920,000
Net inc
8,053,000
b9,830,000
Share earns
.23
.28
b-Includes a $1,757,000 tax credit.


Springs Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Springs Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
457,746,000
424,249,000
Net inc
3,986,000
17,582,000
Share earns
.23
.99
9mo sales
1,340,531,000
1,204,107,000
Net inc
29,327,000
39,300,000
Share earns
1.66
2.21


U.S. Bonds Drop as Dollar's Fall Continues
LEAD: Treasury bond prices fell modestly yesterday as a decline in the dollar to its lowest levels since late June revived concerns about inflation and foreign demand for American Government bonds.


Clip the Wings of the Mega-Airlines
LEAD: Ten years after the airlines were deregulated, much of what we worked to achieve is threatened by the emergence of large areas of monopoly power in serving some classes of customers on some routes.
The answer is not to re-regulate, but to curtail the practices that have enabled a few megacarriers to dominate the industry.


Shearson Risks, Rewards on RJR Nabisco
LEAD: As the advisers to RJR Nabisco's board yesterday began to weigh the fairness and viability of a proposed $17 billion buyout bid for the company, other Wall Street professionals assessed what would be the largest and most complex transaction of its kind.


Durr-Fillauer Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Durr-Fillauer Medical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
148,316,000
127,437,000
Net inc
3,361,000
c1,598,000
Share earns
.45
.20
9mo rev
430,720,000
367,405,000
Net inc
b2,853,000
c4,484,000
Share earns
.38
.57


Confusion About Gastineau
LEAD: Controversy followed Mark Gastineau, the Jets defensive end, today, one day after he suddenly retired from football because his fiancee has cancer.


Mexicans in Opposition Finding Unity Elusive
LEAD: In the Mexican presidential election in July, Cuauhtemoc Cardenas brought together a divided assortment of political groups and won 31.1 percent of the officially recorded vote.
But as he and his supporters settle in for the longer struggle against the political system in place in Mexico for the last 60 years, they are finding it more difficult to forge formal and lasting unity.


'Legs Diamond' Delayed
LEAD: The first preview of the Broadway musical ''Legs Diamond,'' starring Peter Allen, has been postponed again, this time until Tuesday night, at the Mark Hellinger Theater.
The first preview had been planned for last Tuesday but was rescheduled for last night, then was delayed again.
The problem, the producers say, is difficulty installing the sets in the theater.


Universal Furniture Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Furniture Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
119,228,000
61,395,000
Net inc
b8,371,000
c6,150,000
Share earns
.43
.34
Shares outst
19,506,267
18,044,557
9mo sales
342,735,000
170,006,000
Net inc
b21,857,000
c16,006,000
Share earns
1.12
.89
Shares outst
19,501,812
18,015,015


Jefferson Smurfit Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Smurfit Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
308,413,000
282,701,000
Net inc
37,122,000
26,057,000
Share earns
.96
.68
9mo sales
943,237,000
809,104,000
Net inc
106,202,000
60,663,000
Share earns
2.74
1.58


Confident Moynihan Starts A Full-Time Campaign
LEAD: With 17 days remaining before the election in which he is an overwhelming favorite, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan began full-time campaigning yesterday with an impassioned plea to high school students not to use drugs and ''to tell on'' those who do.


Patents; Imaging Systems Cover Heart and Blood Vessels
LEAD: Since the early 1980's, magnetic resonance imaging, or M.R.I., has become a widely used method for producing vivid images of a brain or spinal cord.


American Income Life Insurance Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Income Life Insurance Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b6,025,000
c4,458,000
Share earns
.51
.36
9mo net inc
b16,490,000
c13,727,000
Share earns
1.40
1.07
b-After capital losses of $555,000 for the quarter and $2,011,000 for the 9 months.


2 Die as Greek Cruise Ship Sinks in Collision
LEAD: A Greek cruise ship carrying 475 British students and teachers collided with a freighter and sank near shore today, officials said.
Two Greek seamen were killed and some students were feared trapped underwater, though nearly all of the passengers were reported safe.


Landmark Bancshares Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Bancshares Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,360,000
1,610,000
Per share
.52
.30
9mo net inc
8,585,000
3,857,000
Per share
1.44
.74


Schmidt a Free Agent
LEAD: For the first time in his 16-year career, Mike Schmidt is a free agent.
Schmidt, the Philadelphia third baseman with 552 home runs, filed for free agency yesterday, the first day eligible players could do so.


Feeding Winter Birds
LEAD: If you're going to feed the birds, start doing it now, before the really cold weather sets in.
Chickadees, white-throated sparrows, juncos, woodpeckers, nuthatches and grosbeaks are among the birds who don't mind the cold and don't fly South.


MARCOS AND WIFE, 8 OTHERS CHARGED BY U.S. WITH FRAUD
LEAD: Ferdinand E. Marcos was indicted yesterday in a racketeering case that includes charges that he embezzled more than $100 million from the Philippine Government and used the money to buy three buildings in New York City.


Two Dodgers For Any Era
LEAD: They'll soon be measured for World Series rings, but many of these Dodgers wouldn't have survived spring training with the Boys of Summer teams in Brooklyn.
Or with the Koufax-Drysdale team that swept the Yankees in the World Series a quarter of a century ago.
Or maybe even with Tom Lasorda's other Series champions in 1981, who stunned the


Company Blamed for Blasts
LEAD: Serious and willful safety violations were responsible for the two explosions that killed five people and injured three at a grain elevator complex in Illinois last spring, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration has concluded.


Threat on Bush Reported
LEAD: A man accused of threatening the life of Vice President Bush was ordered held without bond Thursday by a Federal magistrate.
Magistrate Stewart Elliott ruled after a hearing in United States District Court that David Allen Russell, 21 years old, was a threat to himself and others.
He is charged with sending a threatening letter through the mail after a Bush rally in Owensboro.


Patents; Curbing Nicotine Desire
LEAD: Gerald K. Ebbesen of South Newfane, Vt., won patent approval this week for a new method of relieving nicotine cravings in people trying to quit smoking.
The method is a precise mix of sugar, potassium and caffeine.
According to the patent, the mixture briefly increases a person's metabolic rate, stimulating the adrenaline-like jolt of nicotine.


Albany International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Albany International Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
107,955,000
97,691,000
Net inc
8,985,000
5,584,000
Share earns
.36
.27
Shares outst
24,971,000
20,733,000
9mo sales
336,171,000
290,770,000
Net inc
27,677,000
17,744,000
Share earns
1.12
.84
Shares outst
24,672,000
21,115,000


Mike Bell Suspended
LEAD: Mike Bell, a defensive end for the Kansas City Chiefs who served a four-month prison term in 1986 on a cocaine conviction, was placed on the team's 30-day non-football illness list yesterday for violating the National Football League's substance-abuse policy.
Bell, the second player taken in the 1979 draft after playing at Colorado State, has been a starter for Kansas City for most of his pro career.


Backwardness and Birth Control
LEAD: Which of the following apply to the women who opt to end their pregnancies?
Rich.
Poor.
Black.
White.
Single.
Married.
Catholic.
Protestant.
Jewish.
Evangelical.
Very young.
Verging on middle age.
Careless about contraception.


ISRAELI JETS BOMB REBELS IN LEBANON
LEAD: Israeli Air Force jets bombed Palestinian and pro-Iranian guerrilla positions in southern Lebanon and the Bekaa region today, two days after a car-bomb attack killed seven Israeli soldiers on the Lebanese border.


Shaw Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shaw Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Sales
288,338,000
191,517,000
Net inc
9,662,000
6,882,000
Share earns
.63
.42
Shares outst
15,296,626
16,555,366


Theodore Freedman, B'nai B'rith Official, 66
LEAD: Theodore Freedman, director of the European office of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, died yesterday of cancer at a hospice in Houston.
He was 66 years old.


Multibank Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multibank Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
7,458,000
5,726,000
Per share
.80
.60
9mo net inc
18,516,000
14,965,000
Per share
2.00
1.61


New England Electric System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Electric System (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
396,562,000
361,195,000
Net inc
37,229,000
38,807,000
Share earns
.66
.70
9mo rev
1,148,911,000
1,107,857,000
Net loss
73,882,000
b129,724,000
Share earns
-
2.35


Commerce Clearing House Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Clearing House Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
132,892,000
120,234,000
Net inc
3,417,000
6,472,000
Share earns
.19
.36
9mo rev
476,323,000
431,728,000
Net inc
47,883,000
46,151,000
Share earns
2.66
2.56


Nicaragua and Costa Rica Brace As Edge of Hurricane Slaps Coast
LEAD: Hurricane Joan haltingly approached Central America's Caribbean coast today, threatening to unleash a torrent of flash floods and mud slides.


Seymour R. Askin, Retailer, 90
LEAD: Seymour R. Askin, a former president of Askin Stores Inc., a 65-unit chain of clothing stores, mostly in the South and Southwest, died of heart failure Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 90 years old.
Mr.
Askin, whose hometown was Rochester, had been a vice president of the Central Synagogue, on Lexington Avenue at 55th


Duriron Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duriron Co Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
57,803,000
47,272,000
Net inc
4,354,000
1,345,000
Share earns
.55
.19
9mo sales
167,799,000
132,964,000
Net inc
11,059,000
3,618,000
Share earns
1.45
.51


Central Fidelity Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Fidelity Banks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
12,646,000
11,826,000
Per share
.82
.75
9mo net inc
36,848,000
35,214,000
Per share
2.38
2.24


STATE BY STATE In 'the Loneliest Country There Is,' Only Bush's Message Is Getting Across
LEAD: The old-time cowboys used to call the high plains that stretch for hundreds of miles from San Antonio to El Paso ''the loneliest country there is.''


Trump to Upgrade Eastern Shuttle
LEAD: Donald J. Trump, the billionair developer, said that he plans to spend ''tremendous amounts of money'' to upgrade Eastern Airlines' shuttle service after he takes over as its new owner and that he was considering adding such amenities as valet parking.
Mr.
Trump agreed on Oct. 12 to purchase the profitable Northeast shuttle from the Texas Air Corporation for $365 million in cash.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 32.


Duke Power Co reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duke Power Co (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,680,908,000
3,649,974,000
Net inc
519,903,000
499,535,000
Share earns
4.60
4.39


Marcoses to Surrender in New York, Lawyer Says
LEAD: A lawyer for Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos said today that the couple would surrender in New York by Oct. 31 and plead not guilty to the indictments against them.


PS Enterprise Group reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PS Enterprise Group (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,281,899,000
4,288,160,000
Net inc
521,649,000
351,861,000
Share earns
2.54
1.73


Marilyn Hirsh, Writer, 44
LEAD: Marilyn Hirsh, a teacher, author and illustrator of children's books, died of cancer Tuesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
She was 44 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Cross, A T Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cross, A T Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
56,013,649
45,435,286
Net inc
8,594,714
6,624,334
Share earns
.51
.40
9mo sales
148,026,426
118,519,365
Net inc
20,647,314
16,115,139
Share earns
1.24
.97


CONSUMER PRICES UP 0.3% AS FOOD AND CLOTHING RISE
LEAD: The Consumer Price Index rose by three-tenths of 1 percent in September as higher costs for food and clothing were largely offset by a sharp downturn in the cost of gasoline, the Labor Department reported today.


Cape Cod Bank &amp; Trust Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cape Cod Bank &amp; Trust Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,746,000
2,261,000
Per share
1.14
.93
9mo net inc
6,802,000
6,805,000
Per share
2.82
2.82


Education Systems &amp; Publicaions Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Education Systems &amp; Publicaions Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,062,000
1,617,000
Net loss
376,000
35,000
9mo sales
3,846,000
4,630,000
Net loss
632,000
b191,000
Share earns
-
.29
b-Net income


Jim Wright, Unlikely Sparkplug
LEAD: Though the Democrats controlled both houses in the 100th Congress for the first time since 1980, they still confronted a popular Republican President.
Jim Wright, newly elected Speaker of the House, refused to settle for a stalemate.
His personal conduct attracted wide, sometimes harsh, attention.


British Airways In Boeing Pact
LEAD: British Airways ordered 31 Boeing airliners today, handing the United States manufacturer a prize contract worth about $1.8 billion in the face of intense competition from the European Airbus consortium.


Honoring Agnes de Mille
LEAD: The choreographer Agnes de Mille is to receive the 1988 Mr.
Abbott Award, given by the Stage Directors and Choreographers Foundation, at a ceremony on Nov. 14 at the Astor Ballroom of the Marriott Marquis Hotel.
The award is given for accomplishment in the theater.
Previous winners include Bob Fosse, Harold Prince and Mike Nichols.


Tyson's New Promoter?
LEAD: Bill Cayton, manager of the heavyweight champion, Mike Tyson, said yesterday that the promoter Don King told him Thursday that King had signed Tyson to an exclusive four-year promotional contract and had gotten a limited power of attorney from Tyson.
Both Cayton and his attorney, Irving Gruber, said that only Cayton, and not Tyson, had the contractual right to sign a promotional agreement.


Hilliard Ensemble
LEAD: The Hilliard Ensemble, a British chamber choir that specializes in early music, is to perform Dufay's ''Homme Arme'' Mass, motets by Dufay and Ockeghem, and sacred songs from the St.
Martial Manuscript at 4 P.M. tomorrow at Corpus Christi Church, 529 West 121st Street.
Tickets are $10; students and the elderly, $7.


First Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn of Kalamazoo reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn of Kalamazoo
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
915,000
1,031,000
Share earns
.49
.56
9mo net inc
4,035,000
2,226,000
Share earns
2.19
1.22


Social Security To Pay 4% More
LEAD: The nation's 38.4 million Social Security recipients and 4.5 million recipients of Supplemental Security Income will receive an increase of 4 percent a month, starting in January, the Government announced yesterday.


Portland General Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Portland General Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
173,029,000
175,940,000
Net inc
16,692,000
15,577,000
Share earns
.36
.34
9mo rev
550,761,000
561,294,000
Net inc
58,111,000
b100,178,000
Share earns
1.26
2.17


Hard-Pressed Teachers Don't Have a Choice on Multiple Choice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quiet Jersey Town Braces for New Housing After Ruling
LEAD: Ask people in Fanwood what living here is like, and they talk about the quiet streets, the annual Easter egg hunt in the park, the volunteer fire department, the small-town feeling.


Carlisle Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carlisle Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
144,058,000
141,772,000
Net inc
6,431,000
5,364,000
Share earns
.80
.64
9mo sales
426,269,000
407,579,000
Net inc
b18,716,000
14,347,000
Share earns
2.32
1.71


Otter Tail Power Co reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Otter Tail Power Co (OTC)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
175,561,000
169,872,000
Net inc
24,725,000
22,530,000
Share earns
1.87
1.68


Genrad Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genrad Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
50,055,000
48,191,000
Net loss
9,739,000
b1,525,000
Share earns
-
.09
9mo rev
151,637,000
143,083,000
Net loss
8,015,000
38,163,000
b-Net income


Columbus's First Voyage Still Led the Way
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mt. Vernon Shelter: Ready, but Forgotten
LEAD: For the last four decades or so, the Governors of New York State have had no luck rousing anyone at City Hall here on their special hotline.
Not that some people haven't tried.


No Refuge From American Law
LEAD: Indicting a deposed head of state granted asylum in the United States may seem a poor way to treat a guest.
But according to a Federal grand jury in New York, Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos have treated their hosts shabbily, operating a racketeering enterprise out of their safe haven from the Philippine revolution.


Japan Shifts on Computer Networks
LEAD: Taking steps to resolve an increasingly bitter high-technology dispute, Japan said today that it would rescind rules that sharply limit the ability of foreign companies, particularly I.B.M., to establish private, multimillion-dollar computer networks between Japan and other nations.


Lilco Asks U.S. Panel for a License to Operate Shoreham at 25% of Power
LEAD: The Long Island Lighting Company today requested Federal approval to operate its Shoreham nuclear power plant at 25 percent of full power.


Trans Financial Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans Financial Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
694,000
329,000
Per share
.87
.38
9mo net inc
1,234,000
1,352,000
Per share
1.45
1.64


William Regan Jr., 62, Retinal Disease Expert
LEAD: Dr.
William F. Regan Jr., co-founder of the retina service at Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital, died of colon cancer Wednesday at his home in Pelham Manor, N.Y.
He was 62 years old.


Panel Again Backs Research With Tissue of Aborted Fetuses
LEAD: An expert panel convened by the Federal Government to look at the ethical, legal and scientific issues of using human fetal tissue from induced abortions for research and therapy today reaffirmed its earlier conclusion that these uses would be acceptable.


Patents; Bill Barring Royalties on Animals Dies
LEAD: As Congress prepared to adjourn this week, lawmakers decided to duck the hottest patent issue of the session: Should farmers have to pay royalties on genetically engineered animals that have been patented?


Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
170,636,000
145,338,000
Net loss
7,533,000
6,020,000


Jefferson Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
863,000
554,000
Per share
.30
.23
9mo net inc
2,351,000
1,646,000
Per share
.84
.69


Taylor Settles Suit
LEAD: A Morristown, N.J., man and Lawrence Taylor have reached an out-of-court settlement in connection with an altercation during the summer, a prosecutor said yesterday.
Lawrence Gross, 19, told Morristown Municipal Court Judge Michael J. Noonan that he was satisfied with restitution the Giants linebacker agreed to pay for allegedly kicking Gross's car Aug.


4 Die as Small Plane Crashes
LEAD: All four people aboard a single-engine airplane were killed Thursday night when it crashed 100 yards from the runway of Wings Airport in suburban Montgomery County, where it had been trying to land.
The plane, on a flight from Rochester, N.Y., went down in the front yard of a house, but no one on the ground was injured.


Barnes Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnes Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
121,363,000
113,049,000
Net inc
5,194,000
5,160,000
Share earns
.85
.80
Shares outst
5,468,245
6,427,665
9mo sales
377,293,000
343,209,000
Net inc
14,809,000
b13,191,000
Share earns
2.43
2.06
Shares outst
5,438,976
6,407,037


LIGHTEST TURNOUT IN 40 YEARS IS SEEN
LEAD: Several political analysts predicted today that despite simplified registration procedures and aggressive drives to encourage voting, the rate of turnout in the election Nov. 8 would be the lowest in at least 40 years.


North Side Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Side Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,675,000
1,540,000
Per share
.46
.42
Yr net inc
4,929,000
b7,663,000
Per share
1.34
2.08
b-After a tax credit of $1,814,000.


First Bancorp of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bancorp of Ohio (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
8,407,000
8,229,000
Per share
.77
.76
9mo net inc
25,762,000
24,773,000
Per share
2.37
2.28


Corrections
LEAD: A diagram on Sept. 30 with an article about the space shuttle Discovery misstated its speed.
In orbit about 184 statute miles above the Earth, its approximate speed was 17,500 statute miles an hour.


Soviets Draft Plans for Government Change
LEAD: The Soviet Government has issued detailed proposals for constitutional amendments to reorganize the country's top governmental bodies and carry out most of the political changes sought by the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Health Care Property Investrs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Care Property Investrs (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
13,021,000
10,059,000
Net inc
2,807,000
3,581,000
Share earns
.34
.44
9mo rev
38,510,000
29,115,000
Net inc
10,313,000
10,426,000
Share earns
1.26
1.28


About New York; Up From Havoc: Repairing Minds And Buildings
LEAD: Imagine yourself unloved and unable to love, incapable of communicating across the immense canyon dividing you from others, and forever disappointed in your rare strivings to achieve.
Imagine yourself as a despicable piece of rubbish.
Then imagine yourself as a drug fiend - because if you are an addict, that is likely the way you feel.


Health Care REIT Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Care REIT Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b2,098,364
2,570,092
Share earns
.36
.45
9mo net inc
7,678,508
7,559,068
Share earns
1.30
1.34
Shares outst
5,885,978
5,652,680
b-Includes a provision for losses of $937,000.


Bruno's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bruno's Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
467,363,000
471,715,000
Net inc
b13,975,000
10,291,000
Share earns
.17
.13
b-Includes a gain of $3,577,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Home &amp; City Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home &amp; City Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,895,000
1,671,000
Per share
.66
.58
9mo net inc
4,774,000
4,964,000
Per share
1.66
1.73


Bannister Let Go
LEAD: The Knicks got down to the required 12-player roster yesterday by releasing Ken Bannister, a 6-foot-9-inch center; Sean Couch, a 6-1 guard from Columbia, and Bill Jones, a 6-7 forward from Iowa.
Bannister was a sometime starter with the Knicks for two seasons from 1984-86, but played last season in the Continental Basketball Association.


Victoria Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Victoria Bankshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
2,353,000
b111,000
Per share
-
.02
9mo net loss
5,636,000
b1,261,000
Per share
-
.19
b-Net income


Vulcan Materials Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vulcan Materials Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
298,584,000
270,109,000
Net inc
49,369,000
b38,718,000
Share earns
4.79
3.63
9mo sales
785,740,000
676,911,000
Net inc
110,930,000
b88,831,000
Share earns
10.74
8.34


Giants' Johnson Sidelined
LEAD: Damian Johnson, who started the first six games of the season for the Giants at offensive right guard until back problems sidelined him last Sunday, will miss the game Sunday against the Falcons in Atlanta.


National Bancorp of Alaska Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Bancorp of Alaska Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
307,000
4,730,000
Per share
.05
.79
9mo net inc
5,480,000
12,390,000
Per share
.92
2.07
The company said it made $8,550,000 in loan loss provisions for the latest third quarter and $14,050,000 for the 9 months, compared with $975,000 and $2,920,000 for the year- ago quarter and 9 months, respectively.


William Campbell, 83; A U.S. Judge 48 Years
LEAD: William J. Campbell, a former chief judge of the Federal District Court in Chicago whose tenure encompassed a turbulent period in the city's law-enforcement history, died Wednesday of complications following surgery at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 83 years old and lived in Lantana,


Women in the Theater and in Music Pause to Assess Their Status; At Juilliard, Gains Are Recounted
LEAD: ''We've come together at a moment of supreme optimism, I believe, in the history of women in music,'' the flutist Eugenia Zukerman said from the stage of the Juilliard School's Paul Recital Hall at the start of a symposium on the opportunities available to women in classical music.


Bridge; Denmark wins women's title, and U.S. team leads in open final.
LEAD: Denmark won one world title at the World Team Olympiad here tonight, and the United States seemed headed for the other.


Excel Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Excel Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
60,017,000
42,798,000
Net inc
686,000
421,000
Share earns
.12
.07
9mo sales
190,815,000
139,407,000
Net inc
5,314,000
3,739,000
Share earns
.91
.64


Democrats in the House Urged to Aid Dukakis
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson has urged House Democrats to campaign vigorously for Michael S. Dukakis when Congress adjourns.


Review/Music; Beethoven and a Domesticated Strauss
LEAD: The newsworthy aspect of the current New York Philharmonic subscription program at Avery Fisher Hall, heard Thursday night, is the Philharmonic debut of the Mozart specialist Mitsuko Uchida, playing Beethoven's Piano Concerto No. 3.
But at least as interesting was the impact of the other work on the program, Richard Strauss's ''Symphonia Domestica.


Dodgers Head Home for a Party
LEAD: The Los Angeles Dodgers took their trophy and their legend home today.
But not, as the baseball snipers were suggesting, to start the awesome job of rebuilding the team that won the World Series.


Pros Likely at Games
LEAD: The International Basketball Federation will probably vote next April to allow United States professional basketball players to compete in the 1992 Olympic Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain, the secretary general of the federation said yesterday in Madrid. ''I am quite sure the congress will vote in favor of the change,'' the official, Borislav Stankovic of Yugoslavia, said at a joint news conference with Commissioner David Stern of the National Basketball Association.


F.B.I. Agent Is Held On Charge of Selling Cocaine in Chicago
LEAD: An agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation was arrested in Chicago today on charges that he sold cocaine to an undercover F.B.I. agent at a Chicago nightclub.


Brunswick Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brunswick Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
767,900,000
766,500,000
Net inc
43,200,000
42,800,000
Share earns
.50
.48
9mo sales
2,530,000,000
2,288,000,000
Net inc
b176,100,000
135,000,000
Share earns
2.00
1.52


Fast-Food Deal Gives Maine Potato a Lift
LEAD: Potatoes may be the biggest business in this part of Maine, but the french fries served at local McDonald's and Burger Kings are most likely to be from Idaho or somewhere else in the West.


United Carolina Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Carolina Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
6,115,000
5,526,000
Per share
.44
.40
9mo net inc
17,075,000
15,500,000
Per share
1.23
1.12


College Football Notebook; Rutgers Keeps Eye on Army
LEAD: Concentration upon only one opponent at a time is an almost universal message for college football players.
Yet being human, they sometimes peek ahead when their coaches are not spying.


Why Test Homes for Radon? The Risks Are Real; 'A Straw Man'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Test Cuts Fare Cheats To 3% From 30%
LEAD: Thirty percent of the people entering three East Side IRT stations were fare evaders, the Transit Authority said yesterday in releasing results of a five-day experiment studying the $60 million-a-year loss from fare beaters.


Welfare Cash Machines
LEAD: State welfare recipients participating in a demonstration project will be able to collect their benefits through cash machines starting next summer.
Plastic debit cards will be issued to recipients in Pierce County, who will use them to draw cash against their accounts from any of 140 machines.
Frank Mendizabal, a spokesman for the state's Department of Social and Health Services, called the project ''an effort to make it a more efficient system for us and the recipients.


Bemis Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bemis Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
276,823,000
226,000,000
Net inc
10,407,000
8,273,000
Share earns
.39
.31
9mo sales
798,541,000
688,337,000
Net inc
27,019,000
21,771,000
Share earns
1.01
.80


O'Connor Has Breast Surgery To Stop Cancer
LEAD: Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the Supreme Court underwent surgery here today for breast cancer.
According to a statement from the Justice, which was released this afternoon by the Court's press office, the cancer was in a ''very early form'' and the prognosis is for ''total recovery.''


Devils 6, Penguins 4
LEAD: The Devils broke up the line that produced 245 points last season but had been in a drought since the playoffs, and the move returned quick dividends tonight.


Honeywell Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Honeywell Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Sales
1,727,900,000
1,636,700,000
Net loss
b22,200,000
c69,600,000
Share earns
-
1.59
9mo sales
5,212,900,000
4,694,200,000
Net inc
b67,100,000
167,600,000
Share earns
1.58
3.76
Shares outst
42,400,826
44,532,227


Former Colonel and Unisys Are Accused in Billing Case
LEAD: A former Air Force colonel who once supervised the modernization of the service's computer network has been indicted along with the computer company that is doing the work, Federal prosecutors said today.


Marion Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marion Laboratories Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
206,181,000
170,992,000
Net inc
48,085,000
34,886,000
Share earns
.31
.22


BMC Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BMC Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
37,871,000
34,369,000
Net inc
1,127,000
1,073,000
Share earns
.21
.19
9mo sales
116,630,000
104,433,000
Net inc
2,779,000
1,687,000
Share earns
.52
.31


With End of the Session in Sight, Congress Votes to Curb Lobbying
LEAD: On what they hoped would be the last day of the 100th Congress, lawmakers on Friday passed a bill that extends restrictions on lobbying to cover former members of Congress and further restricts lobbying by former members of the executive branch.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Caring for Leather
LEAD: Leather garments and furniture have become increasingly popular, but they need special care.
When making a purchase, ask the seller for care instructions.
Before sending a costly item to a dry cleaner, ask to see results on similar garments.
If local establishments do not provide leather care, garments may be mailed to companies that specialize in such work.


Texaco Canada Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texaco Canada Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
647,000,000
700,000,000
Net inc
91,000,000
89,000,000
Share earns
.75
.73
9mo rev
1,980,000,000
2,100,000,000
Net inc
242,000,000
231,000,000
Share earns
2.00
1.91


Greater New York Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greater New York Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
6,476,000
6,062,000
Per share
.51
.48
9mo net inc
8,726,000
15,051,000
Per share
.69
-
The latest 9 months included a $9.7 million net loss on the sale of First Republicbank notes.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart about the World Series in Sports Pages on Oct. 14 misidentified the single game that holds the attendance record.
It was Game 5 of the 1959 Series, not Game 1.


First Citizens Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Citizens Bancshares Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,604,000
6,436,000
Per share
.58
.66
9mo net inc
15,631,000
19,426,000
Per share
1.62
1.99


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article yesterday about the appointment of Dr.
David I. Cohen by the Health and Hospitals Corporation in New York City misstated his new position.
He is a vice president for medical operations of the hospitals corporation.


OPEC Cut In Output Expected
LEAD: Driven by the realization that none of its members can live with low oil revenues, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is approaching an agreement to limit oil prodution next year to a ceiling of 18.5 million barrels a day, which represents a cut of at least 2.5 million barrels a day from the present level.


Gleason Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gleason Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
43,271,000
54,820,000
Net loss
6,522,000
b326,000
Share earns
-
.06
9mo sales
147,190,000
166,523,000
Net loss
7,991,000
bc2,476,000
Share earns
-
.43


INSIDE
LEAD:  Justice Has Breast Surgery


Manufacturers National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
24,377,000
19,918,000
Per share
1.62
1.34
9mo net inc
69,944,000
30,543,000
Per share
4.66
2.05
The year-ago 9 months included a net charge of $27.4 million from a reserve for less developed country risk.


COPING: With a Tax Audit
LEAD: Audit.
The word makes taxpayers nervous, and with good reason.
At best, an audit means corresponding with the Internal Revenue Service, searching through files, producing records.
At worst, it can mean paying additional taxes, the interest on those taxes and, should the I.R.S. conclude that the taxpayer deliberately filed an erroneous return, a penalty.


Botha, in Speech, Sets Off Feud With Zulu Leader
LEAD: President P. W. Botha found himself embroiled today in a bitter personal feud with the leader of South Africa's Zulus, the only prominent black figure in the country who has been willing to work within its white-controlled politics.


Second Suspect Held in Slaying Of a Patrolman
LEAD: A Bronx resident who is believed to have fired the shots that killed Police Officer Michael J. Buczek was charged with murder last night after a two-day manhunt in which scores of detectives scoured the city.


KLA Instruments Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KLA Instruments Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
38,785,000
23,451,000
Net inc
2,835,000
1,675,000
Share earns
.16
.09


FUTURES/OPTIONS Precious Metals Off Sharply On Consumer Price Report
LEAD: Precious metals futures prices fell sharply yesterday in a disappointed reaction to the Government's report of a moderate three-tenths of 1 percent rise in retail prices last month, analysts said.


Union Camp Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Camp Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
669,812,000
600,772,000
Net inc
75,052,000
56,537,000
Share earns
1.09
.77
9mo sales
1,975,277,000
1,735,128,000
Net inc
216,686,000
148,546,000
Share earns
3.11
2.02


Texas Eastern Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Eastern Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
721,100,000
691,800,000
Net inc
b61,500,000
1,800,000
Share earns
1.15
.03
9mo rev
2,461,300,000
2,659,400,000
Net inc
b111,700,000
c64,700,000
Share earns
2.10
1.22


Knight-Ridder Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knight-Ridder Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
503,126,000
475,608,000
Net inc
b31,998,000
c33,449,000
Share earns
.57
.57
9mo rev
1,508,680,000
1,441,053,000
Net inc
b110,791,000
c105,115,000
Share earns
1.94
1.79


Wagner's Best Wants More
LEAD: Terry Underwood was sitting in the bleachers, resting his sore muscles while the rest of his Wagner College teammates were doing situps and pushups.
Wind sprints had already been taken care of, and soon the Monday ritual every football player dreads, the viewing of game films, would begin.


Minnesota Power reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnesota Power (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
107,458,000
110,849,000
Net inc
18,895,000
22,011,000
Share earns
.64
.75
9mo rev
324,325,000
319,029,000
Net inc
51,149,000
58,669,000
Share earns
1.71
1.97


Rangers 4, Capitals 1
LEAD: Dr.
Jim McGee, a psychologist who has worked extensively with the Baltimore Orioles, clearly has experience counseling teams with chronic performance problems.
So it is less than astonishing to learn that he has taken on the Washington Capitals as his latest clients.


Israeli Concern Seeks State Bailout
LEAD: Executives of Koor Industries, Israel's largest industrial conglomerate, and officials of its creditor banks are increasing efforts to obtain a Government bailout to keep the heavily indebted company from foundering.
But Israeli officials have not publicly said they would engage in a bailout.


American Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Savings Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,606,000
11,555,000
Per share
.72
1.71
Shares outst
6,003,704
6,009,461
9mo net inc
23,633,000
34,529,000
Per share
3.29
5.10
The latest periods included an additional $3.5 million to the bank's loan loss provision for a loan to a Connecticut-based real estate syndication and management company.


Northern Telecom Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Telecom Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,230,000,000
1,160,000,000
Net inc
60,100,000
69,500,000
Share earns
.23
.28
9mo rev
3,820,000,000
3,550,000,000
Net inc
200,700,000
207,200,000
Share earns
.79
.82


Commerce Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
12,548,000
9,730,000
Per share
1.27
.95
9mo net inc
36,777,000
29,134,000
Per share
3.67
2.83


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 50.


North Fork Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Fork Bancorporation (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,206,000
2,634,000
Per share
.54
.50
Shares outst
7,860,339
5,279,723
9mo net inc
9,138,000
7,492,000
Per share
1.50
1.42
Shares outst
6,103,692
5,266,237


Bond of Australia Has Lonrho Stake
LEAD: The British international trading group Lonrho P.L.C., target of heavy share trading in London this week, said that Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd. of Australia and its associates had built up a stake of nearly 15 percent in it.


Blockbuster Entertainment Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Blockbuster Entertainment Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
36,648,000
12,090,000
Net inc
4,784,000
1,375,000
Share earns
.17
.08
9mo rev
83,466,000
28,391,000
Net inc
10,012,000
2,806,000
Share earns
.38
.20


Ex-Scoutmaster Gets 5 Years in Sex Case
LEAD: A former Southington Boy Scout leader has been sentenced to five years in prison for sexually molesting members of his troop.


Ferro Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ferro Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
247,726,000
214,548,000
Net inc
11,808,000
8,321,000
Share earns
.85
.60
9mo sales
748,208,000
638,173,000
Net inc
34,860,000
22,318,000
Share earns
2.54
1.62


Cyclops Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyclops Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
261,784,000
225,205,000
Net inc
5,397,000
7,995,000
Share earns
.76
1.13
9mo sales
756,704,000
-
Net inc
19,665,000
-
Share earns
2.87
-


Chris-Craft Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chris-Craft Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
58,656,000
56,356,000
Net inc
b6,418,000
747,000
Share earns
.28
.03
9mo rev
179,243,000
170,784,000
Net inc
b17,654,000
2,922,000
Share earns
.76
.11


Consolidated Fibres Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Fibres Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
8,461,000
33,675,000
Net loss
1,154,000
c300,000
Share earns
-
.17
Yr sales
106,841,000
116,811,000
Net loss
b41,000
c1,546,000
b-After a tax credit of $2,396,000.


Mending the Leaking, Crumbling Police Headquarters
LEAD: Only 15 years after the Lindsay administration opened the nation's largest and most advanced police headquarters, parts of the 3.5-acre complex in lower Manhattan have fallen into serious disrepair.


Your Money; The Right Way To Make a Will
LEAD: If there are ambiguities in a will, it may well wind up in Surrogate's Court.
And the decision there may not be what the deceased wished.


Mack Trucks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mack Trucks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
500,964,000
436,980,000
Net inc
b2,746,000
c1,299,000
Share earns
.09
-
9mo sales
1,557,572,000
1,374,724,000
Net inc
b17,987,000
d14,873,000
Share earns
.61
.49


Ramada Is Planning to Sell Its Hotels and Restaurants
LEAD: Ramada Inc., in a move to thwart the takeover attempts of the Pritzker family of Chicago, plans a restructuring that would include the sale of its hotel and restaurant businesses.


Rochester Telephone Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rochester Telephone Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
120,200,000
110,886,000
Net inc
12,909,000
10,922,000
Share earns
1.10
.92
9mo rev
352,473,000
342,054,000
Net inc
36,444,000
b36,401,000
Share earns
3.10
3.08


Fraternity Leaders Vow to Fight Abuses
LEAD: In response to increased concern about hazing and alcohol abuse on college campuses, leaders of fraternities and sororities pledged today before the State Board of Higher Education to combat those and other campus social problems.


Old Stone Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Stone Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
9,169,000
5,827,000
Per share
1.02
.53
9mo net inc
27,100,000
b13,740,000
Per share
2.96
-
b-Net loss and included a $16,177,000 charge from a change in accounting.


Soccer Star Traded for Debt
LEAD: Philips N.V., the giant Dutch electronics company, has traded $5 million in Brazilian debt to buy the contract of a soccer star who will play on a Dutch soccer team that Philips controls.


Old National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,806,000
4,242,000
Per share
.52
.45
9mo net inc
13,951,000
13,288,000
Per share
1.50
1.39


Women in the Theater and in Music Pause to Assess Their Status; Playwrights See Little Progress
LEAD: Susan Croft, the director of the New Playwrights Trust in London, was recalling a survey made in 1982 and 1983 on the status of women in the British theater. ''Out of about 600 plays put on by all the national and regional theaters surveyed,'' she said, ''42 were by women.
And 22 of those were by Agatha Christie.


Westcorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westcorp Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,382,000
2,138,000
Per share
.21
.13
9mo net inc
10,471,000
7,721,000
Per share
.64
.47


Datum Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datum Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,322,000
7,205,000
Net inc
336,000
292,000
Share earns
.12
.11
9mo sales
23,147,000
20,663,000
Net inc
893,000
761,000
Share earns
.33
.28


Consolidated Oil &amp; Gas Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Oil &amp; Gas Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,430,000
3,218,000
Net loss
b2,827,000
2,670,000
9mo rev
8,148,000
9,798,000
Net loss
b197,000
6,002,000
b-After an extraordinary gain of $393,000 for both the quarter and 9 months.


First Tennessee National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Tennessee National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
13,226,000
15,628,000
Per share
.84
1.01
9mo net inc
38,443,000
31,736,000
Per share
2.46
2.06
The company said the 1987 results have been restated to reflect the acquisition of Peoples and Union Bank in Lewisburg, Tenn.


Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
69,818,000
70,200,000
Net inc
2,375,000
4,127,000
Share earns
.12
.22


Carriage Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carriage Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Sales
23,687,000
22,381,000
Net inc
1,005,000
840,000
Share earns
.20
.17


Little Movement In Jockeys' Strike
LEAD: Negotiators for horse owners and for jockeys on strike at Aqueduct Race Track since Wednesday were described by a mediator as being ''substantially apart'' after meeting for two hours at the track last night.


BancTexas Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancTexas Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
5,591,000
b4,839,000
Per share
-
.35
9mo net loss
22,615,000
41,781,000
b-Net income  The year-ago periods included an extraordinary gain of $22 million from the financial restructuring that occurred in July 1987.


Review/Dance; The San Francisco Ballet Explores Ancient Egypt
LEAD: The San Francisco Ballet is appearing at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts for the first time since Helgi Tomasson became the company's artistic director in 1985, and the mixed bills on view this week here are obviously intended as showcases for the entire company.


DS Bancor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DS Bancor Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
902,000
1,057,000
Per share
.41
.48
9mo net inc
2,192,000
3,380,000
Per share
.99
1.52


Legg Mason Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Legg Mason Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
52,247,000
56,167,000
Net inc
1,033,000
3,033,000
Share earns
.12
.35
6mo rev
104,023,000
108,583,000
Net inc
2,307,000
5,450,000
Share earns
.27
.63


Soccer Race Remains Tight
LEAD: With less than three weeks left in the regular college soccer season, the contest for the two automatic playoff berths in the New York Region is a three-team race among Adelphi, Brooklyn College and Long Island University.


Nigerian Vows to End Military Rule
LEAD: A tank stood parked by the lawn of the presidential office complex, Dodan Barracks.
At his desk, the President wore the five stars and the crisp olive green uniform of an army general.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 2-5  Ferdinand Marcos was indicted in a racketeering case that includes charges that he, his wife and eight associates embezzled more than $100 million from the Philippine Government and used the money to buy three buildings in New York City.
Page 1  The Marcoses will surrender in New York by Oct.


Once Again, Unexpected Champions
LEAD: Was Orel Hershiser this year's Metrodome or was it Kirk Gibson?
Whoever or whatever it was, the Los Angeles Dodgers have continued a development that has held for three of the last four years.


Bush Assails Use of Chemical Weapons
LEAD: Campaigning for the vital 23 electoral votes of Ohio, Vice President Bush said today that the United States must take the lead in making sure that nations using chemical and biological weapons are punished.


Pernod Advances Bid in Ireland
LEAD: An Irish judge ruled in favor of Pernod Ricard, the French liquor concern, in its long takeover battle for the whiskey maker Irish Distillers Group P.L.C.
The court ruled that Pernod, competing with the British giant Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. for Irish Distillers, had won an irrevocable promise of a 20 percent stake in Irish Distillers held by the Irish fruit importers FII Fyffes P.L.C.


Algeria Death Toll Put at 159
LEAD: The final death toll from this month's Algerian riots was 159, the Interior Ministry announced today.
The official news agency APS quoted a communique from the ministry as saying 154 more people were wounded in the riots that erupted Oct. 4.
Youths, many of them unemployed, took to the streets to protest Government austerity policies.


I.B.M. Halts Some Japan Chip Orders
LEAD: In a move that may eventually help ease the shortage of personal computer memory chips in the United States, the International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it had canceled several memory chip orders from Japanese suppliers.


Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
756,000,000
718,900,000
Net loss
b646,800,000
c123,500,000
Share earns
-
.78
9mo rev
2,258,300,000
2,028,000,000
Net loss
b202,600,000
c259,800,000
Share earns
-
1.64


Republicans Set Sights on Montana, a Democratic Bastion
LEAD: This state has not elected a Republican to the United States Senate in more than 40 years, or to the Governor's office in more than 20 years.


LSB Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSB Bancshares Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
884,000
891,000
Per share
.55
.55
9mo net inc
2,640,000
2,713,000
Per share
1.63
1.67


U.S. Aides Seek to Quell Notion of Double-Cross
LEAD: The Reagan Administration sought today to justify the indictment of Ferdinand E. Marcos by arguing that the former longtime friend of Washington had continued to violate American laws after he arrived in the United States in 1986.


Eldorado Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldorado Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
982,000
625,000
Per share
.44
.29
9mo net inc
2,360,000
1,777,000
Per share
1.08
.84


Laurels for CUNY
LEAD: Announcements of this year's Nobel Prize winners held special significance for New Yorkers.
The selection of Gertrude Elion in medicine and Dr.
Leon Lederman in physics brings to 11 the total of Nobel laureates who have received undergraduate degrees from the City University of New York.
That's more than any other public university in the nation.


National Banc of Commerce Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Banc of Commerce Co
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,161,000
1,002,000
Per share
.31
.27
9mo net inc
3,202,000
3,014,000
Per share
.87
.82


Escape Route Begun for Trapped Whales in Alaska


Geodynamics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geodynamics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 2
1988
1987
Revenue
11,751,000
9,751,000
Net inc
759,000
727,000
Share earns
.26
.25


Great American First Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great American First Savings (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
8,283,000
22,613,000
Per share
.34
.95
9mo net inc
30,175,000
b75,054,000
Per share
1.25
2.84
b-After a loss of $1,381,000 from the early repayment of debt.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page picture caption yesterday about a protest by cloistered nuns at a New Jersey monastery misidentified a visiting prioress in some editions.
She is Mother Maria Brinkman, who traveled from Texas to support the monastery's prioress, Mother Teresa Hewitt.


Holiday Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Holiday Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
422,128,000
460,525,000
Net inc
b21,035,000
c15,374,000
Share earns
.84
.63
Shares outst
25,035,000
24,550,000
9mo rev
1,228,845,000
1,283,236,000
Net inc
b102,122,000
c126,793,000
Share earns
4.10
5.21
Shares outst
24,892,000
24,323,000


Rooney Found Guilty
LEAD: Kevin Rooney, the trainer for Mike Tyson, was found guilty Thursday in Catskill, N.Y., of third-degree assault for the beating of his estranged wife's friend, James Karkheck, on Dec. 12, 1987.
Rooney, who said he would appeal the decision, could spend a maximum of one year in the Greene County Jail.


Why Test Homes for Radon? The Risks Are Real; Illogical Advisory
LEAD: To the Editor:


Suede, George! Suede!
LEAD: Keeping ahead of the news means never sleeping.
That is what this column does: never sleeps.
That is why we can bring you up to date on President Bush's White House disaster while other press, television and polling swamis keep repeating last week's news like stuck records.


CP National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CP National Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
50,408,000
53,988,000
Net inc
4,326,000
3,532,000
Share earns
.57
.46
9mo rev
168,500,000
176,226,000
Net inc
17,010,000
15,034,000
Share earns
2.25
1.97


Progressive Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Progressive Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
312,100,000
259,400,000
Net inc
b25,800,000
c30,100,000
Share earns
.95
1.04
Shares outst
27,200,000
28,900,000
9mo rev
909,200,000
703,600,000
Net inc
b80,500,000
c83,100,000
Share earns
2.84
2.87
Shares outst
28,300,000
28,900,000


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, OCTOBER 22, 1988
LEAD:  The Economy


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Edberg and Becker Gain: Top-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden struggled to defeat Paul Chamberlin of Manhattan Beach, Calif., and second-seeded Boris Becker of West Germany played a near-perfect game in beating a countryman, Eric Jelen, in quarterfinal matches yesterday in the Seiko Super tournament in Toyko.


2 Teen-Agers Charged In Robbery and Killing
LEAD: Two teen-agers from the Bronx were accused last night of being part of a gang that robbed and killed a limousine driver and then broke into his house and raped his wife and daughter, the police reported.


'Crack House' Fire: Justice or Vigilantism?
LEAD: The working-class families on Barlow Street here used to hurry their children indoors and huddle under furniture whenever the shooting started at the nearby crack house.


Comshare Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comshare Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
18,871,400
17,330,000
Net inc
b183,000
c946,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-After a loss of $337,700 on disposal of discontinued operations.
c-Net loss


Nussbaum Tells of Being Handed Comatose Body of Lisa Steinberg
LEAD: Hedda Nussbaum has told Manhattan prosecutors that Joel B. Steinberg handed her the comatose body of Lisa Steinberg shortly before he left their Greenwich Village apartment on Nov. 1, 1987, to have dinner with a friend, top law-enforcement officials said last night.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.38
7.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.44
7.45
5.26
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.59
7.57
6.00
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.70
8.67
8.86
30-YR.


Mass for Charles Raffa
LEAD: A funeral Mass for Charles Raffa, Governor Cuomo's father-in-law, will be celebrated Monday at 10 A.M. at St.
Anastasia's Roman Catholic Church, 45-14 245th Street, Douglaston, Queens.
Viewing hours at the New Hyde Park Funeral Home, New Hyde Park, L.I., are 2 to 4:30 P.M. and 7 to 9:30 P.M. today and tomorrow.


Fastenal Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fastenal Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
8,174,487
5,567,131
Net inc
914,436
488,040
Share earns
.19
.12
9mo sales
22,170,638
14,629,959
Net inc
2,286,445
1,232,942
Share earns
.48
.31


Lincoln Telecommunications Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Telecommunications Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
46,420,000
43,262,000
Net inc
7,006,000
5,787,000
Share earns
.83
.64
9mo rev
137,476,000
125,922,000
Net inc
19,499,000
15,823,000
Share earns
2.27
1.78


PRESIDENT URGES WIDE G.O.P. VICTORY
LEAD: President Reagan returned to the South today with a broad message of support for Republican Congressional and gubernatorial candidates that reflected White House elation with Vice President Bush's campaign for the Presidency.


CNB Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CNB Bancshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,433,000
3,048,000
Per share
.52
.46
9mo net inc
9,604,000
9,097,000
Per share
1.45
1.38


Koop Urging Regulation of 'Smokeless' Cigarette
LEAD: The Surgeon General of the United States, C. Everett Koop, said today that RJR Nabisco Inc.'s new ''smokeless'' cigarette was a ''drug-delivery system'' that should be regulated by the Federal Government.


Review/Film; A Slasher Goes Back To Work
LEAD: It seems too strange to be true, but Halloween and Friday the 13th and prom nights were not always celebrated with slasher films; those quaint seasonal customs began a mere 10 years ago.
Before Jason put on his hockey mask and began strewing bodies around, before Freddy started haunting the dreams of teen-agers on Elm Street, in 1978 there was Michael Myers, the killer in John Carpenter's stylish and still scary ''Halloween.


Review/Dance; Ballet Theater Overcoming Paris Critics' Reserve
LEAD: It is never easy for American ballet companies to win over Paris, a city that often acts as if any ballet troupe that comes from outside France is a group of upstarts.
Nevertheless, American Ballet Theater, making its first appearance in Paris in 11 years, has been slowly winning over some hard-to-please


James Aronson, Journalism Critic, Editor and Teacher, Is Dead at 73
LEAD: James Aronson, an editor, teacher and journalism critic for five decades, died of cancer of the prostate yesterday at the Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Biweekly Mortgages: A Way to Build Equity
LEAD: More homeowners around the nation are taking advantage of mortgages that require payments every two weeks instead of once a month.


Interim Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interim Systems
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
45,491,000
39,396,000
Net inc
1,143,000
917,000
Share earns
.04
.03
9mo rev
134,820,000
104,917,000
Net inc
3,116,000
2,415,000
Share earns
.11
.09


Park Is Less Burned Than Thought
LEAD: Damage from the summer wildfires that swept through Yellowstone National Park was not as severe in some respects as first believed, park officials asserted today.
They said the park was expected to recover without reforestation or reseeding.


Dukakis Goes to Harlem for Gospel Music and Votes


Dukakis, at Harlem Church, Says, 'I'm on Your Side'
LEAD: With polls suggesting his black support may be a bit soft, and his Republican rival targeting his political base in New York, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis traveled yesterday to Harlem, where he clapped and swayed to gospel rhythms and made a pitch to black voters.


A New York Report Says Racism Creates Two Tiers of Schools
LEAD: New York has two unequal school systems - one in affluent areas and the other in poor areas, a state task force has concluded, saying racism ''clearly underlies much of the problem.''


Cult Member Guilty In Theft of Loans
LEAD: A woman in the Circle of Friends group faces 20 years in prison and $220,000 in fines after pleading guilty Thursday to stealing thousands of dollars in student loans, a court official said.


South Carolina National reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Carolina National (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
14,118,000
13,951,000
Per share
.65
.64
9mo net inc
41,051,000
39,721,000
Per share
1.89
1.83


Pennwalt Plans Stock Repurchase
LEAD: The Pennwalt Corporation approved a plan to buy back more than a third of its shares in a long-expected recapitalization plan that will pay shareholders more than $400 million.
The company embarked on the restructuring plan as a way of fending off a takeover by Centaur Partners, an investment group that owns 8.6 percent of the company.


Chicago Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chicago Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
342,846,000
332,978,000
Net inc
b53,497,000
c10,380,000
Share earns
3.98
.71
9mo sales
1,130,214,000
966,480,000
Net inc
b72,366,000
c21,835,000
Share earns
5.20
1.50


Dekalb Genetics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dekalb Genetics (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,800,000
24,900,000
Net inc
2,300,000
3,100,000
Share earns
.40
.55
Yr rev
230,300,000
215,800,000
Net inc
8,300,000
8,300,000
Share earns
1.48
1.48


Innocents in Town
LEAD: Until last week, it had been many years since a New York City woman had seen an old-fashioned teen-ager.


Ex-Official in Vice Plea Bargain
LEAD: Roger Boas, former chief administrative officer of this city, pleaded guilty Thursday to seven counts of statutory rape, charges that stemmed from his having had sexual relations with teen-age girls at a brothel.
Twelve other counts were dropped in return for the guilty plea, which reportedly allows Mr.


Texas Instruments Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Instruments Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,577,400,000
1,416,300,000
Net inc
93,700,000
74,100,000
Share earns
1.03
.85
9mo sales
4,602,700,000
4,059,800,000
Net inc
271,000,000
230,400,000
Share earns
3.01
2.72


When Race and Sex Don't Matter
LEAD: To the Editor:


What to Pack
LEAD: To the Editor: Instead of taking your address book, pack preprinted gummed labels.
These are great for postcards since you can keep track of who has been sent a card, and you don't run the risk of losing the address book.
Other addresses or phone numbers you might need should be carried separately on a piece of paper (with copies distributed among your baggage or traveling party).


Hoya Runner Captures Title
LEAD: John Trautman of Georgetown won the Big East Conference cross-country title in 24 minutes 48.8 seconds over five miles at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx yesterday.
Providence, led by the third-place finish of Frank Conway in 25:05.6, won the team crown with 37 points.
Georgetown, the defender, was second with 69.


Q and A
LEAD:  One-Time Exemption


A Loving Treatment for Mental Illness
LEAD: SHE screamed at me, her face red with anger and puffy from the medication: ''What are you doing here?
I don't know you!''


A Rising Challenge to the Reagan Policy on World Debt
LEAD: SIX years ago, when Miguel de la Madrid was approaching inauguration as President of Mexico, the United States rallied behind him with a $1.8 billion loan to shore up his economy.
Now Mr. de la Madrid is leaving and another President-elect, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, will take office Dec. 1.
Again, the United


Ceiling Fixtures
LEAD: CEILING fixtures for overhead lights, chandeliers or electric fans often must be removed during interior painting or redecorating, or to check a malfunction.
Although the means by which these items are attached to the ceiling is usually hidden from view, fixture mountings are seldom as mysterious as they may seem.


Ellen Archer Wed To Jeffrey Gracer
LEAD: Ellen Lee Archer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel S. Archer of New York and Nantucket, Mass., and Jeffrey Bruce Gracer, a son of Jane Blumenfeld of New York and Englewood, N.J., and the late David Gracer, were married last evening at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
Rabbi Judith Shanks, the bridegroom's cousin, officiated.


More Killers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Abigail Goldberg Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
L.
John Goldberg of London and Saratoga Springs, N.Y., have made known the engagement of their daughter Abigail Shira Goldberg to Adam Garett Speigel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie Spiegel of Van Nuys, Calif.
A December wedding is planned.
The bride, a graduate of the Shipley School and Mount Holyoke College, is an account administrator at the Washington office of Johnson &amp; Higgins, insurance brokers.


'Taking the Worry Out of Growing Older'
LEAD: I would like to comment on a recent article, ''Interest Grows in Continuing-Care Communities for the Elderly.'' I am a resident of Monroe Village in Monroe Township, and I could never have made a greater decision than coming here.


GHOSTS AND GOBLINS BY MAIL
LEAD: Because it culminates in Christmas, fall is the biggest selling season for mail-order catalogue companies.
And thanks to Halloween, the fall shop-by-mail season, which once began at Thanksgiving, is extended by almost a month.


Bucknell Gets Help From Columbia
LEAD: Columbia made enough mistakes yesterday to help Bucknell achieve its first victory of the season after six setbacks.


Talking: Bridge Loans; Slow Sales Enhancing Importance
LEAD: The slowdown in home sales in the Northeast and other areas is reviving the need among buyers for bridge loans.
A bridge loan is short-term financing that provides a buyer with the funds necessary to close on a newly purchased home before his present home is sold.


Pepper Has Minor Surgery
LEAD: Representative Claude Pepper, Democrat of Florida, said today that doctors had discovered a ''small knot'' on a hernia scar in routine tests at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center after the close of the 100th Congress.
Mr.
Pepper, the chairman of the House Rules Committee and who, at 88 years of age, is the oldest member of Congress, said in the statement that the knot was removed in a minor surgical procedure Friday and that he expected to resume campaigning on Monday.


The Vintage Jukebox: Our Memories are Made of This
LEAD: NOSTALGIA lovers, antiques fanciers and popular-music buffs all share a fascination with the jukebox.
The earliest models, from the ''golden age'' of jukeboxes in the 1930's and 40's, were gorgeously crafted sound machines that ''bubbled,'' radiating light and color and bringing joy to the dancing feet of millions.


Other People's Dresses
LEAD: Even after she promised six years ago to quit borrowing designer gowns and jewelry, Nancy Reagan apparently did not say ''no'' to such loans.
After Time magazine reported last week that the First Lady had in recent years worn numerous borrowed outfits ranging in value from $1,500 to more than $20,000, a White House spokesman acknowledged that Mrs.


STREETSCAPES: Readers' Questions; Letters on Life, a Wilde House and a Hospital That Died
LEAD: This is another in a series of columns that appear from time to time to answer readers' questions about New York's changing streetscapes.


Correction
LEAD: A caption today in the highlights section on page 15 of the Television section refers to Mark Gastineau's scheduled performance in a football game this afternoon between the New York Jets and the Miami Dolphins.


Why Older Horses Run Into Our Hearts
LEAD: Two weeks after Waquoit, named for a small town on Cape Cod, won the $1 million Jockey Club Gold Cup at Belmont Park on Oct. 8 he was paraded around his home track at Suffolk Downs in East Boston, Mass.
More than 6,000 posters of the gray 5-year-old were given to a crowd some 25 percent larger than would normally be at Suffolk on a fall Sunday afternoon.


Vermont
LEAD: To the Editor: I enjoyed the article on the glass blower Simon Pearce and Quechee, Vt., (Travel, Aug. 21) so much that five of us rushed there the very next day.
Unfortunately, Alberta Eiseman failed to mention that the prices for everything, except the glassware, are extraordinarily high (even by Manhattan standards) and that the restaurant staff and manager were extraordinarily rude (also even by


Oates's 'Fugitive Pieces'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Protesters Must Honor Rights of Others
LEAD: Richard Galligan disingenuously ignores the objective of the anti-hunter protestors, which is to prevent hunting, rather than merely register disapproval (''State Curtails Freedom of Speech,'' Opinion page, Sept. 25).
His argument in favor of their unfettered ''free speech'' is really just the usual one propounded by the assorted zealots of our day who use their right of protest to interrupt and prevent the exercise of other citizen's legal rights.


New Menu at a Bridgeport Hotel
LEAD: REPORTS that the restaurant, Parc 1070, in the Bridgeport Hilton, had a new menu led us to Bridgeport to find out.
With the upsurge in recent years of high-quality dining rooms in chain hotels, another culinary coup was expected.


A Canalside Promenade In Utrecht
LEAD: SHOULD you mention Amsterdam or The Hague to an Utrechter, he will say with just an iota of condescension, ''They are new cities.'' Utrecht is indeed the oldest city in the Netherlands, dating to around A.D. 48, when the Romans built a fort on what is today the epicenter of the city, Dom Square.
Traditionally, Utrecht has been known as the City of Churches: there are 17 medieval churches, all restored, within the city limits, and much of the country's religious history was forged here.


The Rivera Was an Edsel
LEAD: To the Editor:


What to Pack
LEAD: To the Editor: An important item to leave at home is the set of stubs that record the checks you have already written.
These are irreplaceable.
Mine were stolen once, and it was four or five months before I knew how much money I had.
DORA P. CROUCH Troy, N.Y.


THE NATION: 'Scorpions in a Bottle'; Congress and the President Part At the Height of Misunderstanding
LEAD: THE 100th Congress and President Reagan part company in a paradoxical state, accomplishing more than either dared hope yet torn by animosities that threaten to leave the legislative and executive branches estranged.


With Humor, Candidates Vie for Italian Vote
LEAD: During the day they accused each other of nasty campaigning, but tonight the Presidential candidates showed their kinder, wittier sides as they courted the Italian-American vote.


Truth in Lending: Making It Readable
LEAD: Anyone who takes a chance on an adjustable-rate mortgage knows that his bills can rise or fall with marketplace whims.
But Federal regulations put in place this month take some of the suspense out of the ride.
The new rules for banks were added to the Truth-in-Lending Law and represent a decision by the Federal Reserve Board that disclosure should include explanation and at least a bit of plain language.


ISRAEL'S OTHER WAR
LEAD:  FOR THE LAND AND THE LORD  Jewish Fundamentalism in Israel.
By Ian S. Lustick.  244 pp.
New York:  Council on Foreign Relations/Kampmann &amp; Company.


In 'Hot' Suffolk Race, G.O.P. Tries to Retake Seat
LEAD: One of the nation's most sharply contested Congressional races is shaping up here in eastern Suffolk County, where the Republican Party sees the possibility of reclaiming a House seat that was lost in 1986.


John Hamish Gardner 2d Is Married To Elizabeth Finkle, Sales Assistant
LEAD: At the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York, Elizabeth Hamilton Finkle, the daughter of Mrs.
Richard B. Smith of New York and S. Marcus Finkle of Aspen, Colo., was married yesterday to John Hamish Gardner 2d, a son of Mrs.
Edward P. Gardner of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Mr.
Gardner.


Under Wraps
LEAD: IN HER LIFETIME, IT TURNS out, she was important enough, the daughter of a dignitary.
But now, 2,500 years or so later, Wenu-hotep, an Egyptian mummy who has resided at the Children's Museum in Indianapolis since 1959, has staked a claim as a scientific pioneer.
Aided by the new technology of three-dimensional


One Dies in Chile as Rebels Attack Two Police Stations
LEAD: Leftist guerrillas attacked two small police stations in the south with machine guns and anti-tank rockets, killing a corporal and wounding a local farmer, the police said today.


Review/Music; The Six-String Be-Bop of Mundell Lowe
LEAD: About halfway through his first set at Bradley's on Wednesday night, Mundell Lowe, the guitarist, started in on ''Stomping at the Savoy.'' When he finished the melody, but before he started his improvisation, he sprayed out chiming harmonics, which Ron Carter, the bassist, immediatly played back to him.


Carmen Maura: Good Times for a 'Bad Woman'
LEAD: For years, Carmen Maura was considered a ''bad woman'' because she wanted to be an actress.
Her conservative upper-middle-class Madrid family and friends shut her out of their lives, and she lost custody of her son and daughter during a bitter 12-year battle to win a papalannulment of her marriage.


Motto Was Selected For State in 1959
LEAD: In ''Celebrating the Bland but Influential People of Connecticut'' (Opinion page, Sept. 4), Christopher Hoffman makes the point that Connecticut's official designation, ''The Constitution State,'' honors the role of Connecticut delegates to the Constitutional Convention in mediating the differences between large and small states over the nature of representation in a national legislature.


KILLING OFF THE SOUL
LEAD:  THE USE OF MAN  By Aleksandar Tisma.
Translated by Bernard Johnson.  342 pp.
New York:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.


Marjorie Goodstein to Wed Russell Newman in March
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Goodstein of Kings Point, L.I., and New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Marjorie Pamela Goodstein, to Russell Newman, a son of Mickey Newman of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Sanford Newman.


Picnicking Atop the City's Seven Hills
LEAD: FROM our picnic spot on the Janiculum, the only hill on the west side of the Tiber, all of Rome spread before us in a panorama of warm red roofs and bright yellow walls, undulating in the soft curves of the hills and punctuated by domes of various sizes.
Beyond the cliffside parapet, we could make out the gentle outlines of the other six hills of Rome: the green expanses of the Pincio, the palaces on the Quirinale, the campanile on the Esquiline, the slope of the Celio, the graceful pines of the Palatine and the blush of roses in the gardens of the


Ice Cream Diplomacy
LEAD: IF DIPLOMACY doesn't always ease tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union, can a little ice cream help?


WHILE GOD WAITS US OUT
LEAD:  MARGARET OF THE IMPERFECTIONS  By Lynda Sexson.  211 pp.
New York: Persea Books. $16.95.


Jennifer Petino Engaged
LEAD: The engagement of Jennifer Lynn Petino and John Joseph McNaught has been announced by the future bride's mother, Gloria M. Petino of Brooklyn.
Mr.
McNaught is the son of Audrey McNaught of Jersey City and the late John F. McNaught.
The future bride, also a daughter of the late George J. Petino, graduated from Pace University and is a traffic coordinator with McCann-Ericson, an advertising agency in New York.


The World's Richest Museum
LEAD: JOHN WALSH TURNED HIS station wagon north along the San Diego Freeway, pointing out the window at a cliff that rose abruptly near Sunset Boulevard. ''We start here,'' he said, ''and run as far as the eye can see.'' His hand swept forward, toward a mountain on the distant north horizon.
The enormous stretch of untouched property paralleled the freeway, cutting a wide, rough path through the affluent, well-populated neighborhood of West Los Angeles known as


Lori Vitallano Marries
LEAD: Lori Ann Vitallano, a senior editor at ABC News in New York, and William George Bores, a videotape editor for broadcast operations and engineering at ABC, were married yesterday at Windows on the World.
Judge Micki Scherer of Criminal Court officiated.
Mrs.
Bores, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Vitallano of Mount Vernon, N.Y., is a graduate of the State University of New York at Binghamton, as is her husband.


Justice O'Connor Seen As in Good Condition
LEAD: Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the Supreme Court was described today as being in good condition and resting comfortably at a Washington hospital after surgery for breast cancer.


CD Players With a Light Touch
LEAD: Advanced audio design is forever straining at the outer limits of technical possibility.
Such heroic striving is essential to progress in the long run.
In the short run, however, it sometimes inspires twisty refinements that accomplish very little aside from showing off the designer's technical bravura.


What to Pack
LEAD: To the Editor: Having read and saved Betsy Wade's article ''Packing Without the Angst: Making a Priority List'' (Practical Traveler, Sept. 4), I decided to let world in on two secrets that keep my husband happy.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; What Will Happen in The N.B.A. In '88-89?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


CUOMO ULTIMATUM OVER SHOREHAM
LEAD: Governor Cuomo has asked the leaders of the State Legislature to call their members back to Albany to approve the closing of the Shoreham nuclear power plant or, he said, he will call a special session himself.


A Church Heps Pupils Dream of College
LEAD: THIS promises to be a busy year for Demetria Davis.
In addition to her usual seventh-grade classes at Thomas J. Quirk Middle School in Hartford, she plans to spend a lot of time voluntarily in study hall.


Forty Niner Is The Real Thing
LEAD: Forty Niner illustrated yesterday that a very good horse can overcome a very ordinary rider by scoring a brilliant victory in the inaugural $500,000 N.Y.R.A.
Mile as New York's regular jockeys continued their strike at Aqueduct Race Track.


Polish Those Manners, Newark Tells Cabbies
LEAD: Mayor Sharpe James said he was outraged one night when a Newark resident called to complain that a taxicab driver at Newark International Airport refused to take her to Market and Broad Streets in downtown Newark.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Midwest; Iowa's Big Plays Rout Purdue, 31-7
LEAD: Mike Saunders went 72 yards for a touchdown and Tony Stewart raced 65 yards to set up another score as Iowa routed Purdue, 31-7, in a Big Ten Conference game today.


Behind the Facade: World of the Sea Re-Created on Land
LEAD: THE Pacific kelp bed at Mystic Marinelife Aquarium is a popular exhibit that evokes visions of the sunny California coast.
It might surprise exhibit visitors, however, to learn that it is not really Pacific kelp in there.
In fact, it is not kelp at all, but a plastic rendering.


Katherine D. Rudden Wed To Steven J. Govoni on L.I.
LEAD: Katherine Duffy Rudden and Steven James Govoni were married yesterday at the Wings Point restaurant in East Hampton, L.I., by Edward W. Horne, a Town Justice of East Hampton.


After 28 Years, a Return to a Changed Moscow
LEAD: ''Audiences here are different than audiences anywhere else in the world,'' Byron Janis, the pianist, said the other night. ''People here react, palpably, to one musical phrase.
Playing here is a very personal experience between you and your audience.''


AWARDS FOR VIDEO GER
LEAD: The familiar proverb notwithstanding, the recognition of better mousetraps is by no means automatic.
It is difficult for the more casual customers to spot superior designs in the competitive whirl.
Somebody has to point them out.
That is the intended purpose of the newly instituted Grand Prix for outstanding designs in video equipment.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  The Big Day For the Next President


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  A LONG LONG SONG  Written and illustrated By Etienne Delessert.
Unpaged.
New York: Michael Di Capua Books/  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $13.95. (All ages)


&gt;Museum: 3 Sites In Running
LEAD: THE first major step in developing a railroad museum for the state will be taken Friday when the New Jersey Railroad and Transportation Study Commission is expected to pick a site.


Byram Hills Stops Hackley on Strong Running and Defense
LEAD:  WESTCHESTER


Arafat, Hussein And Mubarak Seek New Unity
LEAD: After more than two years of estrangement between the Palestine Liberation Organization and Jordan, the P.L.O.
Chairman, Yasir Arafat, and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt met with King Hussein today in the Jordanian port of Aqaba.


DANCING WITH THE OPPRESSORI
LEAD:  LADY MORGAN  The Life and Times of Sydney Owenson.
By Mary Campbell.
Illustrated. 250 pp.
Winchester, Mass.:  Pandora Press/Unwin Hyman.
Cloth, $34.95.
Paper, $14.95.


ISLIP, A YEAR AFTER THE BARGE
LEAD: Last year, when officials in Islip, L.I., realized the town landfill was filling up, they banned commercial trash to save space for household refuse.


DATABANK: October 23, 1988
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'88
I Q'88
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$3,988.1
$3,915.4
$3,796.0
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
3.0
3.6
2.6
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'88
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
162.7
$149.4
$136.4


Andrew L. Hogan Wed to Dorothe di Bonaventura
LEAD: Dorothe Cristina Allegra di Bonaventura, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mario di Bonaventura of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Andrew Lally Hogan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Anthony Hogan Jr. of Greenwich.
The ceremony was performed at the nondenominational First Church of Round Hill by the Rev.


When the Speed of Rockets Delivered the Mail
LEAD: FOR hobbyists who collect stamps by topic, one of the most popular areas is space exploration.


Boy Faces Drug Charges
LEAD: A 10-year-old boy has been arrested and charged with juvenile delinquency for possession of heroin and cocaine with intent to sell, the state police said.
The boy, not identified because of his age, was carrying $190 and what the police suspect was 10 packets of heroin and three packets of cocaine, the police said.


Playing Mozart On Mozart's Own Terms
LEAD: Like Ferruccio Busoni, the legendary piano virtuoso of the early 19th century, Vladimir Horowitz, another supervirtuoso, has turned to Mozart in his old age.
Busoni, who had been identified with Bach, Beethoven and Liszt, with the colossal works of the repertory, started to give Mozart concerto series in the last two decades of his life.


Temples Hewn From Rock in India
LEAD: ''INDIA is the country, fields, fields, then hills, jungle, hills and more fields.'' E. M. Forster described it in 1924.
The great cave temples of Ajanta and Ellora, elaborate structures that plunge into the basalt earth, lie sequestered in such Indian hills.


Miss Robinson Is Wed To Thomas E. Bitnar
LEAD: The wedding of Agnes Randle Robinson, a daughter of Mrs.
Hamilton Robinson of Washington and the late Mr.
Robinson, to Thomas Edward Bitnar, the son of the late Joseph Bitnar and the late Sona Bitnarova of Prague, took place yesterday at Epiphany Roman Catholic Church in Washington.
The Rev.
Gabriel


Ann Fogarty Is Affianced
LEAD: The engagement of Ann Elizabeth Fogarty to Mark Kevin Stanton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Stanton of Greenwich, Conn., has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Joseph Fogarty of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., the parents of the future bride.


Interior Dept. Weighing Proposal to Reduce Jobs
LEAD: The Interior Department is trying once again to reduce its staff and transfer many duties to private industry.


Rebroadcast of 'War of Worlds' Set
LEAD: IN an age preoccupied with television and other forms of the visual image, it may be difficult to imagine great attention being paid to a radio broadcast from the late 1930's.


Stiffer Penalties on Insider Trades And Rewards for Informers Voted
LEAD: Capping a two-year struggle to address Wall Street's insider trading scandal, the Senate early this morning approved legislation that greatly increases the monetary penalties and jail terms for the crime.


Question Of the Week; Does Davey Johnson Deserve to Come Back?
LEAD: Davey has admirable qualities as a manager - his gift for nurturing young pitchers may be the most important - but I'm sure many Met fans share my fear that this very talented group will never play up to its potential with Davey's relaxed approach to the basics.
ANN STEINBERG  New York


UPRIGHT AMONG THE SWINE
LEAD:  BLACKWATER  By Paulette Jiles.  239 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.


Memorial for Dorothy Parker
LEAD: Before her death in 1967, Dorothy Parker, the Jazz Age writer and critic reknowned for her caustic wit, suggested her own epitaph: ''Excuse my dust.''


WHAT'S DOING IN: Taipei
LEAD: Unlike Rome, Taipei looks as if it were built in a day.
In parts of the city, where straight roads swirl or zag into circular intersections, small alleyways or dead ends, the sense of urgency seems overwhelming: Cars spill onto sidewalks and up to a family's doorstep as if to shorten the distance to the dinner table; motorcycles scoot on sidewalks to skirt traffic; pedestrians hug street curbs to avoid sidewalk vendors; new stores display wares in boxes while workmen still paint the walls.


Lisa Broida, a Lawyer, Wed to M. S. Josephson
LEAD: At the Harmonie Club in New York, Lisa Ann Broida, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin S. Broida of Ridgewood, N.J., was married last evening to Michael Steven Josephson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Josephson of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi Alex J. Goldman performed the ceremony.


Innovations From Munich's Masters Of Art Nouveau
LEAD: Scores of exhibitions over 30 years have reviewed the development of the Art Nouveau style, focusing on its materials, its designers or the cities where it flourished.
Now, the Philadelphia Museum of Art has organized another such survey, presenting many little-known works of German innovators in ''Art Nouveau in Munich: Masters of the Jugendstil, 1895-1910.


Laura Jinishian and Richard W. Davis Jr. Marry
LEAD: Laura Elizabeth Jinishian, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Jinishian of Old Greenwich, Conn., and Richard Warren Davis Jr., the son of Mrs.
Herbert L. Buckman of Prides Crossing, Mass., and Mr.
Davis of Essex, Mass., were married yesterday at the Dingletown Community Church in Greenwich, Conn., by the Rev.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption with an article about Venice on Oct. 2 in The Sophisticated Traveler, part 2 of The Times Magazine, misidentified the church visible across the Grand Canal from the Piazzetta di San Marco.
It is San Giorgio Maggiore.


Dead Reckoning
LEAD:  DA  Starring Barnard Hughes and Martin Sheen (in photo), William Hickey, Karl Hayden, Doreen Hepburn, Hugh O'Conor, Ingrid Craigie, Joan O'Hara, Peter Hanly.
Directed by Matt Clark. 1988.
Virgin Vision.  102 minutes. $79.95.
Closed captioned.
Rated PG.
Includes some strong language.


Lauren Trownsell And J. R. Watkins To Marry Dec. 10
LEAD: Lauren Lee Trownsell and James R. Watkins plan to be married on Dec. 10, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Donald L. Trownsell of Madison, Conn., and Hilton Head Island, S.C., have announced.
Mr.
Watkins is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Watkins of Cincinnati.


CAVEAT DIRECTOR
LEAD:  BOARD GAMES  The Changing Shape of Corporate Power.
By Arthur Fleischer Jr.,  Geoffrey C. Hazard Jr. and Miriam Z. Klipper.  236 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


Women Must Lead Their Own Lives, Make Their Own Choices; Never the Mother
LEAD: To the Editor:


Photography Center to Move in Spring
LEAD: The International Center of Photography is to move its midtown gallery next spring into expanded quarters at 1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43d Street, the center's founder and director, Cornell Capa, has said.
The new two-floor museum will provide four times as much exhibition space as the center's current gallery at 77 West 45th


Trouble and Strife
LEAD:  THE BAKER'S WIFE  Starring Raimu and Ginetta Ledex (in photo).
Directed by Marcel Pagnol. 1938.
Interama Video Classics. 124 minutes. $59.95.


Nathan Levin, 84, Investment Consultant
LEAD: Nathan W. Levin, an investment consultant who was a financial aide in the philanthropic work of the Julius Rosenwald Fund, died of congestive heart failure Friday at his home in Mt.
Kisco, N.Y.
He was 84 years old and also lived in Manhattan.


A.T.&amp;T.'s Competition Is Looking More Real
LEAD: A YEAR and a half ago, the future looked bleak for the MCI Communications Corporation and the U S Sprint Communications Corporation, the two principal competitors of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in the long-distance telephone market.


A Split on Turf at Laurel
LEAD: Capades won the Selima Stakes and Luge II won the Laurel Futurity today as American and foreign horses split the first two races of the International Turf Festival at Laurel Race Course.


Infected But Not Sick: An AIDS Story
LEAD: EVERY Tuesday and Friday morning I meet a nurse who tries to save my life.
We tell jokes and talk about family and friends as I sit for a half hour being infused with Ampligen, an experimental drug that is believed to arrest the AIDS virus.


Big Bids Reshape Takeover Game
LEAD: Two enormous bids left many on Wall Street convinced that no company is too big for a takeover attempt.
In the biggest bid ever, the top executives of RJR Nabisco teamed up with Shearson Lehman Hutton to propose a $17 billion leveraged buyout of the tobacco and food giant.
The company was formed just three years ago when R.J.


Sports of The Times Dodgers' Dugout Continuity
LEAD: In winning the World Series, the Dodgers were rewarded for continuity in the dugout.
Of all the current clubowners, the O'Malley family has been in baseball the longest, 38 years, while hiring the fewest managers: 3.
Tommy Lasorda has been ensconced in the Dodger dugout the last 12 years, Walter Alston was there the previous 23 years, Chuck


FATHER LOST ME IN A BACKGAMMON GAME
LEAD:  THE CAPTAIN AND THE ENEMY  By Graham Greene.  189 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


On the Adoption Of Black Children
LEAD: As an adoptive parent, I cheer the state's effort to find permanent homes for hard-to-place black children (''State Offers New Program on Adoption of Blacks,'' Sept. 11).
However, I continue to be outraged at the Division of Youth and Family Services' reluctance to place black children with white families.


Both Bentsen and Quayle, Stumping on Home Turf, Display a Sense of Ease; Democrat Reveling in Role as Monitor of the G.O.P.'s Ads
LEAD: Seventeen days before what may be the first general election defeat of his 40-year political career, Senator Lloyd Bentsen is as cheerfully undaunted as if the polls still showed the Democratic ticket with its midsummer lead.


Try, Try Again
LEAD: He has tried and failed twice, but Jackie Nicklaus is not one to give up.
The 27-year-old son of Jack Nicklaus is making his third attempt in three years to qualify for the PGA Tour.


MOUTH, EAR, NOSE
LEAD:  UNDER THE JAGUAR SUN  By Italo Calvino.
Translated by William Weaver.  86 pp.
New York:  A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $12.95.


A Father Sees the End of the Line
LEAD: Y wife and I held moist hands as we sat in a small office on Yale-New Haven Hospital's seventh floor, the wing for infant care.


No Place for Radicals in This Campaign
LEAD: THE Congressional race in the Sixth District is a battle of moderates: Nancy L. Johnson, a three-term incumbent who calls herself a moderate Republican, and James L. Griffin, a political newcomer who says he is a moderate Democrat.
Part of the battle is that they disagree on what moderate means.


You Can Have a Jack-o'-Lantern and Eat It, Too
LEAD: AS autumn deepens, country markets glow with seasonal pumpkins.
From tiny to giant, they beckon.
But purchase a pumpkin and then what?


A De-Japanned 'Mikado' Frisks Onto the Small Screen


Role Models Examine Values
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD: Marlborough, Conn.  $225,000  64 Roberts Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 15-year-old Dutch colonial; totally renovated, close to shopping, 1.2 acres; taxes $2,127.
Old Lyme, Conn.  $167,500  60 Shore Road  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old ranch; 2-car attached garage, stone walls, 1 acre; taxes not available.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''It would be a tragic mistake if Western capital enables the U.S.S.R. to put off the hard choice between guns and butter.''
Senator Bill Bradley,
Democrat of New Jersey,
on the new bank loans
being arranged for the Soviet Unions.


At the Stadium, We're Players In the Middle of a Different Game
LEAD: IN the beginning, we had jumped into the car in jeans and sweatshirts, carrying nothing but our tickets.


Massachusetts to Vote on Nuclear Plants
LEAD: Massachusetts voters will have a chance to shut down the state's two nuclear power plants.
An affirmative vote Nov. 8 for one question on the ballot would ban generating of electricity by commercial nuclear power plants ''by means which result in the production of nuclear waste'' after July 4, 1989.


Military Precision


CONGRESS ADOPTS TAX CODE CHANGES
LEAD: The tax bill that Congress approved early today increases a variety of business taxes, especially those of military contractors, and cuts some taxes on individuals, notably farmers.
The tax increases and reductions, at about $4.1 billion each, will roughly balance each other.


With Shore Ailing, Ads on Tourism Turn Inland
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the state's new tourism advertising was planned before pollution problems in Long Island Sound became major news, the focus on inland attractions could bear fruit next summer, if the coastal problems persist.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  A Day in the Death of Joe Egg  Starring Alan Bates, Janet Suzman, Peter Bowles, Sheila Gish, Joan Hickson, Elizabeth Robillard, Murray Melvin, Fanny Carby, Constance Chapman, Elizabeth Tyrell.
Directed by Peter Medak. 1972.
RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video. 106 minutes. $69.95.
Rated R.


Works by 2 Pottery Legends
LEAD: ''I WRITE our names; Otto prints them,'' Vivika Heino explained.
She had been asked how one could distinguish her pots from those of her husband; both names go on every piece made in their studio.


In Health Care Policy, the Latest Word Is Fiscal
LEAD: AMONG the changes wrought during the Reagan years, few may turn out to be so profound and irreversible as the reshaping of health care.
Partly because of the Administration's initiatives and partly because of other social and financial forces, the roles of those who provide care and pay for it and the expectations of those who need it have been thrown into turmoil.


U.S. Bridge Team Wins Title
LEAD: The United States contract bridge team scored a solid victory in the final of the World Team Olympiad here this afternoon, defeating Austria by 43 international match points.
Americans had never won this title, although they have owned every other world championship in the last four years.


Revue Recreates Music Hall
LEAD: THE dining room at the Spinning Wheel Inn in Redding Ridge has but a single tier and a mini-stage, but to the four performers in ''British Music Hall,'' the customers at the tables might as well be in the gallery, the circle or the stalls - and the pianist is a one-man pit band.


DRUG BILL PASSES, FINISHING BUSINESS OF 100TH CONGRESS
LEAD: In a self-congratulatory mood, Congress early today passed comprehensive legislation aimed at curbing the supply of illicit drugs and the public's demand for them, approving the measure as its final act before adjournment.


FICTION
LEAD:  HAZARD AND THE FIVE DELIGHTS.
By Christopher Noel. (Knopf, $16.95.) The title of Christopher Noel's first novel refers to his high-spirited heroine, 20-year-old Hazard MacIntyre, and her pronouncement of ''the five things that make life worth living.'' Hazard and Baker Samuels, formerly childhood playmates, now close friends and tentative lovers, inhabit a summery Vermont landscape where they're perpetually in flight from the pedestrian and prosaic.


The Soviet Challenge, Unanswered
LEAD: Which Presidential candidate offers more promise in foreign relations?
On the most important relationship, this campaign remains, for both candidates, a campaign of missed opportunity.


You Can Have a Jack-o'-Lantern and Eat It, Too
LEAD: AS autumn deepens, country markets glow with seasonal pumpkins.
From tiny to giant, they beckon.
But purchase a pumpkin and then what?


Speaking of Rehabilitation
LEAD: Not everybody thinks of Watergate when Richard M. Nixon shows up these days.
At the Daytop Village drug treatment center in Bethel, N.Y., last week, Mr.
Nixon was praised as one President who offered more than slogans in his war on drugs. ''Under his Administration we had expansion of treatment programs and introduction of preventive efforts,'' said the Daytop president, Msgr.


Hospital Workers Complain of Discrimination
LEAD: A group of workers at a city-run hospital on Roosevelt Island has charged that senior black employees have been harassed and systematically removed from top positions since the hospital changed administrators three years ago.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Hare-Raising Day Anne Rodriquez wanted her bunny, and she wasn't going to let anyone get in the way.
The Calverton mother had come to the bunny auction at the Suffolk County Farm Pumpkin Festival in Yaphank along with her husband and two children, red-headed Jillian, 4, and brown-haired Jason, 10.


Lisa B. Zalkin to Marry William Glenn in April
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Isadore Zalkin of Martinsville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Beth Zalkin, to William Henry Glenn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira S. Glenn of New York.
The couple plan to wed on April 15.


Review/Dance; A Puzzle Set In the Realm Of a Fantasy
LEAD: Little dances gave way to dramatic vignettes.
Then came other little dances, a few more vignettes and a film. ''A Starer,'' which was presented Wednesday night at the Washington Square United Methodist Church, resembled a jigsaw puzzle, and its dances, dramatic scenes and cinematic interlude resembled pieces of a puzzle that were gradually fitted together.


Clothes Don't Make The Opera
LEAD: The practice of updating classic operas or otherwise displacing them in time and place is not automatically to be despised.
It is a device to be used cautiously, however, if at all.
Any genuinely great work is delicately balanced, a structure built on subtleties of history, culture and artistic convention that may slip away and bring down the whole building if a single block is nudged out of place.


Maine's Elixir of October
LEAD: WHAT a comeback cider has made.
We can now put before our grandchildren what our grandparents knew but our children never saw: custom-made cider, cider from apples we select.


ARE WE DOING ALL RIGHT SO FAR?
LEAD:  RENDEZVOUS WITH REALITY  The American Economy After Reagan.
By Murray Weidenbaum.
Tables.
Charts. 313 pp.
New York:  Basic Books. $19.95.


Michael Steers Plans To Wed Ann M. Lyons
LEAD: Prof. and Mrs.
John L. Lyons of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ann Martha Lyons to Michael Steers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Coster Steers of Greenwich.
A Nov. 12 wedding is planned.


Boxy Bags Full of Memories
LEAD: ONCE upon a time, way back when Harry S. Truman was in the White House, John Cameron Swayze was on television and Studebakers were on the highways, stylish women carried Samsonite cosmetic cases when they went on trips.


The Fate of Baby Amy
LEAD: Not many years ago, physicians could offer little more than sympathy to parents of newborns with hypoplastic left-heart syndrome.
Now, parents must decide, under great duress and with limited and often conflicting information, whether to allow such infants to die peacefully and relatively quickly or to stake all their hopes on risky and experimental, but possibly life-saving, surgery.


Victoria
LEAD: To the Editor: It saddens but does not surprise me that Moira Farrow's ''What's Doing in Victoria'' (Travel, Aug. 28) did not mention the museum devoted to the city's most famous and marvelously eccentric native daughter.
When last we visited, even the taxi driver had never heard of the Emily Carr Gallery of the Provincial Archives of British Columbia at 1107 Wharf Street in downtown Victoria.


Question Of the Week; Does Davey Johnson Deserve to Come Back?
LEAD: Johnson is the first manager in history to win 90 games in each of his first five seasons.
And under Johnson, the Mets have never finished lower than second place and have finished in first place twice in three years.


Role Models Are Needed
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Follow-Up: All Bets Off at Raceway
LEAD: THE likelihood of Roosevelt Raceway operating again as a standardbred race track appears remote.


U.S. Assails Khmer Rouge Over Refugee Treatment
LEAD: United States officials have for the first time expressed alarm about what they say is the violation of human rights in refugee camps run by the Khmer Rouge near the Thai-Cambodian border.


Susan Huffman Weds J. H. Boal
LEAD: Susan Parker Huffman and Jeffrey Hazen Boal were married yesterday at the nondenominational First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Avery C. Manchester performed the ceremony.


Exploring The Heart of Old Tokyo
LEAD: IN the year 628, so the legend goes, two brothers named Hinokuma were fishing in the Sumida River, which ran through the little village of Edo - now called Tokyo - when they dragged up a statue of Kannon, the Goddess of Mercy.


F.B.I. Is to Begin Inquiry of Crash That Killed Zia
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation will pursue an independent investigation of the crash that killed President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq of Pakistan and the American Ambassador to that country, senior Reagan Administration officials said this week.


MADISON AVENUE PUTSCH
LEAD:  EMPERORS OF ADLAND  Inside the Advertising Revolution.
By Nancy Millman.
Illustrated. 225 pp.
New York:  Warner Books. $18.95.


Genevieve Cook Weds Accountant
LEAD: At the Cosmopolitan Club in New York, Genevieve Hogan Cook, a daughter of Mrs.
Philip C. Jessup Jr. of Washington and Michael J. Cook of Canberra, Australia, was married yesterday to Mohamed Moustafa, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mahmoud H. Moustafa of Alexandria, Egypt.
Judge Richard M. Palmer of Family Court in Manhattan officated.


Lech! Lech! Lech!
LEAD: IT WAS A CURIOUS ENCOUNTER, one that Lech Walesa, the leader of Poland's outlawed Solidarity trade union, would later describe as involving ''here a corporal, there a general.''


Susan Lundergan Weds R. J. Gentile
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Susan Teresa Lundergan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold A. Lundergan of Bradenton, Fla., to Richard Joseph Gentile 2d, a son of Mrs.
Richard J. Gentile of Kansas City, Mo., and the late Mr.
Gentile.


Sit on My Laptop
LEAD: TIME WAS, THE SEX-ist male boss dreamed of inveigling his female secretary to sit on his lap.
Today, male and female executives dream of using their laps as launching pads for brainy little machines called &gt;laptops.


False Reports Laid to T.V.A.
LEAD: The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has concluded that the head of the Tennessee Valley Authority's nuclear power program repeatedly made false statements to the commission about a plant under construction near Spring City, Tenn.


Review/Opera; 'Gotterdammerung' Completes Met's 'Ring' Cycle
LEAD: The Metropolitan Opera's new ''Ring'' may or may not coalesce successfully when it finally appears in proper sequence later this season, but optimism could only grow after Friday evening's premiere of ''Gotterdammerung.'' The final work in Wagner's ever-astonishing tetralogy flamed into life early in the opening-night performance and scarcely cooled down for a moment.


A Radically Rethought Magical Kingdom
LEAD: Probably no music pulls so many generations of Americans into the same imaginative world as Walt Disney's movie songs.
Since the 1937 release of ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs,'' Hollywood's first full-length animated feature, every generation has had an opportunity to enter this magical kingdom at an impressionable age, as the film has been systematically reissued.


New York Farmers Report Record Profits for 1987
LEAD: New York farmers made record profits last year, said a report issued this week by the State Agricultural Statistics Service here.


UNDER DIKE BRIDGE
LEAD:  SENATORIAL PRIVILEGE  The Chappaquiddick Cover-Up.
By Leo Damore.
Illustrated. 496 pp.
Washington:  Regnery Gateway. $21.95.


CASE STUDY: The Philip Morris-Kraft Merger; Why Bigness May Not Matter
LEAD: The case study method of teaching business requires students to study a corporation and suggest ways to solve its problems.
This article takes the same approach, but with a twist: The subject is the proposed Philip Morris-Kraft merger, and the ''students'' - in this case, professors, executives, analysts and consultants - were asked to predict the results.


But Is It Art?
LEAD: To the Editor:


What to Pack
LEAD: To the Editor: An effective aid in reclaiming lost luggage is to add the name of the hotel where you will be staying upon arrival to the name tags (one inside and one outside) on your luggage.


Nuclear Arms Plants: A Bill Long Overdue
LEAD: LIKE O-rings on a shuttle booster or rusting bolts on a highway bridge, weaknesses long overlooked in the nuclear weapons industry are now being recognized as precursors to a potential disaster.
Recent plant shutdowns have broken fragile links in the production chain, impairing the country's ability to maintain its nuclear stockpile and raising far-ranging concerns about human health and safety.


SMALL FARMERS: AN ENDANGERED SPECIES
LEAD:  RAISING LESS CORN AND MORE HELL  Midwestern Farmers Speak Out.
By Jim Schwab.
Illustrated. 301 pp.
Urbana:  University of Illinois Press. $24.95.
FAMILY FARMING  A New Economic Vision.
By Marty Strange.
Tables.
Charts. 311 pp.
Lincoln:  Institute for Food and Development Policy/  University of Nebraska Press.


Five-Alarm Fire in Brooklyn
LEAD: A five-alarm fire at a Brooklyn warehouse sent flames high into the evening sky along the East River yesterday, but the authorities said the building was apparently unoccupied and no injuries were reported.
A fire department spokesman, said the fire at 55 Kent Avenue in the Greenpoint section was reported at 6:49 P.M.


Medical-Van Benefit: Helping the Homeless
LEAD: About 800 of New York City's real estate brokers will get together tomorrow at a black-tie dinner in the Grand Hyatt Hotel to roast themselves and help light a fire under a particularly appropriate charity.
Money raised by the $175-a-plate benefit will go to the New York Children's Health Project, which was started by Paul


Political Notes Giuliani Regime Nears End as a Top Protege Resigns
LEAD: The beginning of the end of the Rudolph W. Giuliani regime in Foley Square was signaled last week with the resignation of Howard Wilson, who was chief of the criminal division in the United States Attorney's office and was Mr.
Giuliani's choice to succeed him until he was vetoed by Senator Alfonse M.


A Colonial Condo: The Monroe Mix
LEAD: A 115-acre, single-family home project in Monroe, Conn., will combine Colonial- and condominium-style property arrangements, with 138 Early American reproduction houses built around commons ranging in size from a half acre to three acres.
Because the project on Cutlers Farm Road is a condominium and not a subdivision, the greens will be jointly owned by community members.


Correction
LEAD: An article on page 27 of the Arts and Leisure section today about Jonathan Miller's version of ''The Mikado'' gives an incorrect time for the broadcast Friday on Channel 13 in the New York area.
It begins at 9 P.M.


U.S. Court Says Feeding of Ill Woman May Stop
LEAD: In the first decision of its kind at the Federal court level, a judge has ruled that a state hospital must remove a feeding tube from a comatose woman or transfer her to an institution that will comply with her family's request that the feeding be stopped.
The state has agreed to try to find such an institution.


'SPOOKTACULAR' VIDEOS WITH DRACULA AND FREDDY
LEAD: Next weekend, employees of the National Video franchise in Appleton, Wis., will dress up in costume - for fun, but also to remind customers to buy or rent horror videotapes for Halloween.
According to the assistant manager, Linda Gregorius, the 8,000-square-foot store stocks 7,500 titles.
Twenty percent are in the horror or science fiction categories.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  FALL FROM GRACE: Sex, Scandal, and Corruption in American Politics From 1702 to the Present.
By Shelley Ross. (Ballantine, Paper, $9.95.) If you worry that politicians are mucking about more and reporters are happily raking up more of that muck, ''Fall From Grace'' offers reassurance.
Sex, hypocrisy and corruption have been common and chronicled since New York was a backwash of a British colony.


Bridgeport's Woes with Finances Clearer
LEAD: OFFICIALS in Bridgeport have been wrestling two financial demons.
They have known that the city was millions of dollars in debt and badly in need of a state bail-out.
But for months, they could not figure out how bad the damage was.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I installed a device on my bathroom sink that attaches to the hot-and cold- water faucets to mix them so that the water comes out of a single spout.
Very hot water came out and cracked the enamel in the sink, and I now have a rust patch under this spout.
Can this be covered up or repaired in some way?


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I installed a device on my bathroom sink that attaches to the hot-and cold- water faucets to mix them so that the water comes out of a single spout.
Very hot water came out and cracked the enamel in the sink, and I now have a rust patch under this spout.
Can this be covered up or repaired in some way?


Nicola A. Belzer, an Editor, Is Married to Scott Richter
LEAD: Nicola Alys Belzer and Scott Mark Richter were married yesterday evening at the Fresh Meadows Jewish Center in Queens by Rabbi Abraham Neustein and Cantor Hertzl Pinelis.


Ozone 'Solutions' Won't Work
LEAD: Recently, Dr.
Paul S. Cohen urged New Jerseyans: ''Let's Take Action to Reduce the Ozone on Route 1'' (Opinion page, Sept. 11).
His solution: more highways and more cars - the very sources of ozone and congestion.


France
LEAD: To the Editor: There are three restaurants that might be of interest to your readers in addition to those suggested in the two insightful articles about Lyons and Colmar (Travel, Aug. 7).


Protest Against Drugs and Rent Increases in the Bronx


DATA UPDATE: October 23, 1988
LEAD:
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Aug. 88
Aug. 87
Change
Starts
1,436
1,583
-9%
Completions
1,510
1,633
-7.5%
Sales
713
673
5.5%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Plan for Rail Line Sets Suburb Against City in Los Angeles
LEAD: To Jeffrey L. Levine, a businessman in the San Fernando Valley, the Valley is ''Leave It to Beaver'' land, all suburban families, manicured lawns and station wagons.
To Rabbi Marvin Sugarman the Valley is an ''island of tranquility'' for his Orthodox flock.
And to Robert C. Bonner, the United States Attorney here, it is the pornography distribution capital of


A Botanist Sounds the Alert: Kudzu Is Spotted in Scarsdale
LEAD: RECENTLY, I had a frantic telephone call from a friend telling me that she saw a kudzu vine colony while cycling along the Bronx River in Scarsdale. ''Exactly where,'' I asked in great excitement. ''On a path on the east side of the river directly behind the Scarsdale railroad station,'' she replied.


Other People's Money
LEAD: The long slide of Ferdinand E. Marcos from the power and comfort of the Philippine presidency may yet end behind bars.
A Federal grand jury last week indicted Mr.
Marcos, his wife, Imelda, and several other people on charges of participating in a scheme in which the Marcoses used more than $100 million in embezzled cash to purchase real estate and other personal property in New York City.


Ann-Margret As Quasimodo?
LEAD: To the Editor:


What to Pack
LEAD: To the Editor: I consider a flat sink stopper indispensable.
Also: sleeping mask, small notebook, pocket calculator, phrase book, washcloth in plastic case and plastic bag for swimsuit and anything else damp.


Smith Helps Islanders Extend Unbeaten Streak
LEAD: The game was unruly, but it was ruled by the Islanders, and they extended their unbeaten stretch to four games with a 7-3 victory tonight over the Nordiques.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: The Diamond District; New Facet for an Area That's Bursting at the Seams
LEAD: EARLIER this year, Michael and Geri Bondanza moved their jewelry company into an oddity in Manhattan's diamond district: a building specifically designed for it.


Perils of Owning Too Many Books
LEAD: LAST summer, I encountered my mortality in some boxes of books -not by reading them but by counting them.
I discovered that I own more books than I can read in the traditional life-span left to me.


THE NATION: Election '88; Final Pitches to an Electorate Grown Cold
LEAD: ONE goal of any Presidential candidate is to tap into the discontents of the American voter.
But this year one of those discontents is with the candidates themselves and the campaigns they have been running.


Ceiling Fixtures
LEAD: CEILING fixtures for overhead lights, chandeliers or electric fans often must be removed during interior painting or redecorating, or to check a malfunction.
Although the means by which these items are attached to the ceiling is usually hidden from view, fixture mountings are seldom as mysterious as they may seem.


Leslie Berger Marries Paul J. Kiernan
LEAD: In Washington yesterday, Leslie M. Berger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert J. Berger of Harrington Park, N.J., was married to Paul J. Kiernan, a son of Richard R. Kiernan of New York and Greta S. Kiernan of Hackensack, N.J.
The Rev.
Michael J. O'Sullivan performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Roman Catholic


A 'Menagerie' With Its Moments
LEAD: BY starting its season with ''The Glass Menagerie'' and then getting on with the repertory of new plays exclusively, the American Stage Company is pausing to pay homage to the best of the past, and casting a vote of confidence to the future of a most endangered species: the living American theater.


New York, Under Construction for Three Centuries
LEAD:  1653.
A wall is built, where Wall Street now runs, to protect New Amsterdam from Indian raids.  1699.
The city, in English hands and renamed New York, builds a City Hall at Wall and Nassau Streets.  1735.
The first city almshouse opens in what is now City Hall Park.  1759.


12,000 Form Ranks to Mourn 2 Slain Policemen
LEAD: As a frigid wind whipped down the avenue, swirling over the bell towers of the church and cutting through the crowd, 12,000 uniformed police officers gathered yesterday in tribute to two of their comrades, shot to death on the same night.


It's a 'King of Hearts' With a 'Nice' Touch
LEAD: WITH ''King of Hearts,'' the Forum Theater Group can reclaim its identity as a second stage for the failed or so-called ''unsung musical.''


Holland Idleman, 82, Ex-Moody's Executive
LEAD: Holland B. Idleman, a former president of Moody's Investors Service, died of cardiac arrest Friday at his home in Chatham, N.J.
He was 82 years old.


BOOKSHELF
LEAD:  Additinal titles of interest:


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: South Portland, Me.; Another Coup For a Suburb
LEAD: WHEN the Guy Gannett Company, which publishes Portland's two daily newspapers and The Maine Sunday Telegram, decided to build its printing plant and distribution center here, some residents thought it was a real coup for the Portland suburb.


Islamic Nations Seek to Improve Food Output
LEAD: Leaders of Islamic nations met here this week to discuss a question crucial to all their development efforts: Why can't the Moslem world feed itself?


Deficit Double Talk From Candidate Bush
LEAD: To the Editor:


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Little Compton, R.I.; Beach Option, Good to Dec. 15
LEAD: THE Nature Conservancy, a national nonprofit conservation organization, has won an option to buy a beach of remarkable beauty even for Rhode Island - a state celebrated for its shoreline - and has until Dec. 15 to put together enough money to exercise the option.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.45
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
7.77
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.05
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.43
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
16.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
16.90
Bank of America, San Francisco
21.25


On an 8-Mile Jog, a Question Answered
LEAD: FLUSHED with the sweat and surety of an eight-mile jog along the Belmar boardwalk, my running companion exulted in the moment: ''Someone should write about this!''


Idaho Firm on Barring Atomic Waste
LEAD: Cecil D. Andrus, who has blocked a railroad car filled with radioactive wastes from entering a Federal storage site near here, acknowledged today that his move may lack legal justification.


For Burt of Giants, Too Much Too Soon Is the Right Medicine
LEAD: Jim Burt has never taken adversity lying down.


Second-Half Surge Sends Michigan to Top in Big Ten
LEAD: Michigan, leading by a point at halftime, broke open a close game with a razzle-dazzle touchdown in the third quarter and surged to the lead of the Big Ten Conference today with a 31-6 victory over Indiana.


Finding Sanctuary and Serenity as the Family Chauffeur
LEAD: I HAVE four children; one of them can drive.
The rest are driving my husband crazy.


Khrushchev Son's Tale: 'No Struggle for Father'
LEAD:  Following are excerpts from the fourth installment of Sergei N. Khrushchev's diaries, published today by the weekly magazine Ogonyok and translated by The New York Times.
The narrative deals with the 1964 ouster of the author's father as Soviet leader and begins with Nikita S. Khrushchev and the Soviet President, Anastas I.


Federal Case
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Corn Is Green, Is It?
LEAD: WHERE is this smallest corn crop in Essex County?
It is on a small triangular property, bounded on two sides by the juncture of Walnut and McKinley Streets in Nutley, and backed by a large, conglomerate boulder that was dug up from underneath the Hoffmann-La Roche visitors' parking lot a few years ago, when Mayra Scarborough was No.


Holtz Causes Orderly Success
LEAD: It was at the final team meeting before the 1986 season opener against Michigan that Notre Dame's new head coach, Lou Holtz, learned there was still confusion where there should have been order and discipline.
Repeating a question he and all other detail-conscious coaches ask just before a football game, Holtz yelled out, ''Who's on the first punt team?


You Can Have a Jack-o'-Lantern and Eat It, Too
LEAD: AS autumn deepens, country markets glow with seasonal pumpkins.
From tiny to giant, they beckon.
But purchase a pumpkin and then what?


Rogers Is Charged
LEAD: He has a neck injury that could affect his football career, but Reggie Rogers has more serious matters on his mind these days.
The Detroit Lion defensive end, who was involved in an automobile crash in which three teen-agers were killed in downtown Pontiac, Mich., early Friday morning, has been charged with three counts of involuntary manslaughter.


&gt;WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  NOT SO SLEEPY HOLLOW  The spirit of Halloween, incipient year round in the land of the Headless Horseman, will emerge full-blown from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday, when ''The Legend of Sleepy Hollow'' will be invoked in stories, films, tours and puppetry at Sunnyside in Tarrytown and at Philipsburg Manor in North


Women Must Lead Their Own Lives, Make Their Own Choices; Is Father Criminal?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mad Ride to Nikko and Beyond
LEAD: ''IF you will kindly accept the offer, I should like to show you a famous tourist site: the Slorp,'' said my host.


The Fate of Baby Amy
LEAD: As the mother of a 5-month-old baby girl, I remember vividly how my body felt following her birth.
My breasts ached as they filled with milk; after 24 hours of hard labor, every muscle from my neck to my calves was so sore I could stand for only a few minutes.
I cried and laughed, cried and laughed, from joy, exhaustion and hormonal chaos for days.


Just a Prelude
LEAD: THREE decades ago one of the rubber bridge strongholds in Manhattan was the Bridge House, where the high-stake game had a simple rule: No women.
The players made an exception one day and admitted to their sanctum a young woman expert from the nearby Cavendish Club.
For the first rubber she sat North, facing the late Fred


A Day for Entrepreneurs at College
LEAD: ''WHOM do we expect?
Victims of corporate down-sizing, women trying to make it on their own, minority entrepreneurs and small-business owners, and just about anyone else who is looking for an alternate way of earning a living.''


Rabbi David Aronson, 96, Religious Author
LEAD: Rabbi David Aronson, former president of the Rabbinical Assembly of America, has died after a short illness.
He was 96 years old. ''He was one of the leading rabbis, nationally, in the last 60 years,'' said Rabbi Kassel Abelson, Rabbi Aronson's successor at Beth El Synagogue in the Minneapolis suburb of St.


Steppenwolf Plays Together, Stays Together
LEAD: It's the sort of story that, written by any of a score of modern dramatists, would end ironically.
Those glitteringprizes would turn out to be gilded lead.
Conspicuous success would actually be moral defeat.


Portrait of Poussin as a Young Artist
LEAD: When the time comes to call the honor roll of international exhibitions in the 1980's, a place will be kept warm and ready for ''Poussin: The Early Years in Rome'' at the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth.
In the way of sustained intellectual stimulation it has had few rivals.
It deals with a vital, much disputed and hitherto enigmatic period in the career of one of the greatest of all European painters (and one who has never before been the subject of a large-scale exhibition in the United


For Jessica Lange, Life Is a Mother's Role
LEAD: On a frigid fall night in a suburb called Towson, a cadre of bejeweled partygoers sweeps through a sumptuous Colonial-style manor.
But while a few are chatting and sipping their cocktails, most of the sophisticates are staring through the glass-paneled doors at an ingenuous trio seated outside.


Tennis
LEAD:  Edberg Upset by Australian: John Fitzgerald of Australia upset top-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden yesterday and will meet Boris Becker in the final of the $627,500 Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo.
Fitzgerald, seeded sixth, eliminated Edberg, 7-6, 6-0, winning the tie breaker, 7-2.
Becker, seeded second, also went to a tie breaker before beating Richard Matuszewski of the United States, 7-6, 6-1, in the other semifinal.(AP)  Shriver and Maleeva in Final; Top-seeded Pam Shriver and third-seeded Manuela Maleeva of Bulgaria gained the final of the $200,000 European


YUGOSLAVIA VOTES ECONOMIC CHANGES
LEAD: Parliament today approved constitutional amendments designed to make the economy more market-oriented and to ease the worst economic crisis since World War II.


Political Memo; Just Talking of Landslide Has Rival Camps Uneasy
LEAD: Two weeks ago, the 1988 Presidential campaign between George Bush and Michael S. Dukakis was widely regarded as a close race in which the Vice President had a small advantage.
Now, after the second debate between them, politicians have begun to talk about a Bush landslide.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ending Oct. 8  MANHATTAN  Morningside Heights Area  $395,000  320 Riverside Drive (102d St.)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,150-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, partial Hudson River view; maintenance $750, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: A.J.


Greeks Seize Captain Of Freighter in Crash
LEAD: The Greek authorities detained the captain of an Italian freighter and accused him of ramming a Greek cruise ship on Friday, but Italian officials said today that the freighter was at a standstill before the fatal crash.


Lost in Translation
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE RISE AND FALL OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY
LEAD:  THE GREAT U-TURN  Corporate Restructuring and the Polarizing of America.
By Bennett Harrison and Barry Bluestone.
Tables.
Charts. 242 pp.
New York:  Basic Books.


Dogs May Be Banned by Maine Island
LEAD: Percival Baxter, a former Governor of Maine, loved dogs.
He lowered the flag on the State Capitol when one of his Irish setters died, and he gave a 100-acre island to the state so that his dogs' graves would be cared for after he was gone.
Now, almost 20 years after his death, dogs may be banned from the island.


SAVING FOR ARMAGEDDON
LEAD:  SURVIVING THE GREAT DEPRESSION OF 1990  Protect Your Assets and Invesments - And Come Out on Top.
By Ravi Batra.
Tables.
Charts. 367 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.
HOW TO PROFIT FROM THE NEXT GREAT DEPRESSION  By John L. King.
Tables.
Charts. 208 pp.
New York:.
New American Library.


Cognac
LEAD: To the Editor: In her article on Cognac, the brandy town on the Charente River (Travel, Aug. 21), Jeannette Ferrary names illustrious Frenchmen who were born or who died in Cognac.
She did not, however, name Jean Monnet, the son of a brandy merchant, born in a little house in the heart of the old town 100 years ago.


ALL WE SURVEYED
LEAD:  A WRITER'S AMERICA  Landscape in Literature.
By Alfred Kazin.
Illustrated. 240 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


The Military Consensus, Undone
LEAD: At the cost of almost $2 trillion, President Reagan has generally improved the quality of American military forces.
But he has built a fortress on sand.
The economy has been undermined by the Reagan deficits; the incoherence and waste of his defense programs have eroded the national consensus for substantial military spending.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Little Compton, R.I.; Beach Option, Good to Dec. 15
LEAD: THE Nature Conservancy, a national nonprofit conservation organization, has won an option to buy a beach of remarkable beauty even for Rhode Island - a state celebrated for its shoreline - and has until Dec. 15 to put together enough money to exercise the option.


The Case Against Japanese A.D.R.'s
LEAD: Investors checking the lists of the largest point gainers or losers on the New York Stock Exchange could be forgiven for occasionally thinking that they must have opened to the Tokyo Stock Exchange page by mistake.
On any given day, the Big Board's top-10 lists are likely to contain names like Matsushita, Honda and Sony.


Alexandra Wolffe Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The wedding of Alexandra Hale Wolffe, the daughter of Louise Lindenmeyr Wolffe Herlands of San Diego, to Bradford Sands Ladd O'Grady, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. O'Grady of Princeton, N.J., took place yesterday at All Saints Episcopal Church in Bay Head, N.J.
Canon Edwin Rugby Auer performed the ceremony.


THE CHARGE OF THE LITTLE PLATOONS
LEAD:  IN PURSUIT  Of Happiness and Good Government.
By Charles Murray.  341 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Megan M. Quinn Is Wed To an Account Executive
LEAD: Megan Marie Quinn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Quinn of Lancaster, Pa., was married yesterday to James P. DeLess, the son of Roberta A. DeLess of Wallingford, Pa., and Donald J. DeLess of Devon, Pa.
The Rev.
Arthur A. Anderson officiated at the Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Lancaster.


Federal Case
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beacon Hill
LEAD: To the Editor: Otherwise uplifting, the article ''Living the Life of a Bostonian on Beacon Hill'' (Travel, Sept. 11) has a problem.


At P.S. 1: A Failure and a Triumph All in One
LEAD: The retrospective of the Italian artist Michelangelo Pistoletto currently on view at P.S. 1 in Long Island City is an odd creature: a clear-cut triumph and a palpable failure rolled into one.
As with the large display of paintings by Robert Ryman currently on view at the Dia Art Foundation on West 22 Street in Manhattan, the Pistoletto exhibition reflects an alternative space assuming the function of a conventional museum.


Boston Appointee Felt Racism's Pain
LEAD: Twelve years after a beating turned Theodore C. Landsmark into a symbol of this city's racial tensions, the black lawyer and educator has been appointed to direct a municipal social service agency.


More Guidebooks for the Shelf
LEAD: MOVE the Mobil Guides and the A.A.A.
Tour Books over; space needs to be made for the Zagat Hotel Survey of the United States, which is published in two volumes, and the TravelVision U.S.A.
Sightseeing Guides, which is published in four.
Zagat, creator of pocket-width city-by-city restaurant guides with citizen ratings, enters the hotel-resort-spa rating stakes next month.


Dukakis, in South, Fights G.O.P. Labels
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis campaigned in the politically troublesome South today trying to erase what is perceived as his negative images.
He bought five minutes of national television time to ask voters to ignore the campaign ''of fear and smear'' that he said Vice President Bush was running.


Mt. Vernon Unveils Effort for 21st Century
LEAD: IN 1858, some New York City merchants stepped over the Bronx border and laid out a series of 50-by-100-foot lots for themselves in a pastoral setting bordering the Eastchester Creek.
They called their suburban dream ''the city of homes'' and named it Mount Vernon.
The lots they laid out between First and 14th


Would-Be 'Rescuers' Create Emergencies to Display Heroics
LEAD: What prompts a person whose job entails rescuing people to create the very emergency - to set a fire, say - that allows him or her to be the rescuer?


2 'Rights' Are Wrong
LEAD: ''Who is college football's winningest coach?'' That was the question posed by John McLain, a public relations consultant for Susquehanna University, in a series of letters sent to sports editors and writers this fall.


DIVING WITHTHE DOW
LEAD:  BLACK MONDAY  The Catastrophe of October 19, 1987 . . . and Beyond.
By Tim Metz.  264 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $17.95.


'Wasserella' in Expansion Mode
LEAD: All in all, last week was a pretty good week over at Wasserstein, Perella &amp; Company.


Marcos Indictment Will Aid Manila, Aquino Says
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino said today that the indictment in a New York court of her predecessor, Ferdinand E. Marcos, would serve as a deterrent to leaders who believe themselves to be above the law.


Film Dissects Murder and Justice
LEAD: FOR Errol Morris, a film maker from Hewlett, ''The Thin Blue Line'' is as much a mission as a motion picture.


School Districts Linking Computers
LEAD: SCHOOLS in 26 communities are joining a one-year test linking computers with voice messages.
The Southern New England Telecommunications Corporation is sponsoring the experiment to help students, teachers and parents communicate with information sources and one another.


Takeshita's Scorecard After a Year: Less Is More
LEAD: When Noboru Takeshita was chosen to be Japan's Prime Minister last year, his critics forecast a bleak future.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Hurricane Hits Nicaragua


The Fate of Baby Amy
LEAD: Amy's story touched me deeply, especially for the compassion with which she was allowed to live, and die.


Ms. Delano Wed To Photographer
LEAD: At St.
Mark's Church in-the-Bowery in New York, Laura Delano, a daughter Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Delano of New York, was married yesterday to Benjamin Dimmitt, a son of Lawrence H. Dimmitt of Clearwater, Fla., and the late Betty Jane Roth Dimmitt.
The Rev.
David A. Garcia performed the Episcopal ceremony.


Way Out in the Outback
LEAD: YOU know you are approaching the Australian outback when the sheep in the fields are no longer as white as they were along the coast; they're a dusty ocher, instead, colored by the red clay soil.
You also know you're in the outback when a giant truck has an elaborate network of steel bars - 'roo bars - bolted across the front of the tractor to protect the driver and vehicle from wandering kangaroos, which have no road sense.


Cayton's Complaint
LEAD: Now that Mike Tyson and his wife, Robin Givens, have broken up, he seems to have shifted his allegiance to Don King.
And like the marriage, the arrangement with the flamboyant promoter seems to be headed for court.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  GUITAR TRIO


New England Debates More Rules To Make the Best of Its Progress
LEAD: THE issue of balancing growth with quality of life has been debated in recent months as never before in New England.


Trial Under Way in Murder of Bride
LEAD: FOR some, the memories are fading. ''I remember something about a girl going for a walk, and then she was found murdered, and later her husband was arrested,'' one prospective juror said.


Squatter Touches Off Homeless Battle
LEAD: When Dorothy King decided in August that she would illegally occupy a boarded-up, vacant house in the shabby northeast section of Denver, the aim was to ignite government interest in helping the city's growing homeless population.
That she and her cause might be consumed in the ensuing blaze was not a concern.


Annals of American Poetry: Pound and the Bollingen Prize of '49
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Headline
LEAD: I would like to respond to the article ''Brand-New Degree and No Place to Go''  [ Opinion, Aug. 28 ] .


THE WORLD: Relief for Salinas; Buying Time in Mexico
LEAD: IN offering to lend Mexico $3.5 billion, the United States last week gave President-elect Carlos Salinas de Gortari breathing room to relieve pressures that are as much political and psychological as financial.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I installed a device on my bathroom sink that attaches to the hot-and cold- water faucets to mix them so that the water comes out of a single spout.
Very hot water came out and cracked the enamel in the sink, and I now have a rust patch under this spout.
Can this be covered up or repaired in some way?


Miss Kaplan, Lawyer, Wed to Michael Kupin
LEAD: Rhonda Kaplan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Kaplan of Plainview, L.I., and Michael Barry Kupin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Kupin of Yonkers and New York, were married last evening at Temple Beth Sholom in Roslyn, L.I., by Rabbi Joseph Sternstein.


A Mother's Lament
LEAD: I WOULD wash his mouth out with shaving cream, if I could catch him.
I would give him a good kick if he didn't move like a gazelle, his arms and legs too long, flying as he runs.
Amazingly large feet ''almost'' housed in red bleached, blotched sneakers hit the floor with a force unworthy of his bony body.


Stephen Ohler Married To Silvia R. McCarthy
LEAD: Silvia Rosa McCarthy, an account supervisor, and Stephen Hardenbergh Ohler, a vice president and associate creative director, both at the New York advertising agency of McCann-Erickson, were married yesterday at St.
Charles Borromeo Roman Catholic Church in Albuquerque, N.M.
The Rev.
Jose Blanch performed the ceremony.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  IMAGES SINCE '74


ARE WE DOING ALL RIGHT SO FAR?
LEAD:  DAY OF RECKONING  The Consequences of American Economic  Policy Under Reagan and After.
By Benjamin Friedman.  323 pp.
New York: Random House. $19.95.


Sports of The Times; Repeal the Mike Andrews Rule
LEAD: One of the nice things about the World Series was seeing Charles O. Finley being ''rehabilitated,'' in the Kremlin sense of the word.
Even though Finley stubbornly ran the Athletics into chaos in the late 1970's and finally sold out, he had given Oakland a glorious tradition, and was graciously mentioned by Manager Tony L


Jefferson Continues Comeback
LEAD: The Thomas Jefferson football team, 0-8 in 1987 and threatened with demotion to the Public Schools Athletic League B division, continues to put in a bid for comeback team of the year.
The Orange Wave rallied to overwhelm Sheepshead Bay, 26-12, at the winner's field to capture their fourth game in six outings this season.


In Hewlett, Italian and Aiming to Please
LEAD: VITO'S of Hewlett is a restaurant with an identity crisis.
Is it Italian, yuppie, contemporary, traditional, economy or luxury?
A case can be made for any of the above.
The exterior and name are Italian.
The interior is modern and trendy: etched glass, gray spare walls, black lacquer chairs and ephemeral art.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  ECONOMICS IN PERSPECTIVE: A Critical History, by John Kenneth Galbraith. (Houghton Mifflin, $8.95.) Condemning those who treat economics as a Platonic system of mathematical abstraction, John Kenneth Galbraith demonstrates how power politics and ideology shape what is perhaps the most subjective of sciences.


Long-Lived Conductors
LEAD: To the Editor:


Solidarity Blames New Premier for Delay in Talks
LEAD: The Polish Government is delaying the start of wide-ranging talks with the opposition grouped around the illegal Solidarity trade union, and Solidarity leaders say they believe one of the major obstacles is the new Prime Minister, Mieczyslaw Rakowski.


IF YOU'RE THINKING OF LIVING IN: Greenwich
LEAD: TWENTY years ago the image that Greenwich projected - New England charm, exquisite homes, fine schools, freedom from crime, many recreational and cultural facilities and low taxes - earned it the nickname Camelot.


Center on 47th St. Helps The Mentally Ill Adjust
LEAD: The front door is never locked, and there are no guards.
The carpeted entrance hall has a curved staircase, chandeliers and papered walls with paintings.
In the mornings, there is always coffee waiting.


Julie Muir Weds James D. Kenny
LEAD: The wedding of Julia Louise Muir, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Muir 2d of Larchmont, N.Y., to James Douglas Kenny, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis J. Kenny of Larchmont, took place yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Augustine in Larchmont.
Msgr.
Walter F. Kenny performed the ceremony.


Social Events; From SoHo to Harlem
LEAD:  Benefit for the Aged


Debate on Islamic Law Further Strains Sudan
LEAD: When Sadiq al-Mahdi was chosen as the Sudan's Prime Minister more than two years ago, there was hope in the West that the country might start to repair the worst of its political and religious problems.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  NO-FRILLS GUERNEY  Patrons of the Long Wharf Theater are in for a unique experience when they see ''Love Letters,'' the new production opening Friday for a week of previews before its regular run from Nov. 4 to Dec. 11.
Written as a tour de force for two actors by A. R. Gurney Jr., it has been staged only once, before an invited audience at a benefit for the New York Public Library.


Patrick's Return Makes a Difference
LEAD: A sound defense, James Patrick said, is a delicate balance dependent on an interwoven blend of speed and strength and an unbroken line of communication between forwards and defensemen.
Patrick is too modest to add that it is a balance aided immeasurably by the simple fact that he is finally back on his skates.


Richard J. Ilchert Wed To Catherine Stewart
LEAD: Catherine Ann Stewart and Richard John Ilchert were married yesterday at St.
Monica's Roman Catholic Church in New York by the Rev.
John O'Leary.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George F. Stewart of Middletown, N.J., and the bridegroom is a son of Frederick A. Ilchert and Elizabeth A. Sutton, both of New


A Sculpture Is Created With the Blind in Mind
LEAD: IN museums and galleries, art is presented as something precious.
Objects of art are protected from visitors, who might be asked to keep their distance.


The Fate of Baby Amy
LEAD: As a parent, I was moved by Lynne Vuillemot's description of her dilemma in choosing among Amy's treatment options.
It is clear that her husband, John, and she made a decision based on their love for Amy and fears for her future.


Louise Dube Wed To Donald Cram
LEAD: Marie Jennifer Louise Dube, a planning analyst with the Legal Aid Society in New York, was married yesterday in Ottawa to Donald Peter Cram, a budget analyst at the New York City Office of Management and Budget.
The ceremony at St.
Brigid's Roman Catholic Church was performed by the Rev.
William Ashley.


THE CRADLE OF CIVILIZATION?
LEAD:  A DREAM OF MAYA  Augustus and Alice Le Plongeon in Nineteenth-Century Yucatan.
By Lawrence Gustave Desmond and Phyllis Mauch Messenger.
Illustrated. 147 pp.
Albuquerque:  University of New Mexico Press.
Paper, $19.95.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Branchburg Township  $245,000  101 Windy Willow Way  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; c/a, 2-car garage, brick fireplace; taxes $2,502.
Chatham Borough  $193,000  31 King's Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 27-year-old split level; deck, fireplace, new driveway; taxes $3,358.


Bush Edge Is Holding In Survey
LEAD: A Gallup Poll for Newsweek magazine gives Vice President Bush a 50 percent to 41 percent lead over Michael S. Dukakis, a margin basically unchanged from the last Gallup Poll.


NUCLEAR ARMS PLANTS: Where the Chain Has Broken
LEAD: SAFETY problems permeate the far-flung plants that make atomic bombs, hydrogen bombs and the fuel for warship reactors.
All the sites are old; Oak Ridge, Tenn., and Hanford Reservation in Washington date to the early 1940's, the dawn of the nuclear age.
For many years, their managers say, the Government provided little money for maintenance, let alone improvements.


EGGS, FRIENDS AND ECONOMICS
LEAD:  MEMOIRS OF AN UNREGULATED ECONOMIST  By George J. Stigler.
Illustrated. 228 pp.
New York:  Sloan Foundation Science Series/  Basic Books. $17.95.


At the Joffrey, the Curtain Rises on Act 2
LEAD: For the first time in its 32-year history, the Joffrey Ballet will open a New York season at the City Center, on Wednesday, without Robert Joffrey.
Yet, unlike so many other ballet troupes in transition, the Joffrey is still headed by a co-founder and by the resident choreographer whose ballets have molded the company's signature style.


How 'Cotillon' Was Reborn
LEAD: When George Balanchine was named the first ballet master and choreographer of the Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo - the company formed to fill the void left by the collapse of Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes in 1929 - he immediately set about recruiting new dancers.
For the troupe's 1932 debut season, he engaged Tamara Toumanova and Irina Baronova, both 13 years old, and the 14-year-old Tatiana Riabouchinska, all of them children of Russian emigres in Paris; their virtuosic precocity prompted the indelible sobriquet: ''the baby ballerinas.


Teatro del Sur's Wild Odyssey To the Next Wave
LEAD: Less than two years ago, Teatro del Sur was an utterly obscure, impoverished theater troupe operating out of a tiny basement theater beneath a cafe in the old San Telmo district of Buenos Aires.
Argentines, it seems, prefer their theater big, star-studded and unequivocal, and so Teatro del Sur, which is anything but brassy, quietly carried out its intricate explorations of sound and light and movement without the undue distractions of recognition and income.


Defense Sustains Penn (6-0)
LEAD: Penn kept both its unbeaten record and its hold on first place in the Ivy League intact today with a 10-3 victory over Yale in the cold wind at Franklin Field.


UNION REBEL: Jerry Tucker; The Man Who Is Fighting the U.A.W. From Inside
LEAD: When the governing body of the United Auto Workers union meets on Dec. 5, an unusual tension is likely to pervade the session.
For the first time in at least 30 years, union leaders will be confronting a genuine rebel in their midst.


Marion William Isbell Dies at 83; Founded Chain of Ramada Motels
LEAD: Marion W. Isbell, who founded Ramada Inc. and built it into a 500-motel chain, has died at the age of 83.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: East; West Virginia (7-0) Scores a 59-19 Rout
LEAD: Major Harris passed for three touchdowns and ran for two, and a reserve tailback, Undra Johnson, rushed for 111 yards and scored twice to lead West Virginia to a 59-19 rout of Boston College today.


Miss Gillcash, Consultant, Weds George Ivis Askew
LEAD: In Yantic, Conn., Holly Beth Gillcash, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Gillcash of Windham Center, Conn., was married yesterday to George Ivis Askew, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jess Lee Askew Jr. of Little Rock, Ark.
The Rev.
Carolyn Gibson performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Church.


At History's Side, Along the Wall
LEAD: NAMES like Wall Street and Rampart Street in our own cities remind us that walls remained important for urban defense until relatively recent times.
It comes as a surprise to many to learn that the fortification wall of ancient Rome survives along a considerable part of its length.
This is because through all the centuries of the Middle


'Take 2 Candidates and Call Me in the Morning'
LEAD: The slow-motion pictures are fuzzy in a warm way; the music is soft, the words airy.
Is it a commercial for a men's cologne?
Not exactly.
It is a commercial for George Bush.
With the debates over, the Presidential campaign has become a spattering of 30-second television commercials.
A few years ago candidates were being sold like detergents; then it was breakfast cereals.


Compaq Finally Makes a Laptop
LEAD: A battery-powered laptop computer was finally introduced last week by the Compaq Computer Corporation.
For several years, while other companies were reaping millions of dollars in the emerging market, Compaq steadfastly refused to bring out a laptop, saying it would not be content with the compromises that existing technology would require.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: San Francisco; Housing Built Over a Store
LEAD: WHAT is believed to be the first donation in the country of air rights over a privately owned commercial facility to build low-income housing has been made by Standard Brands Paint Company to the Bernal Heights Community Foundation in San Francisco.


For the Nobelists of Another Year, Some Big Mysteries of Science
LEAD: LAST week, Nobel Prizes were awarded for discoveries in the categories of medicine or physiology, chemistry, physics and economics.
To mark the occasion, George Johnson, an editor of The Week in Review, asked eight scientists to describe some of the most perplexing unresolved problems in their fields.


On Plant Survival
LEAD: KEEP after leaves; rake or blow them off the lawn and add them to compost; run the mower over grass to break up leaves into pieces so they will decompose faster.
Bulb and evergreen planting continues.
Last call to dig and divide perennials.
Watering


A Quickening Congressional Race
LEAD: WITH a little more than two weeks to go before Election Day, Nita M. Lowey, who came from behind last month to win a three-way Democatic primary for the 20th Congressional District race, is seeking a similar upset in an even tougher contest, against the two-term Republican incumbent, Joseph J. DioGuardi.


Question Of the Week; Does Davey Johnson Deserve to Come Back?
LEAD: The Mets are a collection of considerable individual talents without an apparent sense of team drive.
Johnson will probably not change that condition and the outcome will be the same.
ROBERT REGGIO  New Rochelle, N.Y.


Question Of the Week; Does Davey Johnson Deserve to Come Back?
LEAD: The Mets have invented a new statistic: plays not made (p.n.m).
When anything but a strikeout will advance a runner, they strike out.
Why doesn't a runner tag up from first on a fly to the outfield?
How come the captain didn't make trips when he was hurt?
Why can't guys bunt?
Why can't pitchers hold runners at first?


Katharine du Pont Sanger Is Affianced
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
George T. Weymouth of Wilmington, Del., and Fishers Island, N.Y., have made known the engagement of Mrs.
Weymouth's daughter Katharine du Pont Sanger of Sanibel Island, Fla., to Lewis Polk Rutherfurd of New York and Hong Kong.
The couple plan to marry in June.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Less than a week after being named the Green Bay Packers' starting quarterback, Don Majkowski, has signed a two-year contract, which will reportedly bring him $550,000 a year. . . .
Lawrence Taylor has reached an out-of-court settlement with the 19-year-old man who said the Giant linebacker had caused $300 in damages to his car when he kicked a door in a traffic dispute in August.


Getting Real
LEAD: To the Editor:


You Can Have a Jack-o'-Lantern and Eat It, Too
LEAD: AS autumn deepens, country markets glow with seasonal pumpkins.
From tiny to giant, they beckon.
But purchase a pumpkin and then what?


The Other Election
LEAD: Israel's political campaign, which ends just a week before ours, has similarly featured more invective than attention to the country's real problems.
But through the clouds of rhetoric one can detect something that matters.
More of the public is coming to see that Israel must deal politically with the


Italy Seizes Lebanese Who May Have Hostage Role
LEAD: The police in Milan said today that they had arrested a Lebanese woman who arrived from Beirut carrying three letters reportedly written by Americans held hostage in Lebanon.
The woman also reportedly had at least two photographs of the American hostages.


Aikman's Passes Lead U.C.L.A., 24-3
LEAD: Troy Aikman passed for 283 yards and 3 touchdowns today, leading U.C.L.A. to a 24-3 victory over Arizona that earned the Bruins (7-0,4-0) a tie with Southern Cal for the Pacific-10 Conference lead and their best start in 22 years.


How Many Petunias?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hurricane Hits Nicaragua; Toll for Week Is Now 65
LEAD: With powerful winds and torrential rains, Hurricane Joan smashed across Nicaragua's Caribbean coast today, splintering houses and unleashing floods and mud slides across a wide swath of Central America.


FICTION
LEAD:  SPEAKING IN TONGUES.
By Linda Ashour. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $17.95.) Lucy Lerner, the American narrator of Linda Ashour's promising first novel, has moved to Provence, where she shares a renovated country house with her husband, a French photographer, and their young son.
In ''Speaking in Tongues,'' Ms.


Survival Odds
LEAD: THE NEONATAL INTENSIVE-CARE UNIT houses the tiniest patients in the hospital.
All the medical devices - the intravenous needles, the endotracheal catheters, the nasogastric tubes - are the smallest sizes available.
The biggest patients in the unit weigh but seven or eight pounds - full-term newborns.


Nevada Supreme Court Upholds Bar on Gay Rodeo
LEAD: A state judge on Friday barred the Gay Rodeo National Championship from holding the event in this northern Nevada town, and the state Supreme Court upheld the decision.


JADED GENTLEMEN OF VERONA
LEAD:  HOME THOUGHTS  By Tim Parks.  208 pp. New York:  Grove Press. $16.95.


Hits That Make A Heart Sink
LEAD: Dutifully, with a sense of dread, I slapped Bon Jovi's ''New Jersey'' on the turntable the day it arrived.
The new album was all I expected and worse.
By the time I played it again, it had probably sold a million copies, maybe two.
By now, according to Polygram Records, ''New Jersey'' has sold three million copies, a third of the total sales of its predecessor, ''Slippery When Wet.


Susan G. Pender Weds S. E. Obus
LEAD: Susan G. Pender and Steven Edward Obus were married yesterday at Estherwood in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., by Judge Michael J. Obus of the Criminal Court of the City of New York.
Judge Obus, the bridegroom's twin, also served as best man.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: SARAH SCHULTE'S little secret actually isn't.
A while ago she realized that she had better tell it to her son and daughter (who live elsewhere) because, she said, ''If I was found dead looking like that, they might think it strange.'' And in fact, and to put it mildly, they most certainly would have.


Sales Tax Revenue is Higher, While Business Tax Lags
LEAD: REVENUE from the state's 7.5 percent sales tax was up in the latest reporting period, but corporation tax collections continued at the sluggish pace that has been worrying state budget officials most of the year, officials said last week.


Cold War Vestiges
LEAD: 'The world of confrontation and conflict is giving way to a world of detente, a trend that is taking place right here at the United Nations.
Serious efforts are also commencing to bring peace and the relaxation of tension to the Korean peninsula, one of the last vestiges of the cold war.' - Roh Tae Woo, President of South Korea, calling for an international conference to end the division of the Korean peninsula.


The Embattled Professional Corporation
LEAD: Ten years ago, Monte Venis completed his training as a chiropractor and opened an office in Clearwater, Fla.
Last month, Dr.
Venis met with an accountant to discuss incorporating his practice, because ''I've finally gotten to the point where I'm making some money, so I started thinking about where to put my money and how to protect what I've got.


NO ISLAND IS AN ISLAND ANYMORE
LEAD:  THE PREDICAMENT OF CULTURE  Twentieth-Century Ethnography,  Literature, and Art.
By James Clifford.
Illustrated. 381 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press.
Cloth, $30.
Paper, $15.95.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Pies Contested In Massachusetts


Village Embroiled in Historic District Dispute
LEAD: BECAUSE of a long-simmering dispute in its historic district, the village of Tarrytown is involved in separate suits filed by two property owners in the neighborhood.


Laura Siegel, a Lawyer, Weds Stephen D. Stern
LEAD: Laura Jane Siegel, an associate in the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, was married yesterday evening at the Park Avenue Synagogue to Stephen David Stern, the director of sales planning and analysis at BMG Direct Marketing in New York.
Rabbis Kenneth Berger and Barry Schaefer performed the ceremony.


Patricia Chamberlin Wed to E. F. Keyes
LEAD: Patricia Ann Chamberlin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Chamberlin of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Edward Frank Keyes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Keyes of Barrington, R.I.
The Rev.
Paul T. Keyes, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul Roman Catholic Church in


Molly Hood To Be a Bride In November
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Edward E. Hood Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Molly Ann Hood to George Augustine O'Brien 3d, a son of Dorothy Thompson Fisher of White Plains, and the late George A. O'Brien Jr.
A November wedding is planned.


REPORT FROM NEW YORK
LEAD: Forget about provocative new silhouettes, dramatic hemline shifts or startling colorations.
This is not the moment.
The spring 1989 American collections, beginning this week, make it clear that this country's fashion creators are concentrating on the cautious route.
After a lackluster year of sales, no one is about to go out on any chancy limbs.


When the Jailed Sue the Jailers
LEAD: CHARGING that their constitutional rights had been violated in prison, 15 inmates sued the New York State Commissioner of Correctional Services and the prison superintendent - and won.


Home Prices
LEAD: To the Editor:


Breaking Up India Connection
LEAD: HE WAS described as a veteran airline pilot who flew between New York City and Bombay, India.
As he stepped off his jetliner at Kennedy International Airport on July 1, 1987, agents of the United States Customs Service and the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration closed in.


PRIMERS FOR PRESIDENTS
LEAD: The literature of economics influences Presidents, even those who aren't notable readers.
The 20th century is bracketed by two periods when books on economic questions mattered enormously - the progressive era of Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson and the Reagan Presidency.
Beneath today's slick campaign symbolism, the submerged economic issues of 1988 echo earlier debates.


MINES STILL A PERIL TO GULF SHIPPING
LEAD: Despite the cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war, United States and Arab officials in the region of the Persian Gulf say shipping in the waterway still faces a threat from mines sown during the conflict.


Perspectives: Greenpoint's Historic District; Store Owners Bristle at Review Process
LEAD: Banks can be patient.
In the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn, the East New York Savings bank has been operating a new branch for a year and a half in a former lingerie shop without putting in a new storefront.
Business has been less than booming.


PHYLLIS WAS NEVER ANY FUN
LEAD:  THE COMPANION  By Chaim Bermant.  176 pp. New York:  St. Martin's. $14.95.


The Fate of Baby Amy
LEAD: ''The Fate of Baby Amy'' was a powerful story.


Diane Siesel to Marry S. D. Muratore in May
LEAD: A May 28 wedding is planned by Diane Elizabeth Siesel and Stephen Dominick Muratore, the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Siesel of Mamaroneck, N.Y., have announced.
Mr.
Muratore is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Raymond Muratore of Brooklyn.


To Save Suffolk's Water, Approve Proposition No. 1
LEAD: ITEM: About two dozen families in Fort Salonga are using bottled water because toxics, apparently from the Huntington Town landfill, have polluted their wells and made water from them unfit for drinking.


Reading: Joy to Some, Battle to Others
LEAD: This letter is to address the parents and teachers of Christine Meding (''Reading My Way to Success,'' Sept. 4) and to Christine herself.
As an avid reader, I certainly can identify with Christine's love of the written word.
Though not a reader at such an early age, I quickly learned the pleasures of being immersed in a great novel, a mystery story or a newspaper article.


Energy Battle Looms Over Gas Pipelines
LEAD: AS Governor Cuomo and state legislators lock horns over the Shoreham nuclear-power plant, a related energy battle is heating up over natural-gas pipelines, a battle that could have broad repercussions for Long Island.


About Cars; A BMW That Meets All Requirements
LEAD: I am soliciting sympathy.
Here I am in a bright red example of Bayerische Motoren Werke's handicraft and I have to give it back because the test is over.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I installed a device on my bathroom sink that attaches to the hot-and cold- water faucets to mix them so that the water comes out of a single spout.
Very hot water came out and cracked the enamel in the sink, and I now have a rust patch under this spout.
Can this be covered up or repaired in some way?


Leaving a Home for a Condo Brings Seesawing Indecisiion
LEAD: ''SELLING our home and buying a condo had to be one of the hardest things my husband and I ever did,'' my friend Muriel said as we had lunch together one August day. ''I wonder where it ranks on that list of stressful conditions?'' ''Pretty high, I bet,'' I said. ''Where would you want to live if you sold your house?


What to Pack
LEAD: To the Editor: The first consideration is security.
I had zippers sewn to fasten the inside pockets of my sport jackets.
One pocket was deepened to hold airline tickets, vouchers and traveler's checks.
The other pocket was for passports and money.
All valuables are now virtually pickpocket proof.


More Killers
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Republican 'Lock' on Electoral Vote
LEAD: To the Editor:


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: South; N.C. State Beats Clemson by 10-3
LEAD: The tailback Chris Williams ran for a 5-yard touchdown with 10 minutes 4 seconds to play to give North Carolina State a 10-3 upset of Clemson today in an Atlantic Coast Conference game.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  AT HALLOCKVILLE  With a special emphasis on crafts popular during the decades between 1890 and 1910, Hallockville, the 19th-century museum farm in Northville, holds its annual Fall Festival today from noon to 5 P.M.


THE WORLD: Two Views on Occupied Territories; Israeli Election Is Partly a Referendum on Borders
LEAD: Israel's national elections only eight days away, public opinion polls show the public evenly divided on the campaign's crucial issue: how the region can make progress toward peace.
Voters to the left want to give up parts of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, while those to the right want to keep control over the territories, where 1.7 million Arabs live and where an uprising against Israel is in its 11th month.


Xiang-Dong Kong, Chinese Pianist
LEAD:  Xiang-Dong Kong


'The Nerd' Who Came To Dinner and Stayed
LEAD: THE best and perhaps only reason for seeing ''The Nerd'' at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale is Jared Roy's side-splitting performance in the title role.
Other than that, there's not much here.
The minimal plot of this play by Larry Shue revolves around the fact that Willum Cubbert (all but the title character have unusual names) had his life saved by a man named Rick Steadman when they served in


L.I. Association Doesn't Speak for All
LEAD: Whoa!
Wait a minute!
We love you, Grumman, oh yes we do.
And I personally agree with everything that Grumman's chairman, John O'Brien, proposed for Long Island in the front page article the Long Island Weekly  [ Sept. 18 ] , and in the excerpts from his address to the Long Island Association.
Except one gigantic detail: that the Long Island


INNOVATIONS IN FANGS, BROOMSTICKS AND CANDY CORN
LEAD: Halloween is the nation's eighth most popular occasion for sending greeting cards, says the Greeting Card Association, a trade group.
And the use of Halloween cards is growing.


THE UNTRUSTWORTHY MADE SIMPLE
LEAD:  UNDERSTANDING THE NEW ECONOMY  By Alfred L. Malabre Jr.  174 pp.
Homewood, Ill.:  Dow Jones-Irwin. $19.95.


THEIR BRILLIANT CAREERS
LEAD:  THE WAY IT WAS  An Oral History of Finance: 1967-1987.
By the Editors of Institutional Investor.  815 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $24.95.


A Bach Organ Mass
LEAD: The organist Anthony Newman is to play Johann Sebastian Bach's German Organ Mass at Holy Trinity Church, 316 East 88th Street, today at 5 P.M.
The concert is the first of two programs devoted to all the surviving organ music Bach wrote during his years of service in Leipzig, from 1723 until his death in 1750.


WHAT ASIAN THREAT?
LEAD:  THE THIRD CENTURY  America's Resurgence in the Asian Era.
By Joel Kotkin and Yoriko Kishimoto.  286 pp.
New York:  Crown Publishers. $19.95.


Restoring the Enola Gay And a Point in History
LEAD: Aircraft restorers are working to recreate a B-29 heavy bomber exactly as it was when it changed the face of warfare in 1945.


Trapped Whale Presumed Dead; 2 Others Aided
LEAD: One of three California gray whales trapped for more than two weeks in unseasonably heavy ice was presumed dead today.


What's Old in . . .
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; Does Davey Johnson Deserve to Come Back?
LEAD: I think it is more apt to ask if New York and the Mets deserve Davey Johnson.
His record is enhanced by his refreshingly even-handed and calm style and what appears to be substantial affection, respect and regard for his players, his team and the sport.
DIANE P. BARTO  Brooklyn


Pamela Briggs Weds Philippe Besnard
LEAD: Pamela Briggs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Taylor R. Briggs of New York and Williamstown, Mass., was married yesterday to Philippe Jean-Louis Besnard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jean-Louis Besnard of Lyons, France.
The bride's sister, the Rev.
Cynthia Briggs Kittredge, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.


Elizabeth Brown and M. E. Roberts Jr., Lawyers, Are Married in Washington
LEAD: Christ Episcopal Church in Washington was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Elizabeth Merrill Brown and Martin Earl Roberts Jr., who are both lawyers.
The Rev.
Sanford Garner performed the ceremony.


Emily Schmidt, A Banker, Weds
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Chestnut Hill, Mass., Emily Schmidt, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kurt F. Schmidt of Brookline, Mass., was married yesterday to Mark Clay Andrews, the son of Mrs.
Hugh H. Andrews of Cummaquid, Mass., and the late Mr.
Andrews.
The Revs.
Stephen V. Smith and Suzanne Hiatt performed the ceremony.


Jane Eyre Fergus Marries
LEAD: Jane Eyre Fergus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. Fergus of New York, and Joseph Berritto Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Berritto of Howard Beach, Queens, were married yesterday at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in New York by the Rev.
Peter Colapietro.
The bride, a graduate of St.


Lord's Prayer Isn't His, Panel of Scholars Says
LEAD: The Lord's Prayer - which begins ''Our Father who art in Heaven'' - is one of the most famous utterances of Jesus in the New Testament.
A national group of biblical scholars concluded last week, however, that the prayer was really the work of early Christians who wrote it based on various ''ideas'' of what


RICH LITTLE POOR GIRL
LEAD:  EVA LUNA  By Isabel Allende.
Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden.  272 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Prospects; Toward a 'Pentagon Inc.'
LEAD: A study panel of the Defense Science Board last week urged the Pentagon to take the lead in the battle to keep American industry competitive.
The panel, which will release its report next month, called for linking the nation's economic policies with its military strategies, particularly in research and technological development.


BEST SELLERS: October 23, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
12
THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan races to the rescue of America's highest-ranking secret agent in the Soviet Union.
2
1
THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice.


Whalers Win
LEAD: Carey Wilson, the center, had two goals and an assist tonight as the Hartford Whalers beat the Philadelphia Flyers, 8-6, in the National Hockey League.
Penguins 7, Blackhawks 4


Leslie Greenberg Marries Stuart Jeffrey Ochs on L.I.
LEAD: The wedding of Leslie Jana Greenberg, a daughter of Bernard Greenberg of Oceanside, L.I., and the late Frances Katz Greenberg, to Stuart Jeffrey Ochs, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Ochs of Oceanside, took place last evening at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Rabbi Gilbert S. Rosenthal officiated.


The Growing Fear of Fortress Europe
LEAD: There is a magnificently simple vision behind the European Community's plans to remove internal trade barriers in 1992: help the 12-nation community grow faster by encouraging more competition and efficiency.


The Race for Congress; Florida Senate Contest Turns on Performance
LEAD: The candidates in the Senate race in Florida, one of the tightest in the country, use different labels to describe each other but agree that the contest turns on their competing ideologies as expressed in their voting records.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Ivy League; Tigers Coast Past Crimson
LEAD: Judd Garrett scored two touchdowns, Chris Lutz kicked three field goals and the Princeton defense forced five turnovers today as the Tigers defeated Harvard by 23-8.


For Israeli Labor Party, Vote Rides on Land-for-Peace Idea
LEAD: The meeting room was filled with undecided voters, hoping to speak with Foreign Minister Shimon Peres.
And the very first question exposed the Labor Party candidate's greatest area of political vulnerability.


Mary Tyler Moore Tosses Her Hat Up Again
LEAD: Mary Tyler Moore plants her feet on the ground like a traffic cop and with an outstretched hand diverts the galumphing of her golden retriever aptly named Dash.
The bold reach exposes some of her jewels.
Diamonds encircle her wrist, hug the face of her wristwatch and surround the tremendous emerald ring, an anniversary present from her third husband.


A Modest Proposal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q and A
LEAD:  The Azores


Horace Mann Reviving Football
LEAD: With grand heritage and a commitment to athletics, Horace Mann High School could be a model football environment.
Its expansive campus in the Riverdale section of the Bronx begs for the bulky shoulder pads and bulky sweaters of brisk Saturdays in the fall.


Women Must Lead Their Own Lives, Make Their Own Choices
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEVER A BLACK SHEEP BARING
LEAD:  THE SIXTH GREAT POWER  A History of One of the Greatest of All Banking Families, the House of Barings, 1762-1929.
By Philip Ziegler.
Illustrated. 430 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $29.95.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Centereach  $160,000  17 Walnut Street  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 33- year-old splanch; sunken living room, partial basement, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $2,000.
East Patchogue  $119,750  95 Miramar Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 18-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, deck, above-ground pool; taxes $2,000.


3 Youths Now Held in Killing of Man and Rape of Wife and Daughter
LEAD: A third teen-ager from the Bronx was arrested yesterday and charged with being part of a gang that robbed and killed a former employer and then broke into his house and raped his wife and daughter, the police said.


Son Tells of Khrushchev's Last Days in Power
LEAD: Nikita S. Khrushchev, the burly, boisterous peasant-turned-politician who became Stalin's successor in the Kremlin, at first refused to believe a reliable warning of his colleagues' plot to oust him and, when forced to believe it, refused to fight.


Promotion of New Book Revives Italians' Anger Over Nazi Occupation
LEAD: It was a daring jailbreak, one that might have ignited the Italian imagination had it not also scraped a painful patch of the national soul.


Show of Collages Opens New Exhibit Hall in New Rochelle
LEAD: THERE have been a couple of changes at the College of New Rochelle, ones that mark a lot of progress on the campus.


BLOOD, SWEAT AND 9.2 MILLION WORDS
LEAD:  WINSTON S. CHURCHILL  Volume VIII: ''Never Despair,'' 1945-1965.
By Martin Gilbert.
Illustrated. 1,438 pp.
Boston:  Houghton Mifflin. $40.
CHURCHILL  A Photographic Portrait.
By Martin Gilbert.
Illustrated. 374 pp.
Boston:  Houghton Mifflin. $24.95.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It made everybody think about this job again and that dying is a part of it.
When this happens to two in one day, you can't ignore that dying is a part of the job.''  - Thomas Barnes,  a New York police officer.  [ 1:4. ]


Badgers on the Moor
LEAD: MY adventures never resemble those first-person narratives in gorgeous travel magazines: ''Shivering uncontrollably, watching my last supplies tumble down the chasm, I noticed the brilliant moon shining on the Himalayas.'' Just thinking about high altitudes I feel the beginning throb of a migraine.


ALONE IN QUEENS, AN UNLIKELY TOWER SCRAPES THE SKY
LEAD: There is nearly complete in New York City a skyscraper that is having an impact on the skyline as profound, in its own way, as the World Trade Center.
It is not 110 stories tall, or even half that, and it is but a single tower, not a pair, but it is rapidly becoming one of the most conspicuous structures in the entire city.


Army Pins Down Rutgers
LEAD: Army gained respect and plaudits today with a well-earned 34-24 triumph at Giants Stadium over a Rutgers team that had been favored by as much as 10 points.


130 Held in Protest Outside Abortion Clinic
LEAD: About 130 anti-abortion protesters were arrested today after they blocked an abortion clinic in what they described as a ''rescue operation'' of unborn babies, the police said.


WHERE BUSH APPEARS AS SOLID AS THE ROCKIES
LEAD: One night in 1958, Lyndon B. Johnson, a diligent student of voting patterns, told one of his aides, Horace W. Busby, that he was worried about the future of the Democratic Party.


Question Of the Week; Does Davey Johnson Deserve to Come Back?
LEAD: If you believe that baseball is solely a matter of sitting back and waiting for the long ball to put the game on ice, relegating to oblivion the contributions of defense, base running and such offensive minutiae as bunting, squeeze plays and manufactured runs, then Davey Johnson is your manager for the future and deserves to come back.


The Economics of the Waste Crisis
LEAD: Even as disposal costs are skyrocketing, the United States now throws away more trash than any nation in the world, fostering a problem that is both economic and environmental.


Carolyn Maida O'Donnell Weds David T. Gurney
LEAD: Carolyn Maida O'Donnell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence G. O'Donnell of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to David Taylor Gurney, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank I. Gurney of Washington Township, N.J.
The Rev.
Peter C. O'Donnell, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Nativity in Midland Park, N.J.


A December Wedding For Frances Dunseth
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John Francis Dunseth of Philadelphia have announced the engagement of their daughter, Frances Teresa Dunseth, to Christopher Joseph Clinton, a son of Dr.
Arthur Joseph Clinton of Panther Valley, N.J., and Delores A. Clancey of Bernardsville, N.J.
A Dec. 17 wedding is planned.


Fending Off the Mr. Fixit Cult
LEAD: CONTRARY to public opinion, wives don't always want their husbands to fix things around the house.
I am aware of the ''List of Jobs to Do'' that women hand spouses, but most of this list hearsay is myth, invented, no doubt, by men who crave sympathy.
Trust me when I tell you that most women dread the thought of their husbands' tackling home repairs.


Family History
LEAD: IF it has lasted in a box for the last 100 years, why shouldn't it last another century?
Because of the ruins they find when they next peek into that box, said Kathleen Brennan, a professional archivist, growing numbers of amateur archivists are appealing to the Westchester Historical Society for help in preserving family memorabilia.


FICTION
LEAD:  PRIVATE WOODS.
By Sandra Crockett Moore. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $18.95.) For a novel set in an isolated hunting lodge in the Appalachian Mountains, ''Private Woods'' is filled with homely, almost suburban details of meals served and dishes scrubbed.
A strict division of labor applies, with the women preparing food and waiting on their menfolk, who exchange macho challenges when not tracking deer with bows and arrows.


Gallaudet University Installs Deaf President
LEAD: Gallaudet University has officially installed Dr.
I.
King Jordan as the first deaf president in the history of the nation's only university for the hearing-impaired.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  The All-Purpose Animal


In the Storage Closet Was a Lost Treasure
LEAD: I was rooting around in my storage closet last week and spied a leather camera case I hadn't seen in years.
Inside, perfectly preserved was the first camera I ever owned.
I bought it for 170 hard-earned dollars exactly 20 years ago.


Review/Music; Stuttgart Symphony Plays Russian Works
LEAD: Carnegie Hall has offered us a week of European orchestras with nationalistic bents.
Last Sunday, the Lausanne Chamber Orchestra brought us music by Honegger; the Prague Symphony followed on Wednesday with a program that was Czechoslovak from beginning to end.


Block Printing at the Zimmerli
LEAD: WOODBLOCK printing appeared in the West about the same time that paper-making and type were introduced - in the early 1400's.
Since then, the medium has had its ups and downs and, according to Nicholas Carpasso, the guest curator of the current show at Rutgers's Zimmerli Museum, it has been enjoying an ''up'' since the beginning of the decade.


BIAS WAS HIS BUSINESS
LEAD:  SQUARE ONE  A Memoir.
By Arnold Forster.
Foreword by Elie Wiesel.
Illustrated. 423 pp.
New York:  Donald I. Fine. $21.95.


An America's Cup Reunion
LEAD: It was a day in mid-September, one of those fine sailing afternoons that only autumn in the Northeast can bring.
The sun was shining, and a fresh sea breeze kicked in on Narragansett Bay in Rhode Island.


Capt. A. J. Williamson Has a Wedding
LEAD: Capt.
Annesley Jeanne Williamson and Maj.
Jonathan Hunter Jaffin, both surgeons in the Army Medical Corps, were married yesterday at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in New Canaan, Conn., by the Rev.
Roland E. Jones.


Ceiling Fixtures
LEAD: CEILING fixtures for overhead lights, chandeliers or electric fans often must be removed during interior painting or redecorating, or to check a malfunction.
Although the means by which these items are attached to the ceiling is usually hidden from view, fixture mountings are seldom as mysterious as they may seem.


Zoning Challenged in North Salem By TESSA MELVIN
LEAD: A DEVELOPER has gone to court in an effort to overturn North Salem's new zoning ordinance and increase residential density in the town.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Local Colleges; Fordham Is Upset By Stony Brook, 3-0
LEAD: Bob Burden's 31-yard field goal at 9 minutes 22 seconds of the first quarter gave Stony Brook a 3-0 upset over previously undefeated Fordham in a Liberty Conference game yesterday at Patriots Field in Stony Brook, L.I.


Lawyers at Odds: News as Court Tactic
LEAD: THE battle to get the ear of reporters covering a news event - and ultimately the attention of the public - has become an expensive public relations tug of war, with courtrooms among the battlegrounds.


Competition Is Now Up to the Courts
LEAD: The future of daily newspaper competition will be at stake next Friday.
That is when a Federal appeals court in Washington hears arguments concerning a plan to create the nation's biggest business combination of newspapers in the same city.


Not Even Kindling
LEAD:  To the Editor:


Why Some Movies Don't Travel Well
LEAD: It's not fashionable to look at movies as social artifacts.
Movies are supposed to be art, to stand alone to speak to whomever wants to look and listen.
Since most films are not art, however, there's no other easy way to respond to them except, occasionally, as psyche-revealing inkblot tests.


THE REGION: Debts by Any Other Name; The Most Public City Resumes Public Building - With a Lot Less Splendor
LEAD: For one golden century, from the Civil War to the 1960's, New York stood out among American cities for the magnificence of its public works: subways and aqueducts, parkways, bridges and tunnels, libraries, parks and schools.


For Mexicans, A Lame Duck Isn't So Lame
LEAD: Back in early July, before political parties in the United States had even picked their candidates, Mexican voters went to the polls and chose Carlos Salinas de Gortari as their next President.
Nearly four months later, Mexico's President-elect is still patiently counting the days until his inaugural on Dec.


The Better the Colleges, The Better for Us All
LEAD: THOUGH the election of a President will dominate the ballot in November's election, there are many other important choices that New Jerseyans will be asked to make.
Besides choosing a United States Senator, members of Congress and countless municipal officials, voters will be asked to decide on a number of public questions.


Local Talent Dominates Concerts
LEAD: APPEARANCES by local musicians head the list of concert performances across the state this week, starting at the Connecticut Historical Society in Hartford, home to workshops and recitals that add up to an ambitious season for the Connecticut Classical Guitar Society.


The Realty Game Turns On the Utilities
LEAD: Daniel Feld believed that New York City deserved its own potato chip and that his company, Saratoga Potato Chips, just starting up, deserved to save some money on the millions of cubic feet of gas it would take to cook them.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International/3-19


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Sales of Small Airports Are Taking Off
LEAD: THE quest for land in Connecticut has made small, privately owned airports, particularly those that are unprofitable, prime targets for redevelopment.
At least three of 16 such facilities have been sold or leased, and two more are on the block.


Both Bentsen and Quayle, Stumping on Home Turf, Display a Sense of Ease; Republican Turns to Gentle Humor - About Himself
LEAD: This week, by many measures, was the best thus far on the 1988 campaign trail for Senator Dan Quayle.


On Bedrock in Bergen Beach: Bucking That Sinking Feeling
LEAD: The problem with southeast Brooklyn's Bergen Beach, said the developer of a 184-unit condominium there, is that the land is being bought up even as it is slipping away.
Land prices in Bergen Beach have quadrupled in the last five years, said George Massaua and other area developers.
Mr.
Massaua and his partners, the brothers Murray and Edward Gallin, are putting up the six-building Bergen


Davis's Sister to Testify on Night of Police Raid
LEAD: The sister of Larry Davis who answered the door when the police burst into her Bronx apartment with guns drawn almost two years ago is expected to testify in his defense tomorrow.


Lifting the Ice Curtain
LEAD: ABOUT 30 YARDS TO the west, across the snow and ice hummocks of the Bering Strait, lies the international date line.
Beyond the random paths of polar bears and the scattered holes cut through the ice by Eskimos to snare king crab, no signs or even snow cairns mark one's approach to the divide.
Crossing it is only a matter of steps, but this global seam separates today from tomorrow, the Americas from Eurasia, and the territory of the United States from that of the Soviet Union.


HANDICAPPING
LEAD: For any cuisine to survive through the centuries, it has to be closely associated with health.
Throughout its history, great cuisine -from Chinese to French to Indian - follows that code.
Yet when people speak about diet food, it brings to mind tasteless, boring concoctions and tiny portions.
The current euphemism ''spa cuisine'' is not much better.


A Mother's Fury
LEAD: SHORTLY AFTER my retirement from a career in surgery, I was invited to teach at a school for naturalists at Yellowstone National Park.
Let it be said that I know nothing of the wilderness, that my feet have rarely left pavement, that I am afraid of snakes.
Nevertheless, at the appointed date, there I was in Mammoth Hot Springs, Wyo., to ''reinterpret'' the wilderness as though it were a human body.


Diane Mary Lee Weds Executive In Alexandria, Va.
LEAD: St.
Louis Roman Catholic Church in Alexandria, Va., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Diane Mary Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary A. Lee of Alexandria, to Theodore Wachtell 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Wachtell of Pleasantville, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Elliott performed the ceremony.


Elway Sidelined
LEAD: After watching his star quarterback limp through some test drills on a sprained ankle Friday, Coach Dan Reeves of the Denver Broncos knew that John Elway would not be playing against the Steelers in Pittsburgh today. ''He's tender, and knowing John, he would try to do things he normally does, from a reaction standpoint,'' Reeves said.


'Children Have to Have Role Models'
LEAD: THE waiting lists at Connecticut's mental health clinics for children grow longer every day.
Among the reasons seen by Patrick Bologna, a psychiatric social worker who has been the director of the Child Guidance Center of Greater Bridgeport for 14 years, are a shortage of money and therapists.
The result, he said, is that more children who need therapy are going without help.


Drug Money is Fighting Crime
LEAD: LAW enforcement officials are turning crime against itself.
Millions of dollars from drug dealing have been put to use against crime in Connecticut under a four-year-old Federal law allowing assets seized in drug raids to be returned to the state and local police.


THE NATION: Debate on Quality; Efficiency Marches On, And Some Patients Are Left Behind
LEAD: WHILE the dispute continues over health-care financing, the debate over health-care quality is just beginning.


&gt;Commuters Who Want To Fight Back
LEAD: I read with great interest the article on Sept. 11 concerning Martin Hacker, a commuter on New Jersey Transit who wants to fight back (''Irked by Delays, Commuter Fights Back'').


The Fate of Baby Amy
LEAD: I am entering medical school next fall.
Lynne Vuillemot's story has given me insight into the dilemma faced by parents of seriously ill infants.
I hope that, thanks to her, I will be able to discuss honestly and with compassion all the alternatives available in such a situation, including the difficult one of doing nothing and letting nature take its course.


Question Of the Week; Does Davey Johnson Deserve to Come Back?
LEAD: Absolutely not.
He doesn't communicate with his players except through remarks to the press.
He appears more afraid to offend certain players than to do what the team needs.
He shows little confidence in other, younger players.
He sacrifices defense in the hope of the homer.
Bring on McCarver.


The Fate of Baby Amy
LEAD: There is no single right answer when you are asked if risky heart surgery should be performed on your newborn child (''The Fate of Baby Amy,'' by Lynne Vuillemot, Sept. 25).
With full respect for Lynne Vuillemot's decision, I feel a need to present another side to this story.
I share Lynne's intense grief - from the moment I learned my baby daughter,


Claire McIlhenny Is Married in D.C.
LEAD: Claire Brooke McIlhenny, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. McIlhenny of Great Falls, Va., and John Joseph Dempsey Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dempsey of Cleveland, were married yesterday at the Presbyterian Church of the Pilgrims in Washington by the Rev.
Sidney D. Skirvin, who was assisted by the Rev.


How Defense Became Respectable
LEAD: THE first man to revel in defense was Wilhelm Steinitz, who ruled the chess world from 1866 to 1894.
He has disciples everywhere.


Bush Wins the Endorsement Of Two Chicago Newspapers
LEAD: The Chicago Tribune and The Chicago Sun-Times today endorsed George Bush, the Republican Presidential nominee, calling him one of the most qualified and experienced candidates ever, although the Tribune complained about the quality of the campaign and Mr.
Bush's choice of a running mate.


The Menace of Trade Blocs
LEAD: A watershed in world trade lies not far ahead.
Decisions during the next Administration can determine long-term health of the U.S. and world economies, affecting politics and defense.


From Uruguay, Woolens in Style
LEAD: ROLLING grasslands, English pedigree sheep and a climate similar to that of New Zealand have long made Uruguay a leading exporter of fine wool.
And for the last 20 years, this small South American nation has also been the source of richly colored handknits, the creation of a knitting cooperative called Manos del Uruguay.


Unbeaten Notre Dame Posts 7th Victory
LEAD: There were all sorts of pitfalls that could have tripped up Notre Dame today, enough that Coach Lou Holtz admitted he was fitful and scared all week.


Ceiling Fixtures
LEAD: CEILING fixtures for overhead lights, chandeliers or electric fans often must be removed during interior painting or redecorating, or to check a malfunction.
Although the means by which these items are attached to the ceiling is usually hidden from view, fixture mountings are seldom as mysterious as they may seem.


Jets Begin New Era Without Gastineau
LEAD: A Jets team angered and weakened by Mark Gastineau's decision to quit football starts its new era today against the Dolphins in Miami.


In Disasters, a U.N. Agency Produces Order
LEAD: When hurricane Gilbert struck Jamaica last month, knocking out communications on the island, amateur radio operators were organized to carry information on the extent of damage.
In Bangladesh, when the country was hit last month by the worst floods in memory, there were large stocks of food on hand to face the immediate crisis.


Old Money, New Power
LEAD: ED BRADLEY, THE ''60 MINUTES'' CORRESPONDENT, was on the podium.
He was speaking on an afternoon last May at the national convention of the American Association of Retired Persons, the subject of a famous expose by ''60 Minutes'' that accused the group of being little more than a front for an insurance company.


Next Best Thing To Walking on Air
LEAD: OPEN backs and curved medium-high heels give shoes being shown with the Paris ready-to-wear collections a comfortable, airy look.
This front-laced style, a favorite of Christian Lacroix in leather or straw, is almost prim from the front, but light at the sides and back.
It is paired with his more formal spring daytime clothes.


Diane E. Hall Wed To H. W. Juan 3d, A Bank Executive
LEAD: Diane Elizabeth Hall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon B. Hall Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Henry Walter Juan 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry W. Juan Jr. of Greenwich.
Rocco Benvenuto, a Town Justice in Greenwich, officiated.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Oct. 9 about campaign tactics of Israeli political parties misstated the views of a communications analyst.
The analyst, Dr.
Yehudit Elitzor of Hebrew University, said commercials by the two leading parties suggested an attitude of ''I'll bet voters aren't going to use their heads.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 23, 1988
LEAD:
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
THE DARK TOWER: The Gunslinger, by Stephen King. (Plume/NAL, $10.95.) Volume One of a series about a young man's pursuit of an evil force.
2
3
HEAVEN AND HELL, by John Jakes. (Dell, $5.95.) Two families in the aftermath of the Civil War.


AIDS and the Holocaust
LEAD: To the Editor:


Small Businesses Share an Incubator
LEAD: INCUBATOR: An apparatus for hatching eggs or for maintaining the life of a delicate baby.
A small-business incubator provides a similar environment for hatching delicate new businesses.


What to Pack
LEAD: To the Editor: Maps are my No. 1 item.
Another desirable inclusion is an eyeglass screwdriver kit for side pieces that come loose.
Such a kit is small and available at any optometrist.


Elizabeth Griffin Is Married in Rye
LEAD: Elizabeth Anne Griffin and Edward Anthony Matthews were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y., by Raymond Daur, deacon of the church.
Mrs.
Matthews is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
James Joseph Griffin of Rye.
Her husband is the son of Mr. and Mrs.


Miss Oberlander Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Regina Therese Oberlander and Thomas Vargha Cholnoky were married yesterday in Greenwich, Conn.
Msgr.
Elmer Peterson, godfather of the bridegroom, and Msgr.
Francis Glynn, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
Michael Roman Catholic Church, assisted by Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan.


Tatyana Doughty Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Tatyana Doughty was married yesterday to David Olyphant at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church by the Rev.
David H. C. Read.
The bride is a daughter of Nina Sorokoff Doughty of New Vernon, N.J., and Selden Emerson Doughty of Nanticoke, Md.
Her husband is a son of Adele Olyphant Emery of New Vernon and the late John K.


2 in Arctic Go Where Few Will Venture
LEAD: If helicopter pilots have a particular nightmare, it is one that features flying low, in fog, over mountainous terrain.
But for Linh Ho, a 45-year-old veteran of the South Vietnamese Air Force, such perils are to be taken in stride, whether they are encountered here in the Canadian Arctic or in the Pleiku Highlands of


Baseball Notebook
LEAD: Raines Will Pass Up New-Look Free Agency for Expos Pact


100-Year-Old Engine is Restored
LEAD: THE century-old Derby locomotive, the first electric freight engine, traveled a quarter-mile last weekend at the Shoreline Trolley Museum in East Haven.
Moving at a speed considered extraordinary for its time and with sunlight flashing off its ''Broadway colors'' of cadmium yellow and orange, the engine resembles a giant toy.


Outdoors; A Calendar for Small-Game Hunters
LEAD: Most of New York State's small-game seasons are under way, and with few exceptions, they are similar to those of recent years.


Mary Lindemann Is Wed To Alan G. Spear in Maine
LEAD: Mary Allen Lindemann and Alan George Spear were married yesterday at the Church of St.
Mary the Virgin in Falmouth, Me.
The Rev.
Stephen W. Foote, Archdeacon of the Episcopal Diocese of Maine, performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Jeffrey M. Kirk.


THE WORLD: Bordering 3 Wars; Honduras Is Losing Pieces To Armies and Refugees
LEAD: WHEN Jose Benito Bravo Centeno, a 44-year-old senior Nicaraguan rebel commander, was arrested last March in Tegucigalpa with a small amount of cocaine, he was simply detained overnight and then deported, like a foreign dignitary, to the contras' enclave along the Honduran-Nicaraguan border.


Leslie A. Brownridge Wed to Jordan Mayer
LEAD: At the Great Neck Synagogue in Great Neck, L.I., Leslie Ann Brownridge, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Brownridge of Roslyn, L.I., was married last evening to Jordan Mark Mayer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sanford J. Mayer of Jericho, L.I.
Rabbi Dale Polakoff officiated.
The bride graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree in advertising at Northwestern University.


Tricks and Treats for Grown-Up Children
LEAD: Whether it is greeting cards, candy or costumes, Halloween continues to grow in popularity as an adult celebration.
Not that children are excluded from the festivities.
Rather, marketers say, the baby boom generation, with its tremendous buying power, has appropriated the occasion as its own, and businesses are picking up on this trend.


Yonkers Ends a Phase Of Crackdown on Drugs
LEAD: Police officers working under cover since April concluded the first phase of a crackdown on drug sales this week with the arrest of 52 people, bringing to 120 the number apprehended since April.


Schools Split on 'Open Campus'
LEAD: FOR Jennifer White, a senior at North Shore High School in Glen Head, an open campus has meant the freedom to leave school at lunch time, as well as during other free periods, to work on independent research projects.
This, Ms.
White says, is a privilege she cannot afford to lose.
However, if the School District decides, by its targeted deadline of mid


Difficult Week for French Premier
LEAD: Prime Minister Michel Rocard has endured his most embattled week in office, with more than 50,000 Government workers taking to the streets of Paris to demand pay increases.


Anne Fender is Wed
LEAD: The wedding of Anne Elizabeth Fender, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Fender of Basking Ridge, N.J., to Erich Ryder Salzman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Salzman of Ridgefield, N.J., took place yesterday at St.
Lawrence O'Toole Roman Catholic Church in Brewster, N.Y.
The Rev.
Gerard P. Travers performed the ceremony.


The Music Of Fountains Is Everywhere
LEAD: BY day the din of traffic often drowns out the murmur of the fountains, but early in the morning or late at night you don't have to walk far to hear it.


5 Years Later, Grenada Is Tranquil and Thriving
LEAD: They remember hearing the drone of airplanes over the island in the early morning darkness.
As the sky began turning gray, a plane roared low over the new airfield the Cubans were building and antiaircraft guns opened up, spewing red tracer bullets.
Another plane flew in even lower, and parachutes began blossoming behind it.


PARLEY IN JORDAN IS SAID TO NARROW SPLIT WITH ARAFAT
LEAD: The leaders of Egypt and Jordan reported significant progress today in healing a two-year rift between Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization after unexpected negotiations Saturday with Yasir Arafat, chairman of the P.L.O.


Detroit Bets on a Safer Brake System
LEAD: The 1989 model year is the first in which computer-controlled anti-lock brake systems are available on many cars and light trucks.
Experts regard the brakes as a major advance in reducing accidents, and Detroit is ignoring the conventional wisdom that safety does not sell and betting that buyers will pay close to $1,000 for the technology.


Japanese Visitors
LEAD: The Japanese are coming this week with more than 500 works of art representing the great Daimyo culture of feudal lords who ruled Japan under the shoguns.
They will go on view at the National Gallery of Art on Sunday.
A festival of Japanese art forms will accompany the show, including the daily performance of a traditional tea ceremony.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Fighting Nature, for Whales  As the small war being waged to save two whales increased in Alaska, some biologists began to question the wisdom of the efforts.
Page A15.
Jets and Giants Win  The Jets beat the Dolphins, 44-30, despite spectacular passing by Miami's Dan Marino.
The Giants topped Atlanta, 23-16.


Review/Music; The Prokofiev Sonatas
LEAD: This season we have already had a complete Bartok quartet cycle, and the start of a Beethoven piano sonata cycle, and there are other cycles in the offing.
But valuable as these traversals may be, they tend to focus on works we hear all the time, or even, as in the case of the Beethoven, entire cycles we hear at least annually.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


BOMBING SUSPECTS SEIZED BY ISRAELIS
LEAD: The Israeli Army said today that it had arrested several residents of southern Lebanon accused of helping to plan a car-bomb attack that killed eight Israeli soldiers on Wednesday.


Nabisco Bid Seen by Kohlberg
LEAD: Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company is planning to offer a staggering $90 a share, or about $20.3 billion, for RJR Nabisco Inc., the tobacco and food conglomerate, professionals with knowledge of the plans said yesterday.


Whale Trapped in Net Freed
LEAD: A 25-foot gray whale that became trapped in a weighted net was cut free by two lifeguards and continued its southward migration this weekend, the authorities said.
The whale was discovered by the lifeguards at about 5 P.M.
Saturday in a net weighted with eight small anchors three miles offshore, said Capt.


Turn That Dial Back in Time: Superman &amp; Co. Return!
LEAD: Look!
Up in front of the Holiday Inn!
It's a bird!
It's a plane!
It's Bob Hastings!
Yes, it's Bob Hastings, who can change the course of mighty rivers, bend steel in his bare hands and fight the never-ending battle for truth, justice and the American way -all while standing calmly at an ordinary-looking microphone, wearing his everyday corduroy jacket and his dark, open-necked sport shirt.


Sunshine Forever Rallies
LEAD: Sunshine Forever, the heavy favorite from the United States, rallied after losing the lead in the deep stretch to win by a neck today in the $750,000 Budweiser International at Laurel.


College Football; Bruins vs. Irish? Keep On Dreaming
LEAD: The dream game of this season will remain a dream if U.C.L.A. (7-0) and Notre Dame (7-0) sweep their remaining four opponents and finish the campaign at 11-0.
In that case, there will be split votes and arguments over which is the top team of 1988.
And if each wins a bowl game, the arguments will get louder and longer.


Milestone Events
LEAD: On Friday, at the State Department, Carol Adelman was sworn in as the Agency for International Development's Assistant Administrator of the Asia and Near East Bureau.
In brief remarks attended by her husband and friends, Mrs.
Adelman said that her induction into office might be a candidate for the Guinness Book of World Records as the last swearing-in of the Reagan Administration.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  Kraft's board rejected a takeover by Philip Morris.
Moving to preserve its independence, the directors offered stockholders a dividend package they valued at $110 a share, or $14 billion.
Philip Morris, which had offered about $11.5 billion, is likely to raise its bid for the nation's fourth-largest consumer goods producer.


Dangers on the Playground: Better Safeguards Are Urged
LEAD: Few regulations exist to guard preschool children against dangers in the playground, even though many such hazards could be avoided, Federal health officials say.


ITT Plans Guilty Plea In U.S. Contract Case
LEAD: The ITT Corporation said today that it would plead guilty Monday to a charge of conspiring to defraud the Government.
The Government had charged that the company treated an Air Force employee to meals and golf greens fees to obtain information on two Air Force contracts worth $180 million.
The company could be fined as much as $500,000.


Review/Dance; Abridged 'Swan Lake' Breaks With Tradition
LEAD: The East Coast had its first look at the San Francisco Ballet's lavishly designed and hugely popular new ''Swan Lake'' when the production by Helgi Tomasson came to the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts this weekend.


What's Wrong With Public School Uniforms?; 'A Cover-Up'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tamils Kill 9 Indian Troops
LEAD: At least nine Indian peacekeeping soldiers were killed in two attacks by Tamil guerrillas in Sri Lanka's northern and eastern regions today, Indian officials said.
A Indian spokeswoman here said seven soldiers were killed when their vehicle was blown up by a land mine at Omanthai in the north.
At Batticaloa in the east, two soldiers and a former Tamil rebel were killed in an ambush, she said.


Savings Unit Failures Seen
LEAD: Up to 50 United States savings and loan institutions will fail between now and year-end, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board chairman, M. Danny Wall, told a business conference Friday.


Retirement-Plan Accumulations
LEAD: INDIVIDUALS who have accumulated sizable sums in retirement plans face an important decision, and, tax professionals warn, the paperwork needed to make the decision is so complex that they ought to start getting the necessary records together right now.


Amoco Profit Rises by 34%
LEAD: The Amoco Corporation reported Thursday that third-quarter earnings rose 34 percent on a 1.7 percent increase in revenue.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Public Broadcasting Act


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Alberto Culver Co., Melrose Park, Ill., a maker of hair-care, health and beauty aids, elected Howard B. Bernick president and chief operating officer, effective Nov. 1.


Review/Theater; Seeking Truth in an Age of Considerable Boredom
LEAD: If the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival is a serious portent of cultural things to come, the term avant-garde can finally be retired from New York's vocabulary.
The festival's opening attraction for 1988, ''The Warrior Ant,'' is nothing if not a throwback to the smorgasbord esthetics of that totemic artistic happening of the 1950's, the Ed Sullivan show.


Why Johnny Can't Think
LEAD: It occurred to me the other day that this year's rather mindless Presidential campaign might be further evidence of the decline of American education.
Maybe the candidates are giving us such a thin diet because our schools never taught us how to deal with anything more substantial.


Dr. Jennifer Madans Wed to Immunologist
LEAD: Dr.
Jennifer Holly Madans, an official at the National Center for Health Statistics in Hyattsville, Md., and Dr.
Terence Martyn Phillips, an immunologist, were married yesterday at the One Washington Circle Hotel in Washington by Rabbi Harold White.


Computer Hacker in Britain Said to Enter U.S. Systems
LEAD: The London police said yesterday that they had found and questioned a 23-year-old man who had used computer networks to break into more than 200 military, corporate and university systems in Europe and the United States during the last five years.


Jennifer S. Orkin, a Stylist, Wed to Kenneth A. Lewis
LEAD: At the Lotos Club in New York, Jennifer Sara Orkin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Orkin of New York, was married yesterday to Kenneth Adam Lewis, a son of Barbara Lewis of Merion, Pa., and Stanley Lewis of Yardley, Pa.
Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony.


OPEC's Plan to Cut Production Collapses
LEAD: An ambitious attempt by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to limit its rampant oil production collapsed over the weekend as Iraq and Iran failed to bridge their political schism.


Strickland Learns From First Mistake
LEAD: Following the 1986 college draft, Len Bias died after using drugs and three other players among the first seven selections were found to have drug problems.
So, beginning with the 1987-88 season, the National Basketball Association instituted an education program designed to ease rookies into the league.


Exxon's Japan Affiliate Shifting to Thompson
LEAD: Esso Sekiyu K.K., the Exxon Corporation's Japanese affiliate, has moved its advertising to J. Walter Thompson Japan after a four-way competition that included the incumbent, Tokyu.
The annual budget is $16 million.


Shelter to Aid Homeless Men Who Have TB
LEAD: In an attempt to stem a surge in tuberculosis cases among New York City's homeless, health officials are planning a separate homeless shelter ward for men receiving treatment for the disease.


School of Visual Arts' Chairman Is Honored
LEAD: Silas Rhodes, founder and chairman of the School of Visual Arts in New York, was applauded heartily by hundreds of art directors - many of them graduates of the school - as he received the Art Directors Club's Special Hall of Fame Award at a dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel Friday night.


Bossy's Retirement Is Expected Today
LEAD: The Islanders have scheduled a news conference for this afternoon in Garden City, L.I., at which it is expected that Mike Bossy, their longtime right wing, will officially announce his retirement because of a back ailment that has plagued him for the past two years.


Couch Potato Vote Receives an Appeal
LEAD: Like the three performers who sang Stephen Sondheim's ''You Gotta Have A Gimmick,'' Anna Eshoo has a gimmick.
California-style.


A Hero Emerges At West Virginia
LEAD: Representatives of eight bowl games were in the press box at Morgantown, W. Va., Saturday when the Mountaineers handed Boston College a 59-19 defeat.


Ayer's Car Role In Spain Grows
LEAD: SEAT, the biggest Spanish car maker, which was bought by Volkswagen two years ago, has chosen Tapsa Ayer, the Madrid arm of N. W. Ayer, to become its European agency of record.
The budget is $90 million, which will more than double the shop's billings from last year and make it the largest agency in Spain, up from No.


Director at Sackler and Freer Named
LEAD: Dr.
Milo C. Beach, an expert on Indian painting, has been named director of the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery and the Freer Gallery of Art, two museums of the Smithsonian Institution devoted to Asian arts.


Fashion Industry Rises To First Lady's Defense
LEAD: The fashion industry rallied to the defense of Nancy Reagan's use of borrowed designer dresses and jewelry in a newspaper advertisment.


Bridge
LEAD: For the first time in the 28-year history of the World Team Olympiad, an American open team collected the title.
Presented with the trophies Saturday night, marking their success in the two-week competition, were Bob Wolff, Bob Hamman and Jim Jacoby of Dallas; Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex.; Jeff Meckstroth of Columbus, Ohio, and Eric Rodwell of West Lafayette,


Pro Basketball; Celtics Victorious As Toast of Madrid
LEAD: K. C. Jones was optimistic: ''We'll get to him,'' the Boston Celtics' former coach and current vice president said of Stojan Vrankovic, a 7-foot-2-inch Yugoslav coveted by the Celtics.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Travel section yesterday about hotel reservations in Washington for the Presidential inaugural weekend misstated the cost of a package plan at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel.
It costs $15,000.


Los Angeles Ad Agencies Struggle
LEAD: When it opened an office here three years ago, Scali, McCabe, Sloves was not alone among New York-based advertising agencies in regarding this as a most promising city for expansion - a vibrant, trend-setting market that styles itself as the hub of the Pacific Rim.


Bush Is Sticking With a Safe Game Plan
LEAD: Vice President Bush enters the final stretch of the Presidential campaign seeking to keep his candidacy in a protective bubble that minimizes the possibility of last-minute mistakes and to continue to rely on carefully scripted events and commercials to keep Michael S. Dukakis on the defensive.


Brunswick Up Slightly
LEAD: The Brunswick Corporation Friday reported marginally higher profits for the third quarter, saying that a lower tax rate had increased net income.
Earnings rose to $43.2 million, from $42.8 million in the 1987 quarter.
The company said revenues rose to $767.9 million in the third quarter from $766.5 million in the comparable 1987 period.


Foes Accuse Bush Campaign Of Inflaming Racial Tension
LEAD: Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and other Democrats accused the Presidential campaign of Vice President Bush yesterday of inflaming the nation's racial fears with a relentless emphasis on the case of a black prisoner who raped a white woman while he was on leave from a Massachusetts prison.


The Squeeze on Peru's Businesses
LEAD: For Hans Traver, the perils of making plastic goods in Peru have included the hostility of a leftist military regime, a flood of cheap products from foreign competitors and a .38-caliber terrorist bullet that is lodged in his jaw.


Bringing Warmth To Winter Sportsmen
LEAD: Several years ago, a California-based construction supply firm came across a product that seemed well suited to its buyers.
The item was a hand warmer activated by air.


Senate Rejects Aid for U.N. Troops
LEAD: As it rushed toward adjournment, the Senate on Saturday rejected an Administration request for $150 million for United Nations peacekeeping operations in several regions, including southern Africa, despite White House assurances that it would continue to support the Angolan rebels.


The Busiest Day
LEAD: Why does it occur in October?


An Effort to Smile Through the Gloom
LEAD: There are some moments when a day on the campaign trail is like a day at summer camp, with the candidate's entourage behaving like carefree children.
There are other days when the campaign turns glamorous and tense with drama.
But then, there are days like the recent one in McKeesport, a steel mill town that has come on hard times.


What's Wrong With Public School Uniforms?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jersey Woman and Cousin Charged in Killing of Father and an Aunt
LEAD: A college freshman and her cousin were charged yesterday with killing her father and her aunt, who were found bludgeoned to death Saturday in Upper Saddle River, N.J.


Another Bicentennial
LEAD: George Washington is customarily associated with the city that bears his name and with his native Virginia.
Yet, in the case of New York, Washington not only slept there, but was also inaugurated there as the country's first President in 1789.
In fact, New York was the capital of the United States from then until 1790.


POLITICS: Campaign Finance; Democrats Turn Tables on G.O.P. Outraising It in Races for the Senate
LEAD: Many Republican Senate candidates this year are finding themselves in the unusual and uncomfortable position of being outspent or matched financially by their Democratic rivals.


Spurgeon M. Keeny, 95, Headed Relief Efforts in Asia and Europe
LEAD: Spurgeon M. Keeny, who spent decades in Asia helping local governments set up programs for family planning and children's health care, died of a stroke Thursday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 95 years old.


Group Plans Overhaul Of the Pulitzer Fountain
LEAD: A privately financed renovation of Grand Army Plaza, on Fifth Avenue, is to begin today with the removal of the goddess Pomona from atop the Fountain of Abundance.
By the end of 1989, the fountain may do something it hasn't in six years - function.


Review/Dance; Graham, Old and New
LEAD: One of the greatest influences upon Martha Graham from the 1920's to the 1940's was Louis Horst, a theorist of dance composition who also composed spare, rhythmically crisp, melodically clear and pungently dissonant scores.
Two Graham works with music by Mr.
Horst were offered by the Martha Graham Dance Company Friday night at the City Center Theater, 131 West 55th


Letting Smokers Pay for Child Care
LEAD: John J. Day of Indianapolis is a parent, a teacher and a state legislator and, logically enough, the creator of Indiana's program of paying for child care for school-age children by raising the state cigarette tax.


Greece Plans More Exports to U.S.
LEAD: The Greek Government, with the assistance of American marketing experts, has begun an ambitious export program designed to make ''Made in Greece'' a household label in the United States.


DUKAKIS PULLBACK IS SEEN IN JERSEY
LEAD: New Jersey Democratic leaders are becoming increasingly anxious and angry about the Presidential campaign in their state, or lack of one, by Michael S. Dukakis as the race moves into its final weeks.


Bush Flier Features Convict
LEAD: A Republican Party campaign flier mailed last week in support of Vice President Bush's campaign prominently features a photograph of Willie Horton, the murderer who escaped while on prison furlough in Massachusetts and then raped a woman in Maryland.


Reviews/Television; An Amish Farmer and a Prosecutor
LEAD: A promising beginning and an inspirational ending, but no middle; that is the average made-for-television movie.
Tonight's specimen, on NBC at 9, is ''A Stoning in Fulham County.''


Renamed Shansby Fund To Cut Montgomery Tie
LEAD: Just a year after forming a consumer-oriented investment fund with Montgomery Securities, J. Gary Shansby is severing ties with the San Francisco investment banking company and renaming the fund.
In a friendly buyout, an investor bought Montgomery's limited partnership interest in the fund, which will change its name from the Montgomery Consumer Fund to the Shansby


Treasury to Offer 2-Year Notes This Week
LEAD: This week's Treasury calendar is highlighted by an offering of $9 billion in two-year notes on Wednesday.
As usual, the weekly auction of three-month and six-month bills will be held this afternoon.


Hurricane Kills 111 in Caribbean And Leaves Thousands Homeless
LEAD: A severe storm began a new life over the Pacific Ocean today after a six-day trip across the Caribbean that reportedly killed at least 111 people and left hundreds of thousands homeless in five countries.


Corrections
LEAD: The Food Notes column in The Living Section on Wednesday incorrectly described plans for a wine tasting at the Four Seasons restaurant on Nov. 6.
Sixty Napa Valley vintners are expected, not 16.


Cosby at Carnegie
LEAD: The comedian Bill Cosby is to give a benefit performance at Carnegie Hall on Nov. 29 at 9 P.M. to benefit the hall.
Ticket prices range from $35 to $2,500.
Information: 247-7800.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''After 50 years of repression, our nation is seeking to regain its liberty.''  - Jurgis Oksas, to the Lithuanian Reform Movement's congress.  [ A1:4. ]


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct. 24, 1988:
MONDAY
Atlantic Richfield
Lubrizol Corp
Baker Hughes
Phila Elec Co
Brown &amp; Sharpe Mfg
Union Camp Corp
Howell Corp
Wells Fargo Mtge &amp; Equity
Interstate Securities
Zurn Industries
Johnson &amp; Johnson
TUESDAY
Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co
Kennametal Inc
Amax Gold Inc
McDonald &amp; Co Instmts
American Brands
NUI Corp
Amoco Corp
Newmont Mining Corp
Ball Corp
Norwest Corp
Black Hills Corp
Public Serv Co New Mex
Borden Inc
Rockaway Corp
Cilcorp Inc
Rollins Inc
Duke Power$


POLITICS: The Basic Speech; 'When I Talk About a Kinder and Gentler Nation, I Mean It'
LEAD: Candidates for President make dozens of speeches in their campaigns.
Some address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
But more often the candidate uses a ''basic speech.'' It summarizes, with little variation from one occasion to the next except for an obligatory local reference at the beginning, how the candidate wants to present himself to the voters.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Who played the most games in the major leagues without playing in a World Series game?


South African Family Mourns Son Who 'Disappeared'
LEAD: A gentle man wearing his best Sunday suit and the look of personal tragedy, Matome Bopape wondered today about the whereabouts of his oldest son, Stanza.


A Fallen Leader Is Now Talking Of Loftier Things
LEAD: He sounded like the quintessential political reformer, passionately espousing the virtues of public campaign financing and the stronger ethics provisions proposed by commissions on city charter revision and government integrity.
Only the special relevance of those proposals to his present circumstances, and his cigar, gave him away.


Books of The Times; Reagan's Fiscal Policies Come Home to Roost
LEAD:  Day of Reckoning  The Consequences of American Economic Policy Under Reagan and After  By Benjamin Friedman  323 pages.
Random House. $19.95.


Colorado Rejects a Request To Store More Nuclear Waste
LEAD: Gov.
Roy Romer today denied a Federal request to expand low-level radioactive waste storage at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant.


Witnessing the Birth Of an Interest Group
LEAD: ''Average Students for Quayle.''


Airport Expansion in Japan Is Protested


Amid High Hopes, Kohl Leaves Today For Talks in Moscow
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl flies to Moscow on Monday with a grand entourage and high hopes that West Germany can finally find the place it seeks at the forefront of East-West detente.


Legends of Soccer
LEAD: Hilarious soccer joke:


Outdoors: Angling in Preserves
LEAD: THE Constitution makes no mention of trout or bass, deer or grouse, duck, goose, dove or quail.
But there is, nonetheless, a bedrock American tradition of free public land and the freedom to hunt and fish thereon.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-9  Progress in Jordanian-P.L.O. ties was reported by the leaders of Egypt and Jordan after unexpected negotiations Saturday with Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
A1


HDM New York Gets Lea &amp; Perrins Account
LEAD: Less than two years after introducing White Wine Worcestershire Sauce to a public acquainted only with the deep brown original, Lea &amp; Perrins Inc. on Tuesday gave its $5 million account to HDM New York.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Magee Wins in Florida: Andrew Magee earned his first victory on the PGA Tour, shooting a six-under-par 66 yesterday to win the $400,000 Pensacola Open tournament by one stroke over Bruce Lietzke, Tom Byrum and Ken Green.
Magee, 26, who entered the tournament in 64th place on the money list, won $72,000.


Dr. Ana Maria Salazar Is Wed in Philadelphia
LEAD: Dr.
Ana Maria Salazar and Dr.
Daniel M. Kolansky were married yesterday at the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia by Rabbi Elliott Holin.


Tokiko Kato's Songs Reach for Intimacy With Her Audience
LEAD: In the sea of sentimental warblers and prepubescent teen-age idols that engulfs Japan's pop culture, Tokiko Kato stands out.


Coaches in Overtime
LEAD: When George Butcher retired in 1981 after 34 years of coaching high school football, he planned to play a lot of golf and spend the winters in South Carolina and Florida with his wife, playing more golf and relaxing.


Miss Duke Wed To John S. Cluett
LEAD: Maria-Luisa Biddle Duke and John Stockton Cluett were married yesterday at their home in Big Sur, Calif.
Judge Mark C. Rowland of Alaska Superior Court in Anchorage officiated.


Eagles' Rally Stuns Cowboys
LEAD: Randall Cunningham threw a 1-yard touchdown pass to Anthony Toney with four seconds left today as the Philadelphia Eagles rallied from a 20-0 first-half deficit to beat the Dallas Cowboys, 24-23.


What's Wrong With Public School Uniforms?; Dress Code for Teachers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Toxin Is Found in Corn Harvested in Several States
LEAD: A powerful cancer-causing toxin created by a fungus that thrives in hot, dry weather, has been detected in newly harvested corn in several states, raising concern among officials that contamination may be widespread.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
None  Tuesday
Durable Goods Sept.  Wednesday
G.N.P. 3d Qtr.  Thursday
Personal Income Sept.  Friday
None


Arab Intrusion in Israeli Politics Dominates an Election Debate
LEAD: Israel's candidates for Prime Minister struck out at each other today in a campaign debate dominated by questions about King Hussein's apparent endorsement of Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and his plans for Middle East peace.


A Stretcher for the Dodgers
LEAD: MAYBE most of all this winter I'll miss Mickey Hatcher, who runs as if he's being chased by a dog.


Common Heritage Isn't Always Enough
LEAD: One of the bits of conventional wisdom of the 1988 Presidential is that the Greek-American vote will go overwhelmingly for the first Greek-American to run for President.


Tie Breakers Made Simpler
LEAD: TIE BREAKERS in Davis Cup?
Heresay, you say.
But it's true.
Beginning in 1989, Davis Cup matches, the last bastion of such outrageous set scores as 10-8, 13-11, 17-15, will end all but the final sets of individual matches with tie breakers once a set reaches 6-6.


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
West Germany's growth rate next year could reach 2 percent to 2.5 percent, up from earlier official forecasts of 1.5 percent to 2 percent, the Economics Ministry said today.
In a statement, the ministry said it was still reviewing the economy and that an official projection would be made in the Government's annual economic report in January.


Villahermosa Journal; Recipe for Mexico? Politics With Pepper Added
LEAD: Politicians have switched parties, accusations of electoral treachery are flying and both candidates are attempting to forge unity in their own fractious parties.
Here in Tabasco these days, the politics are even hotter than the state's famed chili peppers.


Leonard H. Sandler Is Dead at 62; New York Appellate Court Justice
LEAD: Justice Leonard H. Sandler of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court, who administered the oath of office to Mayor Koch for each of his three terms, died last night at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Jets Beat Dolphins' Air Attack
LEAD: Under intense, dramatic circumstances, the Jets surged to a 20-point lead over the Dolphins today, then staggered to a 44-30 victory.


2,800 Residents, 2 Papers, and a Matter of Pride
LEAD: A war of weekly newspapers has broken out in this secluded former whaling village in eastern Suffolk County, challenging loyalties to a local institution.


Recognition Officials Depart
LEAD: The president and marketing director of Recognition Equipment Inc., both indicted two weeks ago on charges of conspiracy to defraud the United States Postal Service in the procurement of $250 million in Government contracts, have taken leaves of absence, the company said Thursday.
The two executives,


French Wine Promoted In Cable TV Campaign
LEAD: The French Food and Wine Society, a trade group also known as Sopexa, is starting an American advertising campaign on cable television today promoting its ''affordable'' line of wines.
A total of 33 wines from 11 importers affiliated with its division called food and wine from France will be featured.


Lawyers, Debra Anisman And Paul K. Milmed, Wed
LEAD: Debra R. Anisman, an associate in the law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, and Paul K. Milmed, an assistant United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, were married yesterday at the Water Club in New York.
Rabbi Amram Prero officiated.


As Alaska Whale Rescue Is Pressed, Biologists Question Effort's Wisdom
LEAD: As the small war being waged to save a pair of whales escalated today, some biologists began to question the wisdom of the effort.


Steven George Eftimiades Is Married to Miss Marudis
LEAD: At the Orthodox Church of Our Lady of Kazan in Sea Cliff, L.I., Eleni Marudis was married yesterday to Steven George Eftimiades by the Rev.
Emmanuel Gratsias, assisted by the Rev.
Leonid Kishkovsky.


The Work of the 100th Congress
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  Omnibus Trade Act Extends Presidential authority to negotiate trade agreements, increases Presidential authority to retaliate against certain unfair trade practices, provides relief to United States industries hurt by imports if they improve competitiveness, authorizes $1 billion for worker retraining and streamlines rules controlling exports to Soviet bloc.


Julie Fraenkel Is Married to Joshua Jacob Mamis
LEAD: Julie Fraenkel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Levy Fraenkel of Rye, N.Y., and Joshua Jacob Mamis, a son of Mrs.
John Edward King of Glen Ridge, N.J., and Justin Mamis of Watchung, N.J., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Robert A. Rothman performed the ceremony at the Stouffer Westchester Hotel in White


Streaking Rangers Roll Into First Place
LEAD: They are almost tragicomic, what with their hands of stone and limitless spirit.
They create havoc and thus innumerable chances, if also precious few goals.
As a result, they have a tendency to exasperate in the same shift as they delight.
One thing Lucien DeBlois, Don Maloney and Jan Erixon never do, though, is stop working.


Soap Opera Magazines Fight For Fans' Hearts and Dollars
LEAD: Psst!
Skye will try to kill Barbara on ''All My Children.'' Mason will develop a third personality on ''Santa Barbara.'' And David will turn out to be the father of Nina's baby on ''The Young and the Restless.''


Medicare Reform Holds Promise for More Personalized Care
LEAD: To the Editor:


Vote No on Highway Bonds
LEAD: On Election Day, New York State voters will be asked to approve borrowing $3 billion for repairs to highways, roads and bridges.
By voting no, they would send a necessary message to the Legislature.


Other Sides of Skiing
LEAD: There is life after ski racing.
In fact, there is another life during a ski racer's career.
That's what 50 racers and coaches from the United States Ski Team are discovering today in a kind of executive training program.
They are learning about the business side of skiing as well as how to move into the real world after their racing days are over.


Steps Studied to Extend Weapons Fuel
LEAD: Reagan Administration officials say they have begun exploring some unusual steps to extend the dwindling supply of tritium, including reducing the amount of the gas in nuclear weapons and slightly delaying the schedule for replenishing the tritium that is already in warheads.


Soviets Plan Price Index
LEAD: The Soviet Union, which has long maintained that it has no inflation, plans to develop an index to measure rising prices, a senior Government statistician said Thursday.


Algo Henderson, 91, Ex-President Of Antioch College and an Author
LEAD: Algo D. Henderson, a former president of Antioch College and one of the principal planners of the State University of New York, died of cancer Thursday at Kaiser Hospital in San Francisco.
He was 91 years old and lived in Orinda, Calif.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article yesterday about a Bach organ Mass to be played by the organist Anthony Newman at the Holy Trinity Church, 316 East 88th Street, misstated the day of the performance.
It is to be this Sunday.


Dukakis Wins Endorsement Of Newspapers in Four Cities
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis was endorsed for President yesterday by newspapers in Detroit, St.
Louis, Milwaukee and Atlanta.


Vicki Nightingale Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Vicki Lynn Nightingale, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Nightingale of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Anderson Hettich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur M. Hettich of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and Longboat Key, Fla.
Judge Peter C. Dorsey of Federal District Court in Hartford performed the ceremony at the Belle Haven Club in Greenwich,


Reviews/Music; 'Attila': Praising Wotan
LEAD: Hagen wasn't the only barbarian stomping about and invoking Wotan on Friday night at Lincoln Center.
Somewhere between the latter part of the first act and the beginning of the third act of Wagner's ''Gotterdammerung'' at the Metropolitan Opera, the New York City Opera found time to squeeze in a performance of Verdi's ''Attila'' at the New York State Theater.


Review/Music; Mexico's Roots, With Marimbas and More
LEAD: ''Raices Musicales'' (''Musical Roots''), a night of Mexican music at the Triplex Theater on Friday night, started off with a graceful, animated duet on a marimba.
By the time the show was over, the musical history of Mexico had revealed itself: four more groups had appeared, and sounds of Spain, Africa, Germany and the United


Auto Union Is Losing Backer of Cooperation
LEAD: Donald F. Ephlin, the United Automobile Workers' leading advocate of joint company-union undertakings, has announced that he will retire as a vice president after the union's convention next June.


Devils Tie After a 2-0 Lead Slips Away
LEAD: The Devils took a two-goal lead before the game was nine minutes old tonight, but had to settle for a 3-3 deadlock with the Red Wings.


Cambridge Journal; As Race Grows, So Grows the Party
LEAD: At 6 o'clock this morning, David and Peter Salem unloaded a three-seat leather sofa, a stereo, and a cooler of beer from their car onto the bank of the Charles River here, staking out a prime position for the Head of the Charles crew races.
They also brought a set of unconvincing stickers reading ''Coke'' and '


More B-1 Problems Reported
LEAD: Maintenance problems are hampering the Air Force in readying its new fleet of 99 B-1 bombers for wartime missions, the General Accounting Office asserted in a report today.


More Stability Expected for Rates
LEAD: Long-term interest rates are mired in the middle of a range they have occupied for a year, and credit market analysts forecast that conditions are likely to remain stable for at least a while.


What Congress Has Wrought
LEAD: From economics to the environment to ethics, the Congress that adjourned this weekend passed a host of major legislation.
Table, page B7.


The Men Behind the Campaign Myth
LEAD: As recent weeks have confirmed, a Presidential campaign is not designed to reveal character.
Each candidate is presented as tough and gentle, thoughtful and decisive, a family man and a man of the world, along with whatever else suits the audience of the moment.
So with about two weeks to go until Election Day, the questions with which the campaign started - Who is George Bush?


Curbside Pickup and Sludge Forests: Some Cities Make Recycling Work
LEAD: When the people who manage the 100,000 tons of sewage sludge produced annually by this city are asked what they do with it, they point to a forest of unusually large conifers.


Steelers Increase Creativity and Win
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Steelers played as if they had nothing to lose today, and ended their longest losing streak in 20 seasons.


The Talk of Mystic; Pizza Brings New Fame To a Seaport
LEAD: Something happened here last week, something that could affect the delicate balance between the tony and the touristy, the patrician and the prosaic, that this salt-sprayed former whaling port has tried to maintain.
It was a movie, ''Mystic


35 Are Killed in Bangladesh In Storm on Southern Coast
LEAD: Hundreds of fishermen were missing after a severe storm hit the southern coast, killing at least 35 people, officials said today.
A boating group said the Government failed to broadcast warnings.


Lithuanians Move to Limit Moscow Ties
LEAD: The inaugural congress of a grass-roots political movement in the Soviet republic of Lithuania today approved a founding platform dedicated to curtailing, but not totally eliminating, Soviet rule in Lithuania.


Fountain Bet Ends in Death
LEAD: Christopher Paulsen, 26 years old, bet a man a dollar last Saturday that he could swim through a narrow conduit connecting two pools on the upper tier of the outdoor Ira's Fountain, near Portland's Civic Auditorium.
He became trapped under a concrete slab, had to be rescued, and died in a hospital this Saturday, the authorities said.


Reading Bush's Mind
LEAD: Mustn't get overconfident.
That Sasso fella will stop at nothing, and is pumping the rumors of me being a civil libertine.
And I hear Lloyd Bentsen has something more respectable up his sleeve.


Taking the Hits, Paying the Price
LEAD: IT figures.
In a season in which quarterbacks have fallen like bowling pins, Jim McMahon has remained sturdy.
For the first time in his seven-year career, McMahon made his seventh straight start last week.


A Blustery Day for Head of the Charles
LEAD: The 24th annual Head of the Charles Regatta became the battle of the Boston wind today as more than 3,500 rowers battled a howling wind over the first two and a half miles of this three-mile course.


Julie Herzig Is Married To Dr. Robert Desnick
LEAD: The wedding of Julie Esther Herzig, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip R. Herzig of Great Neck.
L.I., to Dr.
Robert John Desnick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore D. Desnick of Minneapolis, took place yesterday at the North Shore Country Club in Glen Head, L.I.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson performed the ceremony.


Kraft Rejects Bid of Philip Morris; Offers $14 Billion Dividend Plan
LEAD: Moving swiftly to head off an $11.5 billion takeover attempt by the Philip Morris Companies, Kraft Inc. announced yesterday that its directors had rejected the $90-a-share bid and would instead offer stockholders a dividend package it valued at more than $110 a share, or $14 billion.


Why Social Security Shouldn't Be Voluntary
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ozone Loss in Antarctic Appears Diminished
LEAD: The seasonal ''hole'' in the protective ozone layer over Antarctica appears to be less severe this year than last year, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.


Dr. Minna Cagan Marries Dr. Steven E. Selub on L.I.
LEAD: Dr.
Minna Ruth Cagan, a fellow in reproductive endocrinology at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C., and Dr.
Steven Elie Selub, a fellow in gastroenterology at the University of North Carolina School of Medicine at Chapel Hill, were married yesterday at Temple Beth Sholom in Roslyn Heights, L.I.


Hope and Infighting Mix In Pakistani Campaign
LEAD: The cement was still wet on the front stairs when Tikka Khan, a retired general and former head of the Pakistani Army, moved into his new election office this week.
Seated under a portrait of the late Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, the former general opened his first civilian political campaign.


Britons Deny Reports Of a Bell Buyout Effort
LEAD: Principals of Lowe Howard-Spink &amp; Bell, the British ad agency holding company partly owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, have denied reports that its deputy chairman, Tim Bell, tried to organize a management buyout of part of the company.


David Abrams Marries Amy Levine in Boston
LEAD: Amy Levine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard I. Levine of Newton, Mass., was married yesterday to David Abrams, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Abrams of South Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Herman Blumberg performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton in Boston.


Anti-Nuclear Group Marks a 5-Year Vigil
LEAD: About 70 people assembled on a small triangle of land near the White Hart Inn this weekend to mark the fifth anniversary of what has become the state's oldest anti-nuclear war vigil.


The Promotion NBC Killed: A Lesson in Back Scratching
LEAD: TO the promotion department at NBC in Burbank, the temptation was irresistible: in real life, the Republicans had nominated for Vice President a handsome young Senator, Dan Quayle, who looked good on television but whose past was in question.
As it happened, that came tantalizingly close to one of the story lines in NBC's upcoming miniseries, ''Favorite Son,'' a steamy political soap opera.


Jockeys Are Beating the Odds
LEAD: If a betting window at Aqueduct Race Track had been taking action on the length of the jockeys' strike that began last Wednesday, all the smart money would have been snapping up tickets that said no more than two or three days.


Bid for RJR Nabisco Expected
LEAD: Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company is expected to offer a staggering $20.3 billion, or $90 a share, for RJR Nabisco Inc. this morning.
Page D1.


Thomson McKinnon Stake
LEAD: Employees of Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc. have been told that the firm is seeking a buyer of a 23 percent stake in the brokerage held by the Hartford Insurance Group, people close to the firm said yesterday.


In the Middle of It, Filled With Wonder
LEAD: Shortly before Gov.


Bicyclists Leave Diets Behind
LEAD: HOWARD SCHERZER mounted the steps of the Maine Monument at the southwest corner of Central Park and called the group of bicyclists to order. ''This is our most gluttonous tour,'' he warned, ''so be ready.''


Banks Sparks Giants
LEAD: The Giants have made a habit this season of winning or losing games in the last seconds, but they almost outdid themselves today.


Sprouse Out Of Business
LEAD: Stephen Sprouse, the American designer who shook up the fashion world in 1983 with his neon colors and graffiti-scrawled 1960's shapes, will go out of business again, said CSI Associates, the company that runs his retail and wholesale operations.


A Connecticut Man Is Slain After an Apartment Dispute
LEAD: A Connecticut man visiting people in an apartment with his wife and 8-month-old baby was shot to death after an argument, the police said.


Willoughby's Is Sold for $1 Million
LEAD: Willoughby's, a Manhattan retailer that calls itself the world's largest camera store, has been acquired by Queen Street Camera Inc. of Toronto for $1 million.
The Canadian company plans to inject $5 million into the store immediately for new inventory, physical improvements and marketing, its chairman and founder, Erik


Chevron to Cut 400 Jobs
LEAD: Chevron U.S.A. announced plans Friday to cut 400 jobs from the work force of 2,200 at its largest refinery because of increased competition and reduced profit.
The Port Arthur refinery has an operating capacity of 407,000 barrels of crude per day.
After streamlining, capacity will be about 329,000 barrels per day.


Halftime Score: League Is Ahead
LEAD: A year after the strike, the National Football League at midseason boasts booming attendance, strong competition and unlikely leaders in each conference while continuing a fight against drug abuse.


Affordable Housing in Jersey Is Still an Elusive Goal
LEAD: Thirteen years after New Jersey's Supreme Court outlawed exclusionary housing zones with its Mount Laurel doctrine, problems continue to block broad availability of affordable housing for poor and moderate-income residents.


Barry Campbell Good, Executive, 56
LEAD: Barry Campbell Good, a managing director and energy industry analyst at the brokerage house of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company Inc., died of lung cancer Saturday at his Manhattan home.
He was 56 years old and also lived in Watermill, L.I.


Farley Bids $1.3 Billion For Pepperell
LEAD: After five months of intense speculation, heavy trading of its stock and a $14 jump in the price of its shares since May, West Point-Pepperell Inc., a big Georgia-based producer of sheets and towels, is coming under takeover attack today.


Proxmire Savors a Victory as He Bids a Farewell
LEAD: ''This is my last speech in the Senate,'' said the austere and contentious William Proxmire on the closing day of the 100th Congress, 31 years after he delivered his first.
There were thousands in between.


2 Mexican Police Officials Seized In New York on Narcotics Charge
LEAD: Two Mexican police officials were arrested in New York City late Saturday night and charged with conspiring to import large shipments of Mexican heroin into the United States, the authorities said.


Fire Strikes Theater in Paris Showing Film on Jesus' Life
LEAD: Ten people were injured in a fire at a Parisian theater where ''The Last Temptation of Christ'' was being shown, the police said today.
A police spokesman said the cause of the fire was unknown.


Conservationists Laud Efforts For the Hudson
LEAD: They began with a passion for a mountain, a band of volunteers determined to stop Consolidated Edison from building a power plant on the slopes of Storm King Mountain overlooking the Hudson River Gorge.


For Hockey Enthusiasts, Holiday on Ice
LEAD: DAVE SPRINGETT manages a grain company in Winnipeg, Manitoba.
For two weeks each winter, he is a manager of a different sort, a playing manager of an international hockey team.


Back in Washington    He was returning after spending the weekend at the Presidential retreat at Camp David, Md. (AP)


S.E.C. Upgrades Its Regulation of Penny Stock Market
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has developed a get-tough policy for fraud and manipulation in the penny-stock market.


Airline Deregulation's Middle Age
LEAD: Remember when it was fun to fly?
There was just one fare in coach, the center seat was always empty and the plane usually landed on time.
What you may not remember on this 10th anniversary of airline deregulation is that fares were 20 percent higher in 1978 and that far fewer cities enjoyed the benefits of frequent air service.


CONGRESS REGAINS ITS VOICE ON POLICY IN 1987-88 SESSIONS
LEAD: Overshadowed for six years by a popular and aggressive President, Congress regained its voice in the 1987-88 sessions, enacting ground-breaking legislation in areas as diverse as trade policy and welfare, civil rights and arms control.


Review/Art; After the Crosshatch: Johns in Philadelphia
LEAD: Acclaimed in June as the crown and centerpiece of this year's Venice Biennale, the exhibition of ''Jasper Johns: Work Since 1974'' opens Sunday at the Philadelphia Museum of Art and can be seen there through Jan. 8.
Composed almost entirely of large new paintings in which mastery is everywhere evident, it makes a tremendous impact in a museum whose plain grandeur sets it off to perfection.


William H. Borden, Executive, 73
LEAD: William H. Borden, the president of Monmouth-Evergreen Records and a longtime chairman of the board of trustees of the Manhattan School of Music, died of cancer Friday night at his home in Rumson, N.J.
He was 73 years old.


What's Wrong With Public School Uniforms?; Mayor's Defense
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rome Suspects Arms Dealer Has Role in Efforts on Hostages
LEAD: Police officials said today that they were investigating a suspected arms dealer who has links to Italian and Swiss intelligence agencies to determine his role in possible efforts to free American hostages being held in Lebanon.


Upset Remembered
LEAD: Forty years ago, President Harry S. Truman was whistle-stopping his way across the United States in a campaign that ended up blowing away the sure-thing Republican contender, Thomas E. Dewey.
In the anniversary-conscious capital, there had to be somebody who wanted to commemorate that epochal event.


Shearson Expected To Cut Staff
LEAD: As part of a broad cost-reduction effort, Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. is planning to cut its work force by about 1,000 people before the end of the year, people close to the securities firm said yesterday.


Dr. Amy Rowan Weds Paul Sloate
LEAD: Dr.
Amy Beth Rowan and Paul Lowell Sloate were married yesterday at the St.
Moritz Hotel by Rabbi Thomas Weiner.
The bride is the daughter of Dr.
Sandra K. Rowan of Reading, Pa., and Dr.
Noel M. Rowan, also of Reading.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan R. Sloate of Larchmont, N.Y.


Reviews/Music; Sketches of Beethoven Heard at Carnegie Hall
LEAD: Beethoven's sketchbooks were his musical diaries and idea books, carried always on his person and containing not only notated music but also verbal scenarios.
One thing they describe is a composer's obsession with often trivial musical themes.
Their appearance and reappearance in gradual transformations make the sketchbooks road maps to his creative process.


Kodak-Mitsubishi Deal
LEAD: An Eastman Kodak Company subsidiary that sells an innovative snowmaking aid announced an agreement with the Mitsubishi Corporation that gives the Japanese company all rights to sell the product in Japan.
The snowmaking aid, called Snomax, is a protein that, when dissolved in water, allows snowflakes to form in water that is 8 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit warmer than freezing.


Review/Opera; Older Singers Bring a New Life to 'Cosi' and Others
LEAD: A remarkable group of Italian basses and baritones is spreading disproportionate amounts of good cheer in opera these days.
It is the prerogative of these singers, at the age when higher-paid tenors and sopranos must retire, to shift into the basso-buffo repertory and go on more or less indefinitely.


For Bush and Dukakis, Three Capital Ideas
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Apprentice Drug Czar
LEAD: Czar Dan: Vice President Bush said he would give his running mate the huge task of coordinating Federal anti-drug efforts.


Client Group Confronting Fiery Topics
LEAD: THE Association of National Advertisers is accustomed to opening its annual meetings during times of turmoil.
Last year the stock market crash disturbed day one.
This year the association's 79th annual convention comes to New York amid proposals for the largest mergers and buyouts of consumer-products companies in history.


A Stray Bullet Kills a Woman In Queens Home
LEAD: A woman standing in the foyer of her house in Queens was killed yesterday when a bullet from a high-powered rifle smashed through the front door, striking her in the abdomen, the police said.


Mark E. Austad, 71; A Former Ambassador
LEAD: Mark Evans Austad, a broadcaster who became United States Ambassador to Norway and Finland, died of heart disease Thursday.
He was 71 years old.


Chief of Johnson &amp; Johnson To Step Down in Revamping
LEAD: James E. Burke, whose steady leadership was credited with helping Johnson &amp; Johnson weather the Tylenol-poison crisis in 1982, plans to step down next April in a major management restructuring at the health-care company.


Wean Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wean Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
19,412,000
17,872,000
Net loss
3,585,000
1,701,000
9mo sales
47,627,000
68,520,000
Net loss
8,977,000
b416,000
b-Includes a gain of $523,000 from an accounting change.


Foxboro Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foxboro Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
127,631,000
141,529,000
Net inc
2,695,000
b7,687,000
Share earns
.22
-
9mo sales
396,792,000
378,704,000
Net inc
5,927,000
b23,942,000
Share earns
.48
-


Pauper or Prince?
LEAD: The United States is not quite the international pauper that it seems, according to a study prepared for the Pentagon.


Massbank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Massbank Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,254,000
1,310,000
Per share
.44
.42
Shares outst
2,656,051
3,149,226
(
9mo net inc
3,763,000
4,217,000
Per share
1.31
1.28
Shares outst
2,881,963
3,299,568


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts made a huge bid to acquire RJR Nabisco.
The Wall Street investment house, which has become one of the country's largest industrial holding companies, offered $20.3 billion for Nabisco.
That compares with the $17 billion offered by Nabisco executives and Shearson Lehman Hutton.


Gatx Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gatx Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
152,600,000
143,700,000
Net inc
13,100,000
9,100,000
Share earns
1.40
.95
9mo rev
429,400,000
401,800,000
Net inc
38,000,000
26,600,000
Share earns
4.07
2.77


Judge Blocks Minorco's Bid for Consolidated Gold Fields
LEAD: A Federal judge in New York yesterday temporarily halted a $4.9 billion bid for Consolidated Gold Fields P.L.C. by the Minerals and Resources Corporation on the ground that a takeover could decrease competition in the world's gold market.


GTE Net Rose 5% in Quarter
LEAD: The GTE Corporation said yesterday that its net income rose 5 percent, to $313 million, or 91 cents a share, in the third quarter of 1988, compared with $297 million, or 86 cents a share, in the corresponding period last year.


Lee Wright, 39, Dead; Designer of Menswear
LEAD: Lee Wright, an award-winning designer of men's fashions, died last Thursday at New York Hospital.
He was 39 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Wright, a former actor, died of pneumonia, his family said.


2 Ballot Issues Raise Question: Is Smoking Becoming Taboo?
LEAD: Two anti-smoking measures on the ballot in California and Oregon have provoked a furious counterattack that reflects the tobacco industry's deepening concern about spreading anti-tobacco sentiment.


Review/Television; Policeman in New Series Is Host of Call-In Show
LEAD: At 10 o'clock tonight on NBC, ''Midnight Caller'' makes its tentative debut.
Pre-empted by the mini-series ''Favorite Son'' next week and by election coverage the following week, the series is scheduled to return later in the season on a regular weekly basis.
It deserves better marketing.
As formulas go, ''Midnight Caller'' is reasonably promising, a mixture of ''Miss Lonelyhearts'' and every Raymond Chandler ripoff you've ever sat through.


Secor Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Secor Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b3,177,000
754,000
Per share
.45
.23
9mo net inc
b16,639,000
3,537,000
Per share
3.51
1.07
b-After an extraordinary charge of $643,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary gain of $3,874,000 for the 9 months.


Benjamin M. Belcher, 76, Former Executive
LEAD: Benjamin Moore Belcher, retired chief executive of the Benjamin Moore Paint Company, died of a stroke Sunday at the Sharon (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 76 years old and lived in Lakeville, Conn.


A.N.A. Elects New Chairman
LEAD: The Association of National Advertisers yesterday elected Joseph J. Doherty, vice president of marketing communications at Owens-Corning Fiberglas, as chairman.
John E. Ruhaak, vice president of advertising and promotion at United Airlines, was elected vice chairman.
Also elected to the board was


Autotrol Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autotrol Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
7,562,394
7,723,838
Net inc
58,429
430,373
Share earns
.03
.22
9mo sales
24,113,049
23,225,192
Net inc
654,029
960,008
Share earns
.33
.49


Hickam, Dow B Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hickam, Dow B Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,944,000
3,144,000
Net inc
290,000
535,000
Share earns
.12
.23
9mo sales
8,686,000
8,884,000
Net inc
911,000
b1,130,000
Share earns
.37
.47


Compaq Computer Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compaq Computer Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
501,634,000
313,473,000
Net inc
57,870,000
36,438,000
Share earns
1.40
.94
9mo sales
1,397,895,000
791,946,000
Net inc
163,337,000
87,266,000
Share earns
4.06
2.32


Philadelphia Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philadelphia Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
898,988,000
839,268,000
Net inc
196,861,000
144,823,000
Share earns
.85
.63
Shares outst
202,842,589
193,379,111
9mo rev
2,449,887,000
2,443,924,000
Net inc
468,299,000
428,798,000
Share earns
1.98
1.88
Shares outst
200,224,325
191,395,716


Colonial Bancgroup (Waterbury, Conn) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colonial Bancgroup (Waterbury, Conn) (O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,124,000
1,865,000
Per share
.33
.30
9mo net inc
5,946,000
5,146,000
Per share
.92
.86


Ryland Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryland Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
262,710,000
239,079,000
Net inc
13,910,000
11,550,000
Share earns
1.06
.88
9mo sales
640,298,000
646,718,000
Net inc
30,174,000
27,335,000
Share earns
2.30
2.09


Health Inspector Sentenced In Restaurant Extortion Case
LEAD: A former New York City health inspector was sentenced yesterday to two months in jail and fined $10,000 for extorting bribes from restaurant owners, and a former senior inspector pleaded guilty to extortion.


Farmers Face Foreclosure
LEAD: The Government's farm lending agency is threatening 90,000 farmers with foreclosure unless they restructure bad debts worth about $8.8 billion, Government officials said today.


Pepperell To Review Farley Bid
LEAD: West Point-Pepperell Inc. yesterday urged shareholders not to take any action on a $48-a-share takeover bid from Farley Inc., and Farley's chairman indicated that he might be willing to consider making a higher offer.


Whale Rescue Awaits Arrival of Icebreakers
LEAD: Rescuers today waited for two Soviet icebreakers to join the effort to free two trapped California gray whales, and biologists said they were considering a proposal to airlift the whales to safety.


Watts Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Watts Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
55,270,000
41,825,000
Net inc
6,220,000
4,538,000
Share earns
.49
.36


Detroit Edison Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detroit Edison Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
867,917,000
787,157,000
Net inc
145,948,000
172,968,000
Share earns
.91
1.05
9mo rev
2,341,474,000
2,183,868,000
Net inc
b83,570,000
448,170,000
Share earns
.30
2.65


Quantum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Sales
39,774,000
49,495,000
Net inc
2,052,000
b4,057,000
Share earns
.20
.44
Shares outst
10,158,227
9,228,602
6mo sales
78,698,000
89,667,000
Net inc
2,654,000
518,000
Share earns
.26
.06
Shares outst
10,116,119
9,254,442


Bank of South Carolina reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of South Carolina
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
134,576
b45,492
Per share
.25
-
9mo net inc
213,489
b337,892
Per share
.40
-
b-Net loss


The Goya Who Dared To Paint Kings Ugly
LEAD: As an artist driven by ambition, Francisco Goya became a court painter, but his unflattering renditions of Charles IV, Ferdinand VII and other members of Spain's royal family have long been interpreted as indictments of monarchical rule.
While an old man living in France, he attended Mass regularly, yet bitter anticlerical sentiments characterize dozens of his prints and drawings.


Swimmers Honored
LEAD: United States Swimming, the national governing body for the sport, named Janet Evans and Matt Biondi co-swimmers of the year on Saturday.
Evans, 17, from Placentia, Calif., won three gold medals in the Olympic Games and set a world record in the 400-meter freestyle.
Biondi, 22, from Moraga, Calif., won seven medals at Seoul, five of them gold, and was the most decorated United States athlete at the Games.


Harrah's Officer Joins Resorts International
LEAD: David P. Hanlon knows the odds on making profits in Atlantic City.
For four years, he has run the city's second-most-lucrative resort, Harrah's Marina Hotel and Casino.


New Phase for Superconductors
LEAD: The field of superconductivity is entering a new phase after a frenzy of discovery.
After a string of dramatic findings three years ago, scientists envisioned a wide array of bold advances, from high-speed power lines to magnetically levitated trains.


Hubco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hubco Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,339,913
1,248,438
Per share
.34
.32
9mo net inc
3,989,721
b4,084,087
Per share
1.02
1.05
b-Included a net non-recurring gain of $256,384.
The year-ago per share figures adjusted to reflect a 10 pecent stock dividend paid Nov.


Guards Find Key to Handcuff On Byrne Slaying Defendant
LEAD: A defendant in the killing of a rookie police officer in Queens had a handcuff key in his possession yesterday morning as he was about to be transported from jail for an appearance in State Supreme Court, officials said.


U.S., Distrusting the Nicaraguans, Rules Out Any Storm-Relief Aid
LEAD: The United States will not extend emergency assistance to Nicaragua, where a hurricane has left at least 50 people dead and an estimated 300,000 homeless, Reagan Administration officials said today.


Coast Distribution System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coast Distribution System (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
38,358,000
31,576,000
Net inc
1,608,000
1,018,000
Share earns
.34
.23
9mo sales
106,591,000
86,988,000
Net inc
3,376,000
2,395,000
Share earns
.73
.54


Xiox Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xiox Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
415,000
522,000
Net loss
179,000
46,000
9mo rev
1,366,000
1,650,000
Net loss
432,000
261,000


Inco Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inco Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
784,500,000
414,600,000
Net inc
b200,300,000
41,400,000
Share earns
1.88
.36
9mo sales
2,291,500,000
1,218,100,000
Net inc
b516,400,000
50,200,000
Share earns
4.86
.39


National Convenience Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Convenience Stores Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
275,328,000
225,347,000
Net inc
1,337,000
b7,839,000
Share earns
.06
.35
b-After a gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change of $6,531,000.


Peaceful Volcano
LEAD: Mount St.
Helens completed its second year without any ''significant volcanic activity'' yesterday, the United States Geological Survey reported.
This is the longest period of quiescence since the volcano blew off its top on May 18, 1980, causing at least 60 deaths.


Sunbelt Nursery Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunbelt Nursery Group (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
35,968,000
30,333,000
Net loss
3,490,000
3,075,000
Yr sales
157,944,000
137,843,000
Net loss
4,626,000
3,971,000


Allegheny Ludlum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Ludlum Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
320,480,000
209,054,000
Net inc
38,376,000
8,920,000
Share earns
1.70
.40
9mo sales
913,233,000
632,023,000
Net inc
85,032,000
35,516,000
Share earns
3.76
1.81
Shares outst
22,575,000
19,563,095


Combustion Engineering Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Combustion Engineering Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
899,060,000
793,306,000
Net loss
28,531,000
b15,322,000
Share earns
-
.40
9mo sales
2,562,948,000
2,149,422,000
Net inc
312,000
39,022,000
Share earns
.01
1.07


Agency Fee Cutbacks Criticized
LEAD: GRAHAM H. PHILLIPS, the United States chairman and North America president of Ogilvy &amp; Mather, went before a united mass of clients yesterday and told them in no uncertain terms: Don't cut agency compensation.
Please.
The corporate representatives, who are attending the 79th annual meeting of the Association of National Advertisers in New York, were sympathetic.


Lamson &amp; Sessions Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lamson &amp; Sessions Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
100,182,000
89,623,000
Net inc
7,904,000
3,680,000
Share earns
.72
.40
Shares outst
10,625,000
7,801,000
9mo rev
299,115,000
252,047,000
Net inc
21,342,000
7,010,000
Share earns
2.21
.86
Shares outst
9,042,000
7,423,000


First Source Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Source Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,492,000
1,892,000
Share earns
.67
.50
9mo net inc
6,793,000
5,624,000
Share earns
1.79
1.47


Diceon Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diceon Electronics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
33,617,000
32,351,000
Net inc
1,742,000
2,911,000
Share earns
.30
.46
Yr sales
140,685,000
111,053,000
Net inc
9,858,000
9,535,000
Share earns
1.62
1.56


Branford Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Branford Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
621,000
554,000
Per share
.40
.35
9mo net inc
1,803,000
1,600,000
Per share
1.15
1.03


First Essex Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Essex Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
905,000
1,419,000
Per share
.13
-
9mo net inc
3,166,000
3,375,000
Per share
.45
-
The bank converted to stock form on Aug. 11, 1987.


Lee Data Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lee Data Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Revenue
21,361,000
25,446,000
Net loss
750,000
2,395,000
6mo rev
42,859,000
47,487,000
Net loss
1,505,000
3,725,000


International Microelectronic Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Microelectronic Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 25
1988
1987
Revenue
14,900,000
12,800,000
Net inc
1,800,000
1,800,000
Share earns
.07
.07
6mo rev
27,925,000
24,998,000
Net inc
3,556,000
3,517,000
Share earns
.13
.13


Dow Corning Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Corning Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
365,000,000
327,000,000
Net inc
34,700,000
34,600,000
9mo sales
1,107,000,000
969,000,000
Net inc
112,000,000
101,000,000
Dow Corning is a joint venture between Dow Chemical Co.


Campaign Trail; Quayle Shows What He Did in the Service
LEAD: Senator Dan Quayle finally showed an audience on Monday what his National Guard experience was all about.
When the controversy broke in August over Mr.
Quayle's National Guard duty in the Vietnam war, the Republican Vice-Presidential candidate said the experience taught him such significant skills as how to weld.


A Show With Songs And Manners
LEAD: In her new cabaret act at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street), Barbara Cook tells an amusing anecdote about having recently attended a small White House dinner for the Swedish royal family.
At the end of the meal when the guests were presented with finger bowls and dessert cutlery, she relates, she felt mortified at not knowing the proper procedure.


West German Forecast Sees 3.5% Growth This Year, but Drop to 2% in '89
LEAD: The West German economy, the largest in Europe, will register better-than-expected growth this year of 3.5 percent, but will slow down in 1989 to only 2 percent, the country's leading economic research institutes predicted today.


Watkins-Johnson Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Watkins-Johnson Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
71,802,000
66,083,000
Net inc
5,533,000
4,492,000
Share earns
.66
.54
9mo sales
211,645,000
194,627,000
Net inc
14,974,000
12,265,000
Share earns
1.79
1.47


A Shulman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A Shulman Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
145,887,000
117,845,000
Net inc
8,229,000
5,635,000
Share earns
.92
.63
Yr rev
598,907,000
465,069,000
Net inc
27,646,000
19,813,000
Share earns
3.09
2.21


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the renovation of Grand Army Plaza in Manhattan included an incomplete identity for an official associated with the project.
He is Henry J. Stern, the New York City Parks Commissioner.


Electronic Tele-Communicaions Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electronic Tele-Communicaions Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,001,762
653,246
Net inc
94,636
b94,862
Share earns
.05
-
9mo sales
2,651,197
2,291,925
Net inc
198,375
64,248
Share earns
.10
.05


The Drug Bill's $2.3 Billion Promise
LEAD: It was a moving sight: 12,000 police officers, nearly half the force, massed in Saturday's cold to mourn two colleagues slain on a single evening last week.
Their presence added weight to Police Commissioner Ward's defiant challenge to drug murderers: ''All of us will never give up.
The police officers of this city will never give up.


Zero Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zero Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
41,891,000
35,622,000
Net inc
4,008,000
3,411,000
Share earns
.32
.27
6mo sales
83,180,000
69,836,000
Net inc
7,929,000
6,372,000
Share earns
.63
.51


A Tightly Focused 'Spider Woman' for the Stage
LEAD: After it was published as a novel and before it was filmed, Manuel Puig's ''Kiss of the Spider Woman'' was a play, first staged in Spain and later in England.
Familiarity with the work's other incarnations should not detract from the play's dramatic cogency, as conveyed in David Chambers's production at the Yale Repertory Theater.


U.S. Bonds Decline in a Slow Day
LEAD: Treasury bond prices dipped in sluggish trading yesterday, as market participants largely ignored a big drop in oil prices and reacted instead to the news of an expected sale of 30-year bonds.


American Western Securities Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Western Securities Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
30,500,000
14,200,000
Net inc
1,179,000
412,000
Share earns
.22
.09
9mo sales
69,900,000
38,500,000
Net inc
2,285,000
963,000
Share earns
.56
.19


Quaker State Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quaker State Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
191,703,000
202,920,000
Net inc
4,167,000
6,424,000
Share earns
.16
.24
9mo rev
613,055,000
652,846,000
Net inc
9,165,000
b51,457,000
Share earns
.35
-


Henry Armstrong, Boxing Champion, Dead at 75
LEAD: Henry Armstrong, the only boxer ever to hold three world titles simultaneously, died of heart failure yesterday in Los Angeles after a lengthy series of illnesses.
The former fighter, who for a few months in 1938 reigned as featherweight, lightweight and welterweight champion, was 75 years old.


Nussbaum to Testify Against Steinberg
LEAD: Hedda Nussbaum will be called as the key prosecution witness and asked why she waited 10 hours before calling an ambulance after Joel B. Steinberg handed her the comatose body of Lisa Steinberg, the 6-year-old child he is accused of beating to death, the prosecution said yesterday.


First Wyoming Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Wyoming Bancorporation (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,368,000
843,000
Per share
.29
.18
9mo net inc
3,948,000
b8,019,000
Per share
.84
-
b-Net loss and the loss was primarily attributable to additions of about $10 million ot its reserve for loan losses and reserve for real estate acquired through foreclosure.


Ballet Theater Gala
LEAD: American Ballet Theater will celebrate the return of the company from its engagement at the Festival International de Danse de Paris with a gala benefit party on Nov. 1 at the Palladium, 126 East 14th Street.
Ticket prices range from $75 to $2,500.
Information: 477-3030, extension 246.


American National Insurance Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American National Insurance Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b26,362,000
c30,984,000
Share earns
.93
1.07
9mo net inc
b75,697,000
c85,167,000
Share earns
2.68
2.95
b-Includes capital gains of $5,410,000 and $10,761,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Crane Company reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crane Company (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
378,258,000
284,025,000
Net inc
20,686,000
16,714,000
Share earns
.91
.70
9mo sales
969,267,000
822,738,000
Net inc
49,951,000
b45,786,000
Share earns
2.19
1.93


Wolohan Lumber Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wolohan Lumber Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
74,636,000
66,215,000
Net inc
3,708,000
2,731,000
Share earns
.63
.46
9mo sales
193,407,000
171,804,000
Net inc
8,356,000
6,310,000
Share earns
1.43
1.07


Swedish Farm Animals Get a Bill of Rights
LEAD: The Swedish welfare state, long renowned for its generosity and scope, is extending its reach into a new frontier: the barnyard.


...and Ned Rorem's 65th
LEAD: Ned Rorem's 65th birthday is not being as lavishly celebrated as Leonard Bernstein's 70th, but a good deal of Mr.
Rorem's music, always ingratiating and sometimes more profound than that, is still being heard this fall.
Last week, on the opening program of the 15th season of the 92d Street Y's Chamber Music at the Y, it was Mr.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Advo-System Inc., Windsor, Conn., a direct marketing company, to North Castle Partners, Greenwich, Conn.


Burndy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burndy Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
69,486,000
70,023,000
Net loss
b867,000
c2,560,000
Share earns
-
.21
9mo sales
216,967,000
207,700,000
Net inc
b2,889,000
6,574,000
Share earns
.24
.54


Servicemaster LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Servicemaster LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
386,870,000
363,146,000
Net inc
16,476,000
14,925,000
Share earns
.51
.48
9mo rev
1,137,117
1,058,591,000
Net inc
49,142,000
45,177,000
Share earns
1.55
1.44


Man Held in Landlord Killing
LEAD: A 22-year-old man has been arrested and charged with shooting his landlord to death as he slept last June 28, the police said today.
The suspect, Ralph Palermo, was charged with murder Sunday night, the police said, in the firing of a fatal shotgun blast at Peter Dennis, 41, of North Amityville.
Mr.


Prosecutor Would Drop an Iran-Contra Count
LEAD: The special prosecutor in the Iran-contra investigation, while accusing Oliver L. North of a ''campaign of lies and deception,'' today consented to drop one of the 16 criminal charges against the former National Security Council aide.


First American (Tenn) Corp(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American (Tenn) Corp(O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
16,130,000
15,315,000
Per share
.70
.66
9mo net inc
33,806,000
43,406,000
Per share
1.47
1.89


Computer Sciences Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Sciences Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
299,475,000
281,254,000
Net inc
11,990,000
9,897,000
Share earns
.75
.62
6mo rev
598,772,000
555,874,000
Net inc
23,682,000
19,354,000
Share earns
1.48
1.21


Ashland Oil Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashland Oil Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,098,572,000
1,990,717,000
Net inc
b66,241,000
65,530,000
Share earns
1.19
1.11
Yr rev
7,753,071,000
6,671,862,000
Net inc
c223,944,000
d133,432,000
Share earns
4.01
2.14


BRIDGE
LEAD: When six Danes captured the women's team title at the World Team Olympiad in Venice on Friday night, they became the first Scandinavians ever to win a world title.


Buyout Deal Is Accepted by Malrite
LEAD: The Malrite Communications Group, owner of 6 television stations and 11 radio stations, said yesterday that it had agreed to a buyout proposal from its top management, led by its chairman, Milton Maltz.


John M. Rochford, Lawyer, 66
LEAD: John M. Rochford, a corporate lawyer, died Sunday at his home in Garden City, L.I., after a long illness.
He was 66 years old.


Mcorp Halts Payments On Debt
LEAD: A ticklish struggle among regulators, creditors and executives over the future of Mcorp, Texas's last large bank holding company that is still owned by Texans, emerged today with the company's disclosure that it had indefinitely halted payments on $470 million in debt.


Bush Says Dukakis's Desperation Prompted Accusations of Racism
LEAD: Vice President Bush denied today that his campaign has any racist overtones, calling the charge by the Dukakis campaign and leading Democrats ''some desperation kind of move.''


Reagan Signs 11 Bills but Will Veto Some Others
LEAD: The White House began wading through 120 bills passed in the final days of the 100th Congress and President Reagan signed 11 of the bills today, including one that will make it politically easier to close obsolete military bases.


Lake Shore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lake Shore Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,025,000
2,491,000
Per share
.50
.41
9mo net inc
8,140,000
6,949,000
Per share
1.35
1.15


Reviews/Music; Soul, by a Polish Singer
LEAD: Near the end of her Town Hall concert on Saturday evening, Basia, a 29-year-old Polish-born singer whose first solo album, ''Time and Tide,'' has sold nearly half a million copies, offered an adoring tribute to Aretha Franklin.
Backed by her seven-member band, she delivered four of Miss Franklin's classic hits - ''Until You Come Back to Me,'' ''Baby, I Love You,'' ''I Say a Little Prayer'' and '


Labor Talks Going Nowhere
LEAD: Gene Upshaw, the National Football League Players Association director, described today his recent meetings with Jack Donlan, the director of the N.F.L.
Management Council.


Formica Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Formica Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
94,491,000
99,623,000
Net loss
b1,488,000
c2,275,000
Share earns
-
.20
9mo sales
321,675,000
301,209,000
Net inc
b21,994,000
d998,000
Share earns
1.69
-
Shares outst
13,043,000
9,449,000


Imperial Oil Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Oil Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,767,000,000
2,063,000,000
Net inc
130,000,000
218,000,000
Share earns
.79
1.33
9mo rev
5,319,000,000
5,682,000,000
Net inc
428,000,000
568,000,000
Share earns
2.61
3.47


St Joseph Light &amp; Power reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St Joseph Light &amp; Power (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
22,100,000
21,000,000
Net inc
3,800,000
3,900,000
Share earns
.83
.84
9mo rev
58,700,000
57,900,000
Net inc
8,800,000
8,700,000
Share earns
1.90
1.88


Ohio Edison Corp reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Edison Corp (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,027,468,000
1,786,426,000
Net inc
323,027,000
442,283,000
Share earns
1.88
2.60


Profits of Oil Companies Increase Sharply in Quarter on Strong Demand
LEAD: Strong demand for oil products, especially gasoline, helped oil company profits surge in the most recent quarter.
Even the fall in crude oil prices helped the companies.


Bossy's Desire to Play Defeated by Pain
LEAD: Mike Bossy, mentally and physically debilitated for the last two years by back pain that would not go away, finally surrendered his hockey career to the ailment today and announced his retirement.


Fisher Scientific Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fisher Scientific Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
239,400,000
229,300,000
Net inc
10,200,000
9,000,000
Share earns
.28
.24
9mo sales
711,800,000
672,800,000
Net inc
28,500,000
19,800,000
Share earns
.77
.55


Midway Airlines Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midway Airlines Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
105,321,000
93,803,000
Net inc
b1,669,000
c4,537,000
Share earns
.16
.41
9mo rev
306,375,000
249,557,000
Net inc
b6,044,000
c13,759,000
Share earns
.56
1.25


New York Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b1,052,000
1,286,000
Per share
.30
-
Yr net inc
c4,314,000
2,697,000
b-Included a pre-tax, non-recurring expense of $352,000 related to the early retirement of the bank's former president.


Dicken's Dark-Hued Path to Troubled Genius
LEAD:  Dickens  Illustrated. 607 pages. William Morrow &amp; Company. $24.95.


U.S. Denies Any Hostage Link to Suspect Held in Italy
LEAD: Administration officials said today that there was no connection between the United States Government and an arms dealer being investigated by Italian authorities for possible dealings involving the American hostages in Lebanon.


Greece Accuses Ship Captain
LEAD: The captain of an Italian freighter appeared before a court today on manslaughter charges arising out his vessel's collision with a Greek cruise ship on Friday.
Two Greek crewmen of the cruise ship, the Jupiter, died in the accident off Piraeus and a 14-year-old British girl and a teacher are missing and presumed dead, the Merchant Marine Ministry said.


Baseball Arbitrator Sets 14 Players Free
LEAD: Fourteen players, including the two most senior Yankees, Ron Guidry and Willie Randolph, were declared free-look free agents yesterday by the arbitrator in the second collusion case.


William L. Grey, 72, Lawyer and Executive
LEAD: William L. Grey, an attorney and former chief executive of Anaconda Wire and Cable Co., died in his sleep yesterday at his home in Somers, N.Y.
He was 72 years old and had moved to Somers from Hartsdale, N.Y., in 1986.


United Water Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Water Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
36,569,000
35,470,000
Net inc
6,961,000
6,821,000
Share earns
.42
.41
9mo rev
95,062,000
92,588,000
Net inc
15,105,000
14,612,000
Share earns
.91
.89


The Limelight Turns to Lieberman, and He Relishes It
LEAD: Fifty people sat in rows at wood tables eating ziti and meatballs and waiting for the candidate.
Four ceiling fans turned hardly at all, though noisily.
It was possible to see the night arrive through the narrow windows.


Startel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Startel Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,914,000
2,655,000
Net loss
220,000
b12,000
9mo rev
8,790,000
6,850,000
Net loss
49,000
1,141,000
b-Net income


California Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,235,114
2,644,202
Per share
.31
.65
9mo net inc
3,712,372
7,131,793
Per share
.92
1.77


Humanity's Gawkiness
LEAD: Klutzes of the world, unite!
That could well be the slogan of Shrimps, the dance and performance-art group from Los Angeles that appeared Saturday night at the Kitchen.


Mid Maine Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid Maine Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
424,182
459,926
Per share
.31
.33
9mo net inc
1,032,577
1,490,102
Per share
.75
1.06


Sad Medieval Romance Dedicated to Harkness
LEAD: Contemporary Latin and Spanish-American arts, now fashionable, it seems, are being celebrated throughout the city.
The Tour de Fuerza, a 10-day festival of new Latin dance and performance, is at Dance Theater Workshop, with Creative Time's Up Tiempo festival at El Museo del Barrio, and the Hispanic Heritage Month festival at the Triplex is to come in early November.


Suncoast Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suncoast Savings &amp; Loan Assn
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
483,000
233,000
Share earns
.27
.15
Shares outst
1,776,000
1,587,000


Campaign Trail; Dukakis's Staffers Dial 'B' for Buddha
LEAD: Tensions are escalating at the Dukakis headquarters on Chauncy Street.


Dominion Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Resources Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
923,800,000
916,000,000
Net inc
148,500,000
144,700,000
Share earns
1.53
1.52
9mo rev
2,495,300,000
2,503,000,000
Net inc
347,800,000
346,200,000
Share earns
3.60
3.66
Shares outst
96,700,000
94,600,000


Minnetonka Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnetonka Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
74,121,000
46,053,000
Net inc
6,162,000
b5,449,000
Share earns
.38
.31
9mo sales
142,167,000
100,196,000
Net inc
8,214,000
b8,249,000
Share earns
.48
.47


Roosevelt Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roosevelt Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,335,000
b4,617,000
Share earns
.78
.82
9mo net inc
12,449,000
b16,278,000
Share earns
2.24
2.95
b-Includes a tax benefit of $801,000 and $4,898,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Carter and Ford Spots Urge Big Voter Turnout
LEAD: Former Presidents Jimmy Carter and Gerald R. Ford are appearing in a series of commercials that being showing tomorrow aimed at encouraging Americans to vote.


Autumn Traditions Fall With the Leaves
LEAD: As leaves cascade from fiery oaks, sugar maples and sumacs, some things autumnal seem to be awry.


Chip to Track 'Killer' Bees Is Invented
LEAD: ENGINEERS for the Martin Marietta Corporation, working at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee, have developed a silicon microchip they believe will prove useful in tracking the strain of ''killer'' bees that have been migrating northward through the Americas since 1957.


Indian Airlines Accused of Laxity In Safety Steps and Pilot Training
LEAD: Indian Airlines, one of Asia's largest carriers, was accused today of compromising on safety standards and on the training and fitness of its pilots, and of overworking its aging Boeing 737's, one of which crashed last week.


DUKAKIS CRITICIZES BUSH TAX CUT PLAN
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, asking Americans to take ''a hard second look'' at him and Vice President Bush, used Mr.
Bush's own tax returns today as his latest weapon against the Republican Presidential nominee.


Data Switch Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Switch Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
27,860,000
25,007,000
Net inc
648,000
1,201,000
Share earns
.06
.11
9mo rev
83,458,000
69,480,000
Net inc
1,864,000
46,000
Share earns
.17
-


Rogers Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rogers Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
40,902,000
36,110,000
Net inc
345,000
931,000
Share earns
.11
.31
9mo sales
123,349,000
104,416,000
Net inc
2,229,000
2,180,000
Share earns
.73
.73


New Way to Map Brain Helps Surgeons Cure Some Epilepsy
LEAD: USING advanced electric probes and radio transmitters developed for the space program, physicians are mapping the brains of people with certain types of epilepsy.
By pinpointing the damaged areas of the brain more precisely than has been previously possible, doctors are able to perform surgery that seems to cure the disorder in most of these patients.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.27
8.29
7.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.50
7.44
5.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.62
7.59
5.92
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.71
8.70
8.59
30-YR.


Interstate Power Co reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interstate Power Co (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
273,005,000
270,872,000
Net inc
23,418,000
b11,556,000
Share earns
2.15
.88
b-After a charge of $2,952,000 from settlement of litigation.
The prior 12 months net from operations included a charge to bad debts from bankruptcy of a major industrial customer of $3,646,000 and power plant abandonment writeoffs of $3,784,000.


Carpenter Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carpenter Technology Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
142,180,000
115,240,000
Net inc
6,567,000
2,086,000
Share earns
.72
.23


Standard Register Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Register Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
162,724,000
164,281,000
Net inc
5,692,000
9,492,000
Share earns
.19
.32
9mo rev
488,538,000
489,849,000
Net inc
24,141,000
26,185,000
Share earns
.81
.88


Banks of Iowa reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banks of Iowa (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,664,562
3,517,527
Per share
1.44
.81
9mo net inc
13,446,999
9,619,201
Per share
3.29
2.55


From Austria, a Quartet
LEAD: The Artis Quartet, a young Austrian ensemble, was formed in 1980, when its players - Peter Schuhmayer and Johannes Meissl, violinists, Herbert Kefer, violist, and Othmar Muller, cellist - were students at the Vienna Music Academy.
Heard in their New York debut on Friday evening at Weill Recital Hall, the quartet showed many strengths and a few weaknesses, but, in any case, a distinctive ensemble sound.


Piggott Is Released
LEAD: After serving one year of a three-year prison sentence for a $5.25 million tax fraud, Lester Piggott, the former British champion jockey, was released on parole yesterday in Suffolk, England.(AP)


Gorbachev Hails Kohl in Moscow, Saying the 'Ice Has Been Broken'
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany arrived here today, and his first talks with Mikhail S. Gorbachev set a promising tone for the four-day visit, which both sides hope will finally take the chill out of Soviet-West German relations.


Privatization Of T.W.A. Nearly Done
LEAD: Trans World Airlines Inc. said yesterday that a move by a Delaware Chancery Court has allowed its chairman, Carl C. Icahn, to complete his effort to take the airline private.


Keane Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keane Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
14,564,000
10,868,000
Net inc
735,000
144,000
Share earns
.57
.10
9mo rev
42,895,000
31,144,000
Net inc
2,068,000
627,000
Share earns
1.60
.45


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,792,413,000
1,838,754,000
Net inc
308,181,000
299,388,000
Share earns
3.54
3.46


Chittenden Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chittenden Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,413,000
2,229,000
Per share
.49
.44
9mo net inc
6,036,000
2,133,000
Per share
1.22
.38


Communications Satellite Corp (COMSAT)(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications Satellite Corp (COMSAT)(N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
94,000,000
82,600,000
Net inc
17,700,000
c24,000,000
Share earns
.96
1.31
9mo rev
267,000,000
251,500,000
Net inc
49,600,000
bc51,300,000
Share earns
2.69
-


Actmedia Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Actmedia Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 4
1988
1987
Revenue
26,651,000
19,132,000
Net loss
1,674,000
b1,207,000
Share earns
-
.10
9mo rev
71,630,000
59,795,000
Net loss
2,280,000
b4,080,000
Share earns
-
.34


Supply of Flu Vaccine Is Delayed, Officials Say
LEAD: There have been some delays in production of flu vaccines and final deliveries may be delayed by up to two months, pharmaceutical firms and public health officials said today.


2 Teamsters Go On Trial in Ohio On Charges of Padding Payrolls
LEAD: A Federal prosecutor said today that three witnesses would testify that they were paid by the teamsters' local here but never had to work.


N.Y.R.A. Enters Talks In Strike by Jockeys
LEAD: Gerard J. McKeon, the president of the New York Racing Association, met last night with leaders of Aqueduct Race Track's striking jockeys and the horse owners to present what he called ''a new idea'' in attempting to resolve the week-old labor dispute.


Leonard H. Sandler Is Dead at 62; New York Appellate Court Justice
LEAD: Justice Leonard H. Sandler of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court, who administered the oath of office to Mayor Koch for each of his three terms, died Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Washington Water Power Co reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Water Power Co (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
445,359,000
381,064,000
Net inc
76,029,000
b26,290,000
Share earns
2.69
.44
b-Includes a gain from the accrual of unbilled revenue of $20,838,000 and a provision for disallowances of $51,212,000.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


MDU Resources Group Inc reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MDU Resources Group Inc (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
342,324,000
336,501,000
Net inc
33,180,000
26,573,000
Share earns
1.79
1.48


Rink Opens as Fall Begins Glide to Winter


College Head to Lead MacArthur Foundation
LEAD: The MacArthur Foundation of Chicago, one of the nation's wealthiest philanthropies, has named the president of Hampshire College its next president.


Paradyne Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paradyne Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
56,812,000
58,163,000
Net loss
37,433,000
b278,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
172,829,000
172,137,000
Net loss
40,184,000
3,173,000
b-Net income


Commercial National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
472,000
b22,646
Per share
.11
-
9mo net inc
2,356,000
b22,035,000
Per share
.56
-
b-Net loss


Roto-Rooter Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roto-Rooter Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
15,406,000
13,809,000
Net inc
1,349,000
1,115,000
Share earns
.28
.23
9mo rev
45,354,000
40,109,000
Net inc
b4,118,000
3,134,000
Share earns
.85
.64


31st St. Building Collapse Stops Trains, Kills Man and Injures 12
LEAD: New York subway and commuter train service was thrown into chaos for hours yesterday because of concern that underground vibrations would endanger people trapped in the rubble of a building that collapsed in midtown Manhattan.


Waltham Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waltham Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
791,000
b988,000
Share earns
-
.27
9mo net inc
504,000
3,040,000
Share earns
.14
.82
b-Net income


Popeye's Owner Makes Bid For Church's Fried Chicken
LEAD: A. Copeland Enterprises Inc., owner of Popeye's Famous Fried Chicken, said yesterday that it was offering to buy Church's Fried Chicken Inc. for $8 a share, or a total of $295.7 million.


Baltic Stirrings: How Patient Is Moscow?
LEAD: A sense of euphoria has swept through the Soviet Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania in recent weeks as the Communist authorities have seemed not only to give in to but to collaborate in the independent political movements that have sprung up in those once-free states.


Satellite to Improve Monitoring of Ozone Loss
LEAD: A NEW satellite will considerably improve the ability of scientists to track changes in ozone concentrations high in the earth's atmosphere.
The ozone, a gas that acts as a natural shield against the sun's potentially lethal ultraviolet rays, is slowly being eroded by pollution.


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
181,500,000
211,300,000
Net loss
b54,000,000
c5,800,000
Share earns
-
.19
9mo rev
574,200,000
603,500,000
Net loss
b34,300,000
c17,800,000
Share earns
-
.57


A Fraternity Is Suspended After a Mock Slave Auction
LEAD: A University of Wisconsin fraternity is under investigation for sponsoring a mock slave auction in which pledges reportedly donned black faces and Afro wigs, school officials said today.


National City Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Bancorporation
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,255,000
588,000
Per share
.32
.15
9mo net inc
3,509,000
2,230,000
Per share
.90
.56


State by State; Senator, a War Hero, Says Quayle's Service Record Shouldn't Be Issue
LEAD: If any politician has reason to resent those who avoided military service in Vietnam, Senator John McCain does.


VM Software Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VM Software Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,706,186
6,038,071
Net inc
942,176
180,570
Share earns
.15
.03
9mo rev
28,324,982
19,120,785
Net inc
2,868,234
1,082,436
Share earns
.45
.17


Surprises Are Few, Despite the Strike
LEAD: The strike by Aqueduct Race Track's jockeys is providing a unique experiment for curious horseplayers.
Putting 47 virtually unknown replacement riders on the local horses seems a good test of the old question of just how much difference a jockey makes.


Laidlaw Transportation Ltd reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laidlaw Transportation Ltd (OTC)
Year to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,182,974,000
892,850,000
Net inc
147,406,000
92,272,000
Share earns
.76
.53
Shares outst
176,974,000
154,547,000
The results are in U.S. currency.


Defense Role For Helmsley Is in Doubt
LEAD: A Federal judge disclosed a medical report yesterday that said Harry B. Helmsley could not ''substantially assist'' in his defense in a scheduled trial on tax evasion charges.


Reviews/Television; True-Life Evil Overcome on 'David'
LEAD: Last night on NBC's ''Stoning in Fulham County,'' an infant was stoned to death.
Tonight at 9 on ABC's ''David,'' a 6-year-old boy is horribly burned over 90 percent of his body.
It's not difficult to discern what kinds of stories are bought for television movies these days.
But there are significant differences.


Samuel Niefeld, 60, Impresario
LEAD: Samuel M. Niefeld, who as a vice president of Columbia Artists Management oversaw the careers of such artists as Kiri Te Kanawa and Kathleen Battle and was a principal organizer of touring Soviet attractions in the United States, died Saturday morning at his home in Quogue, L.I.
He was 60 years old.


Market Place; Cautious Progress For Griffin's Deal
LEAD: CAN Merv Griffin persuade investors to lend his company $325 million to take over Resorts International Inc. even though Resorts is not making enough to support that much debt plus its existing obligations?
Similarly, can Donald J. Trump persuade buyers of ''junk bonds'' to put up $675 million to let him complete his end of the deal to carve up


Fieldcrest Cannon Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fieldcrest Cannon Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
335,926,000
366,387,000
Net inc
4,277,000
1,461,000
Share earns
.42
.14
9mo sales
970,412,000
1,015,389,000
Net inc
6,131,000
5,792,000
Share earns
.60
.57


Clashes Are Few in Debate By Moynihan and McMillan
LEAD: In their first face-to-face confrontation of the United States Senate campaign, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and his Republican challenger, Robert R. McMillan, agreed on far more issues than they disagreed on last night.


U.S. Seizes an Airliner That Carried Cocaine
LEAD: An Eastern Airlines passenger plane was seized today by the United States Customs Service after agents said they found 56 pounds of cocaine inside a United States Mail bag aboard a flight from Colombia.


Jets' Season Goes Every Which Way
LEAD: The Jets have been up this season.
They have been down.
On Sunday in Miami they even went sideways against Dan Marino, chasing his passes east and west as well as north and south.


Valid Logic Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valid Logic Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
28,037,000
18,033,000
Net inc
1,681,000
279,000
Share earns
.08
.02
Shares outst
21,400,000
17,700,000
9mo sales
75,132,000
45,521,000
Net inc
3,646,000
b26,925,000
Share earns
.19
-


42 Amtrak Passengers Arrested in Drug Sweep
LEAD: A five-day crackdown resulted in 42 arrests of suspected drug couriers traveling on Amtrak trains from New York to the Washington area, an Amtrak spokesman said tonight.


Manitowoc Co reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manitowoc Co (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Revenue
40,575,152
44,111,052
Net inc
3,695,370
1,865,728
Share earns
.36
.17


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 3 P.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


3 GROUPS GATHER ON SOUTH AFRICA
LEAD: Delegations from South Africa, the African National Congress and the Soviet Union gathered today to discuss the perceptions that they have of one another.


Koss Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Koss Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
7,550,312
6,920,843
Net inc
b662,978
b744,752
Share earns
.17
.16
Shares outst
3,922,727
4,584,887
b-After tax credits of $53,000 for the latest first quarter and $100,000 for the year-ago period.


Giants Aren't Content at Top
LEAD: At the halfway mark of the National Football League season, the Giants are tied with the Washington Redskins for first place in their division.
They seem more or less content with that, though they say they are disappointed they have not exactly been playing championship ball.


Assemblyman Moves to Oust An Election Commissioner
LEAD: Assemblyman Herman D. Farrell Jr., the Manhattan Democratic chairman, moved yesterday to oust Alice Sachs, a reform leader in the 50's and 60's, from the Board of Elections.


Varian Associates Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Varian Associates Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
307,900,000
276,900,000
Net inc
b24,200,000
5,300,000
Share earns
1.10
.24
Yr sales
1,170,600,000
982,800,000
Net inc
27,800,000
21,400,000
Share earns
1.27
1.98


First Charter Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Charter Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
779,285
671,248
Per share
.26
.23
9mo net inc
2,014,805
1,743,458
Per share
.68
.66
Shares outst
2,968,358
2,626,356


Consolidated Capital Realty Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Capital Realty Investors (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Net loss
1,306,000
1,817,000
9mo net loss
3,439,000
b441,000
b-After an extraordinary loss of $579,000.
The company said the latest 9 months are after a gain of $4,906,000 from property sales; year-ago 9 months include a gain of $1,336,000 from property sales.


Goody Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goody Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
56,657,000
54,907,000
Net inc
1,914,000
3,726,000
Share earns
.29
.57
9mo sales
175,029,000
161,155,000
Net inc
9,933,000
11,346,000
Share earns
1.53
1.75


IBP Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IBP Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,229,618,000
2,016,458,000
Net inc
23,148,000
18,939,000
Share earns
.49
.28
9mo sales
6,687,162,000
5,710,393,000
Net inc
39,568,000
52,403,000
Share earns
.84
.75


Sahlen &amp; Associates reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sahlen &amp; Associates (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
16,612,733
9,721,962
Net inc
b108,100
347,734
Share earns
.01
.04
Shares outst
11,578,083
8,002,704
Yr rev
54,949,187
21,902,751
Net inc
b1,934,089
c1,259,477
Share earns
.16
.16
Shares outst
11,578,083
8,002,704


Weitek Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weitek Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,300,000
5,500,000
Net inc
1,090,000
352,000
Share earns
.15
.05
9mo rev
25,100,000
14,450,000
Net inc
2,572,000
572,000
Share earns
.35
.08


Mays, J W Inc reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mays, J W Inc
Year to July 31
1988
1987
Sales
76,495,147
78,248,987
Net loss
1,800,726
b1,862,986
Share earns
-
.86
b-Net income and after a $459,000 extraordinary credit.
The latest year included $492,284 pre-tax income from a lease termination at the company's Fishkill property.


Waste Feud Resolved for Now
LEAD: A boxcar loaded with radioactive wastes that had caused a dispute between Idaho, Colorado and the Federal Government returned to the Rocky Flats nuclear weapon plant near here today after Gov.
Roy Romer approved temporary storage of the wastes at the plant.


Soviet Army Puts Glasnost Into Practice
LEAD: Senior Soviet military officers are trying to live up to Mikhail S. Gorbachev's policy of greater openness as Western military observers attend weeklong Warsaw Pact maneuvers in East Germany.


Campaign Trail; Indicted Lawmaker Airs Own Evidence
LEAD: It could qualify as this year's best use of political adversity by a candidate for public office.
It is certainly one of the more riveting advertisements of the 1988 campaign.


2 Women Shot, One Fatally, By Women Robbing a Shop
LEAD: One woman was killed and another seriously wounded when two robbers, both women, attempted to hold up a dress store in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn last night, the police said.


MCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
517,000,000
73,700,000
9mo net loss
529,000,000
198,800,000
MCorp's quarterly provision for loan losses was $368.9 million, making its total loan loss allowance $688 million.


General Metal &amp; Abrasives reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Metal &amp; Abrasives
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,069,267
1,653,275
Net loss
145,365
b63,290
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income


People
LEAD: *
John W. Rindlaub, a senior vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam, has been named director of corporate relations.


Daisy Systems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Daisy Systems Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
30,895,000
27,585,000
Net inc
b2,849,000
458,000
Share earns
.16
.03
Yr rev
117,400,000
100,860,000
Net inc
b6,924,000
c16,276,000
Share earns
.39
-


Pop Radio Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pop Radio Corp
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,191,731
1,510,022
Net loss
b2,683,885
1,905,078
b-Includes a $345,950 writeoff from deferred registration costs and $218,750 of interest and financing expense from the amortization of debt account.


Philip W. Callanan, Executive, 72
LEAD: Philip W. Callanan, a former senior vice president at Hill &amp; Knowlton, a New York advertising agency, died Friday at New York University Medical Center after a brief illness.
He was 72 years old and lived in Fort Hamilton, N.Y.


Rep. Pepper Leaves Hospital
LEAD: Representative Claude Pepper, at 88 the oldest member of Congress, was discharged ''in very good condition'' from Walter Reed Army Hospital today after minor surgery, aides said.
The Florida Democrat, who is running for re-election to a 14th term, entered the hospital Thursday for removal of scar tissue from a hernia operation.


Israelis Stage New Air Raid On Militia Base in Lebanon
LEAD: Two Israeli warplanes blasted a military base of a Syrian-backed militia in southeastern Lebanon today with four rockets, setting the base afire and wounding one militiaman, the police said.


TAIWAN AND KOREA ARE SAID TO IMPEDE U.S. TRADE EFFORT
LEAD: The Treasury said today that Taiwan and South Korea were manipulating their currencies to stimulate sales of their goods to the United States, thereby impeding a reduction of the big American trade deficit.


St Jude Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St Jude Medical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
27,570,000
18,978,000
Net inc
8,333,000
4,458,000
Share earns
.71
.42
9mo sales
85,115,000
56,549,000
Net inc
24,669,000
13,173,000
Share earns
2.10
1.27


Full Employment Would Cut the Deficit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Burr-Brown Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burr-Brown Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
42,368,000
35,320,000
Net inc
3,212,000
1,538,000
Share earns
.33
.16
9mo sales
132,845,000
101,999,000
Net inc
8,693,000
2,601,000
Share earns
.89
.29


Police Suspect Arson In Fire at Paris Theater
LEAD: Government officials, religious leaders and film directors condemned today an apparent arson attack against a Paris theater that was showing Martin Scorsese's film ''The Last Temptation of Christ.'' The fire Saturday night left 13 people hospitalized, 1 of them in serious condition.


Ex-Leader Is Seen as Factor in Grenada Vote
LEAD: In the aftermath of the invasion of Grenada five years ago, one of the greatest fears of the United States was that democratic elections would return to power Sir Eric Gairy, the eccentric leader who had dominated the island's politics for nearly three decades.


Cheeky Exuberance
LEAD: Neil Greenberg stood out during his years with the Merce Cunningham Dance Company as a performer with a delightfully insouciant energy.
He'd pop onto the stage and transform the moment into one of quiet exuberance.
When Mr.
Greenberg left the company in 1986 to pursue his own career in choreography, he took not only the inevitable influence of Mr.


CF&amp;I Steel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CF&amp;I Steel Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
75,768,000
60,908,000
Net inc
83,000
b4,696,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
243,439,000
176,130,000
Net inc
8,404,000
b11,158,000
Share earns
1.27
-


Atlantic Richfield Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Richfield Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,592,000,000
4,439,000,000
Net inc
391,000,000
315,000,000
Share earns
2.17
1.71
9mo rev
13,776,000,000
12,355,000,000
Net inc
1,192,000,000
884,000,000
Share earns
6.56
4.82


Lubrizol Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lubrizol Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
265,382,000
236,468,000
Net inc
10,683,000
18,913,000
Share earns
.28
.48
9mo rev
848,092,000
778,088,000
Net inc
b65,514,000
68,667,000
Share earns
1.69
1.73


Plantronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plantronics Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
29,186,000
27,101,000
Net inc
1,266,000
1,863,000
Share earns
.21
.30
The latest quarter comprises 13 weeks, while the year-ago first quarter had 14 weeks.


T J International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* T J International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
96,800,000
77,700,000
Net inc
7,100,000
5,300,000
Share earns
1.00
.75
9mo sales
242,800,000
195,100,000
Net inc
14,700,000
10,900,000
Share earns
2.07
1.56


Crew of Cruiser That Downed Iranian Airliner Gets a Warm Homecoming
LEAD: Three months and 20 days after it shot down an Iranian passenger jet by mistake, the crew of the U.S.S.
Vincennes returned home today to a hero's welcome, regretful about the deaths but convinced that they had acted properly.


Union Carbide Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Carbide Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,108,000,000
1,730,000,000
Net inc
213,000,000
b23,000,000
Share earns
1.56
.17
9mo sales
6,185,000,000
5,069,000,000
Net inc
501,000,000
209,000,000
Share earns
3.71
1.60


Home Port Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Port Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
578,000
527,000
9mo net inc
1,420,000
1,309,000
The per share earnings were not available because the company went public on Aug. 30, 1988.


Software Product From Ashton-Tate
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Corporation, based in Torrance, Calif., is shipping its long-awaited and often-delayed new version of its flagship product, dBase IV.
The software, which will sell for $795, offers greater ease of use and compatibility with computer networks than does its predecessor, dBase III Plus, which has been the most popular data-base management product for personal computers.


Nature's Sunshine Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nature's Sunshine Products (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
11,200,000
9,700,000
Net inc
770,000
560,000
Share earns
.29
.22
9mo rev
32,700,000
28,300,000
Net inc
2,360,000
1,480,000
Share earns
.91
.60


Rivals Challenge Lotus
LEAD: JUST as a word-processing program can be used to write a business letter, a love letter or a verse drama, a computerized spreadsheet can work for a widget factory, a personal checking account or a research laboratory.
The word processor does not care what the words say; the spreadsheet does not care what the numbers stand for.


Old Spaghetti Warehouse reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Spaghetti Warehouse
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Revenue
6,929,504
6,002,008
Net inc
404,474
328,004
Share earns
.27
.22


Dan Quayle's Got The Right Stuff
LEAD: Even if Dan Quayle had expected the Vice Presidential nomination, he could hardly have been prepared for the fury of the campaign against him.
The merciless attack on the Indiana Senator began even before the nomination became official and it gives every sign of continuing until the polls close on Nov.


Careers; A Demand For Patent Attorneys
LEAD: A nationwide shortage of patent attorneys is occurring at a time when many companies are increasing the size of their patent staffs as they have become more litigious and aggressive about patents.


Finnigan Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Finnigan Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
32,488,000
28,470,000
Net inc
2,290,000
1,272,000
Share earns
.40
.25
Shares outst
5,797,000
5,150,000
9mo rev
98,395,000
78,117,000
Net inc
b6,786,000
c2,995,000
Share earns
1.25
.59
Shares outst
5,412,000
5,145,000


Texans in Terror of Group of Boys
LEAD: When Lee Jozwiak's son came home trembling because someone held a knife to his throat in the playground of this subdivision about 17 miles northwest of downtown Houston, she blamed The Posse.


Healthcare Compare reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthcare Compare (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,003,000
3,484,000
Net inc
815,000
445,000
Share earns
.16
.10
Shares outst
4,965,000
4,133,000
Yr rev
20,829,000
11,603,000
Net inc
2,299,000
b1,227,000
Share earns
.50
.37
Shares outst
4,415,000
3,230,000


In Paris, Four Designers Lead the Way
LEAD: Lagerfeld and Lacroix, Montana and Miyake - these are the names everybody is dropping as they chat between the spring and summer fashion shows here.
A major change is under way and these designers, so far, are the key players.


China Reports Arrest of Spies
LEAD: China said today that it had arrested a spy sent from Taiwan and a female accomplice recruited on the mainland.
A national radio report said Cao Zhangjun, 36 years old, described as a spy for Taiwan's Military Information Bureau, and Xiang Jianping, an accountant in a government department, had pleaded guilty to spying charges.


Wright's Style: Both a Strength and a Weakness
LEAD: After Jim Wright's first two years as Speaker of the House, many lawmakers are still trying to figure out their new leader and, by their own admission, they are not having much success.


Datron Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datron Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
8,874,000
7,361,000
Net inc
880,000
452,000
Share earns
.30
.16
6mo sales
16,607,000
14,459,000
Net inc
1,451,000
830,000
Share earns
.50
.30


Utility to Try Novel Approach to Store Energy
LEAD: A NOVEL approach to storing energy - by compressing air in underground caverns - is now being tried by an Alabama power utility.
The technique was first developed in Europe.


State Department Pique
LEAD: Some people in the State Department are smoldering over the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's handling of several appointments and promotions in the closing days of the 100th Congress.


Toxic Ash Is the Time Bomb in the Incinerator; Regulate Packaging
LEAD: To the Editor ''Cutting Trash Down to Size'' (editorial, Oct. 11) mentions a number of solutions to the problem of a country choking to death on disposable diapers, but fails to mention the most obvious and cheapest corrective: stringent regulation of the lunatic packaging industry.


At Least 13 Reported Dead As Typhoon Hits Philippines
LEAD: A typhoon pounded the Philippines today with heavy rains and winds up to 140 miles per hour, bringing floods, mud slides and tidal surges that killed at least 13 people and left 47,000 homeless.


Interleaf Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interleaf Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
18,395,000
12,732,000
Net inc
123,000
b1,309,000
Share earns
.01
.11
6mo rev
35,446,000
23,265,000
Net inc
232,000
b2,032,000
Share earns
.02
.17


California Water Service Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Water Service Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
33,876,000
35,272,000
Net inc
5,151,000
6,075,000
Share earns
.91
1.06
9mo rev
88,005,000
88,801,000
Net inc
11,511,000
b14,633,000
Share earns
2.01
2.55


NWA Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NWA Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,611,541,000
1,443,712,000
Net inc
116,282,000
87,336,000
Share earns
3.98
2.89
9mo rev
4,232,092,000
3,928,414,000
Net inc
101,143,000
102,990,000
Share earns
3.47
3.59


E.P.A. Predicts Its Rules Will Be Expensive
LEAD: Recent and future environmental regulations could impose significant costs on local taxpayers, particularly in small towns and big cities, and on farmers, says a new study by the Environmental Protection Agency.


Bradshaw Due Back
LEAD: Terry Bradshaw, the former Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback who had been undergoing tests for chest pains, was given a clean bill of health by doctors yesterday and will resume his National Football League broadcast duties for CBS Sports.


Martin Marietta Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Martin Marietta Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,455,002,000
1,319,848,000
Net inc
202,788,000
55,625,000
Share earns
3.81
1.02
9mo rev
4,192,342,000
3,853,536,000
Net inc
335,161,000
171,266,000
Share earns
6.30
3.13


Milton Roy Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Milton Roy Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
30,529,000
27,784,000
Net inc
1,031,000
930,000
Share earns
.24
.22
9mo sales
92,901,000
82,262,000
Net inc
3,122,000
2,520,000
Share earns
.73
.60


Radionics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radionics Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
11,065,000
9,065,000
Net inc
1,062,000
801,000
Share earns
.25
.19
9mo sales
30,034,000
25,978,000
Net inc
2,879,000
2,265,000
Share earns
.67
.54


An 80th Birthday...
LEAD: It is hard to imagine New York's concert life without Alexander Schneider.
Happily, we don't have to.
Mr.
Schneider is still conducting and playing his violin, and on Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall he celebrated his 80th birthday surrounded by young colleagues.


Eaton Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eaton Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
846,700,000
753,500,000
Net inc
b54,400,000
c49,100,000
Share earns
1.47
1.19
9mo sales
2,596,800,000
2,332,800,000
Net inc
b161,300,000
c175,400,000
Share earns
4.32
4.08


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ARCO, Los Angeles, said its board was investigating a possible initial public offering of about 50 percent of its Lyondell Petrochemical Co.


White House Welcome for U.S. Olympians


Arranging A Benefit, He's Cut Corners
LEAD: Brooke Astor, Pat Buckley, Blaine Trump.
These are the names that spring to mind when the talk turns to powers behind charity galas.
The name James P. Erdman does not.
But give him time.


William T. R. Fox, 76, Professor
LEAD: William T. R. Fox, professor emeritus of international relations at Columbia University, died of heart disease yesterday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
Professor Fox, who suffered a heart attack in August, was 76 years old and lived in Greenwich.


McKesson Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McKesson Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,721,000,000
1,594,700,000
Net inc
b21,300,000
c23,000,000
Share earns
.50
.55
6mo rev
3,371,300,000
3,100,400,000
Net inc
b44,400,000
c44,400,000
Share earns
1.04
1.04


Central Jersey Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Jersey Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,895,000
4,057,000
Per share
.57
.48
9mo net inc
12,829,000
11,380,000
Per share
1.51
1.34


Houghton Mifflin Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Houghton Mifflin Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
166,077,000
153,340,000
Net inc
28,675,000
26,736,000
Share earns
2.02
1.88
9mo sales
296,548,000
281,809,000
Net inc
26,956,000
26,873,000
Share earns
1.90
1.89


A Flower of North India, The Punjab, Slowly Dies
LEAD: There was a time not very long ago when Tahmi Bhandari ran a genteel guest house in a burly city with few grace notes.
Diplomats and travelers of independent mind and means came and went, sitting at her polished wood heirloom tables set with bone china, a rest stop on journeys between busy New Delhi and austere Pakistan or Afghanistan up the Grand Trunk


Rover to Add 850 Jobs
LEAD: British Aerospace P.L.C. said today that its recently acquired auto manufacturing unit, Rover Group P.L.C., would create 850 more jobs at its Austin Rover division to meet increased demand.
Last week, Austin Rover received a contract worth ;540 million, or about $945 million, from the car rental company Avis Europe P.L.C.


Crystal Brands Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crystal Brands Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
125,367,000
102,182,000
Net inc
b3,112,000
c7,300,000
Share earns
.35
.81
9mo sales
298,846,000
264,683,000
Net inc
b3,526,000
c8,244,000
Share earns
.39
.92


Guardian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardian Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
975,307
419,548
Per share
.49
.26
9mo net inc
2,116,257
1,200,168
Per share
1.15
.74
Per share earnings have been adjusted to reflect a 5-for-4 stock split paid in July.


Worldwide Computer Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Worldwide Computer Services (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,429,257
3,922,921
Net inc
87,707
93,163
Share earns
.05
.05
9mo sales
13,112,458
11,236,832
Net inc
309,095
289,734
Share earns
.17
.15


Philip Morris and Kraft Clash Over Offers
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that it was still interested in taking over Kraft Inc. and took a swipe at Kraft's $14 billion dividend plan announced Sunday.


Genuine Parts Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genuine Parts Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
777,707,000
686,059,000
Net inc
46,220,000
38,587,000
Share earns
.60
.49
9mo sales
2,225,508,000
1,961,359,000
Net inc
132,192,000
107,656,000
Share earns
1.71
1.36


Cominco Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cominco Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
372,800,000
249,300,000
Net inc
49,800,000
c54,100,000
Share earns
.60
.71
9mo sales
1,155,000,000
908,300,000
Net inc
b130,000,000
c97,000,000
Share earns
1.53
1.20


PATTERNS
LEAD:  Sprouse's Troubles


Takeover Spree Starts a Speculative Frenzy
LEAD: The giant takeover offers in recent weeks have touched off a burst of speculative fever on Wall Street.
With many stocks already rising on merger rumors, analysts are scrutinizing hundreds more to identify tomorrow's targets.
And brokers are calling clients with tips to encourage more trading.


Guardsman Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardsman Products Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
36,186,000
35,501,000
Net inc
1,757,000
1,440,000
Share earns
.35
.29
9mo sales
105,132,000
94,748,000
Net inc
5,021,000
3,966,000
Share earns
1.01
.80


Unocal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unocal Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,581,000,000
2,576,000,000
Net inc
97,000,000
29,000,000
Share earns
.84
.25
Shares outst
117,000,000
117,000,000
9mo rev
7,432,000,000
7,058,000,000
Net inc
b339,000,000
152,000,000
Share earns
2.90
1.30
Shares outst
117,000,000
116,000,000


Huffy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huffy Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
68,952,000
83,908,000
Net loss
2,146,000
b2,379,000
Share earns
-
.27
9mo sales
265,321,000
265,285,000
Net inc
3,274,000
8,401,000
Share earns
.39
.97


Ask Computer Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ask Computer Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
39,316,000
26,609,000
Net inc
2,377,000
1,882,000
Share earns
.18
.14


Fay Rejects Settlement
LEAD: Michael Fay, the chairman of New Zealand's challenge for the America's Cup, has rejected any out-of-court settlement over the legality of last month's cup racing series.


New Theory Explains How Cholesterol Threatens the Heart
LEAD: LEADING heart scientists believe they have discovered the crucial early steps by which cholesterol in the blood can initiate the formation of the artery-clogging plaques that cause most heart attacks.


Occupational-Urgent Care reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Occupational-Urgent Care (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,064,575
1,697,728
Net inc
762,357
b715,405
Share earns
.17
.16
9mo rev
7,699,284
4,338,790
Net inc
1,865,328
b1,434,927
Share earns
.41
.32


American Capital Manageent &amp; Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital Manageent &amp; Research Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
25,300,000
25,300,000
Net inc
6,000,000
6,400,000
Share earns
.25
.26
9mo rev
75,200,000
84,600,000
Net inc
18,100,000
25,300,000
Share earns
.74
1.04


Puritan-Bennett Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puritan-Bennett Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
51,250,000
44,512,000
Net inc
3,455,000
2,924,000
Share earns
.31
.26
9mo sales
150,524,000
128,121,000
Net inc
10,142,000
7,956,000
Share earns
.91
.72


Why Should Every Road in the Area Be Under Construction?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kansas City Southern Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas City Southern Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
132,074,000
126,396,000
Net inc
4,547,000
b7,392,000
Share earns
.43
.76
9mo rev
379,636,000
372,327,000
Net inc
11,791,000
b11,737,000
Share earns
1.12
1.21
Shares outst
10,306,000
9,566,000


Mexico Says Drug Suspects Aren't Police
LEAD: A Mexican Government spokesman asserted yesterday that two men arrested on suspicion of conspiring to import heroin into New York City are not high-ranking Mexican policemen, as United States authorities say, but ''adventurers'' who once sought unsuccessfully to become police officers.


Farmers Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Farmers Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
65,937,000
c62,052,000
Share earns
.96
.90
9mo net inc
b205,893,000
c181,452,000
Share earns
3.00
2.62
b-After a loss of $1,320,000 from discontinued operations.


Grand Met Holders Back Pillsbury Bid
LEAD: The shareholders of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. overwhelmingly approved the British company's $5.23 billion takeover bid for the Pillsbury Company.
At a special meeting, the shareholders also backed Grand Met's plan to sell its Inter-Continental Hotels Corporation unit to the Saison Group Ltd. of Japan for $2.15 billion, as well as sell new Grand Met shares to existing shareholders to raise money for the


Waste Management Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waste Management Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
938,180,000
756,829,000
Net inc
129,123,000
88,724,000
Share earns
.57
.39
9mo rev
2,593,028,000
1,998,663,000
Net inc
339,486,000
238,746,000
Share earns
1.50
1.07


Conservative Leaving
LEAD: Gary L. Bauer, who has served since 1987 as the White House director for policy development and been one of the Administration's chief conservative spokesmen, will leave the Administration at the end of the month to join an evangelical Christian organization, Focus on the Family, based in Pomona, Calif.


Allegheny Power System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Power System Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
524,934,000
522,306,000
Net inc
49,115,000
53,027,000
Share earns
.95
1.04
9mo rev
1,645,550,000
1,450,411,000
Net inc
153,710,000
160,611,000
Share earns
2.98
3.15


Toxic Ash Is the Time Bomb in the Incinerator; Delicatessen Scrutinized
LEAD: To the Editor:


General Building Products reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Building Products (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
21,913,000
19,706,000
Net inc
77,000
754,000
Share earns
.02
.19
9mo sales
56,517,000
49,530,000
Net inc
276,000
1,759,000
Share earns
.07
.48
Shares outst
4,016,750
3,631,099


Doctors Urge Wide Cholesterol Testing of Children
LEAD: IN a major new effort to stem heart disease at its childhood origins, the nation's pediatricians are expected to begin testing millions of American children for high cholesterol levels.


What Makes Shirley Run, in Her Own Words
LEAD: Can the most famous child in the world grow up emotionally unscarred?
Is it possible for the winsome waif with 56 golden curls to grow up at all?
What happens afterward to someone who was the most popular movie star in America at the age of 7, who received 167,000 presents for her eighth birthday, who was offered forbidden chewing gum by Amelia Earhart and found J.


Now, Citizens Can Let Fingers Do the Talking
LEAD: Town meetings were once a wondrous thing.
The whole town came to a hall, citizens spoke their minds, then they counted hands and knew what to do.
Today, too often a town meeting will turn into a total zoo, making professional wrestling look like brain surgery.
A small part of the town comes, everyone pushes and shoves for a spot in front of the television news cameras, and then, to prove that they are right, people yell their opinions.


Gallagher &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gallagher &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
44,278,000
41,847,000
Net inc
7,829,000
7,420,000
Share earns
.65
.61
9mo rev
117,870,000
108,295,000
Net inc
13,636,000
13,781,000
Share earns
1.13
1.13


For the 101st Congress; Six Choices in Connecticut
LEAD: All six Connecticut representatives in Congress seek re-election, all are favored to win and all enjoy the money advantage of incumbents.
They report contributions four and five times greater than their challengers.
In the four districts in the New York area, we support three members for re-election.


The Impossible Quest for the Perfect Map
LEAD: CARTOGRAPHERS since Ptolemy in the second century have struggled with the problem of drawing the round Earth on a flat sheet of paper, knowing there is no perfect solution.


Sei Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sei Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
33,155,000
29,522,000
Net inc
3,155,000
2,663,000
Share earns
.25
.21
9mo rev
98,754,000
89,283,000
Net inc
10,089,000
6,570,000
Share earns
.79
.52


Continuum Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continuum Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
16,455,000
18,359,000
Net inc
440,000
1,746,000
Share earns
.10
.40
6mo rev
33,293,000
32,841,000
Net inc
1,085,000
2,263,000
Share earns
.25
.52


Safeco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safeco Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
785,065,000
695,772,000
Net inc
b51,299,000
c60,574,000
Share earns
.79
.90
9mo rev
2,230,821,000
2,069,805,000
Net inc
b189,675,000
c214,177,000
Share earns
2.88
3.17


Landmark Is Debated By Experts
LEAD: Creating them is a struggle.
Maintaining them is a challenge.
Regulating them is a battle.
But just finding New York City's landmarks and historic districts can be a near impossibility.


Reviews/Music; Fear, Madness and Rock
LEAD: With images of fear and madness, decadence and collapse, Siouxsie and the Banshees rocked Radio City Music Hall last Thursday night.
Siouxsie Sioux has been singing her waking nightmares since the birth of British punk-rock in 1976, working with Steve Severin on guitar and various bands of Banshees to concoct a shifting blend of psychedelia and phantasmagoria.


Bear Defense Holds For a 10-9 Triumph
LEAD: They tried running right and running left, passing long and passing short.
They tried two quarterbacks.


Reviews/Television; Scientists Who Falsify Their Studies
LEAD: ''Do Scientists Cheat?'' asks this week's offering on ''Nova,'' and the unsurprising yet troubling answer is that yes, some do.
The scientists interviewed tonight at 9 o'clock on Channel 13 differ over how many bad apples are to be found in the nation's laboratories, but there is evidence that the number has been going up, particularly in the biomedical field.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-15  A rights program for farm animals has been set up by the Swedish Government, long renowned for its generosity and concern over the treatment of people.
A1


Brush Wellman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brush Wellman Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
85,000,000
72,600,000
Net inc
6,400,000
4,300,000
Share earns
.35
.23
9mo sales
264,500,000
221,400,000
Net inc
22,600,000
17,600,000
Share earns
1.23
.93


Great Bay Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Bay Bankshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
914,000
594,000
Per share
.27
-
The bank converted to public ownership in December 1987.
The year-ago results restated to reflect an accounting change.


SPX Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SPX Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
212,946,000
195,315,000
Net inc
9,600,000
9,100,000
Share earns
.78
.74
9mo sales
651,588,000
571,395,000
Net inc
35,200,000
29,000,000
Share earns
2.86
2.36


First Regional Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Regional Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
203,000
60,000
Per share
.10
.03
9mo net inc
414,000
b1,493,000
Per share
.19
.69
b-After a one-time gain of $1,289,000.
First Regional was formerly Great American Bancorp.


Symbol Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Symbol Technologies Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
24,723,000
20,985,000
Net inc
4,976,000
4,551,000
Share earns
.26
.24


Officer Severs Ties to Cooper
LEAD: The Cooper Companies said that Parker G. Montgomery had resigned as a director and that his term as president and chief operating officer had ended, effective immediately.
Mr.
Montgomery, who founded Cooper Laboratories in 1958, resigned as chairman and chief executive in July, as part of a plan by shareholders to restructure the company.


Inter-Tel Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inter-Tel Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
15,586,000
13,303,000
Net inc
410,000
b803,000
Share earns
.05
.10
9mo sales
47,983,000
33,417,000
Net inc
1,505,000
b1,180,000
Share earns
.17
.15


Corrections
LEAD: A picture in some copies yesterday with an obituary of Spurgeon M. Keeny was published in error.
It showed his son, Spurgeon Jr.


Unifi Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unifi Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1988
1987
Sales
79,574,404
69,029,458
Net inc
5,343,696
6,371,034
Share earns
.51
.60


We Told You So
LEAD: The best thing that could happen to American journalism might be for Michael Dukakis to win the election.


South Africa Bomb Blast Kills 2
LEAD: A car bomb exploded early today outside a shopping mall in Witbank, a mining town 60 miles east of Johannesburg, killing 2 people and wounding at least 40.


Kansas City Power &amp; Light Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas City Power &amp; Light Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
227,976,000
218,372,000
Net inc
49,362,000
44,656,000
Share earns
1.54
1.36
9mo rev
733,579,000
699,208,000
Net inc
113,180,000
b1,596,000


Addendum
LEAD: *
Popular Science will be raising its ad rates 5 percent with the January issue, while the circulation will stay at 1.8 million.


Penn Central Deal
LEAD: The Penn Central Corporation has signed an agreement to acquire the Republic American Corporation for $15.75 a share, or about $249 million.
The companies said they expected the deal to be completed early next year.
Republic American, based in Encino, Calif., sells workers' compensation insurance in California.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Superconductivity Goals  Predictions for the usage of superconducting materials are more modest now as experts say they expect the first uses to be in microelectronics.
Page D1.
Hostage Dealings Denied  The Administration denied any connection with an Italian arms dealer who is under investigation for possible schemes to release American hostages in Lebanon.


At Hindu Fete, Good vs. Evil Is Good Drama
LEAD: The flaming arrow sped true to its mark, the belly of the 10-headed demon.
With bursts of flame, the crackle of fireworks, and applause and chanting of religious slogans from tens of thousands of watchers, Ravana, the demon, collapsed in a thunderous fall, sending sparks high into the crisp evening air.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1988
From '87
Ashland Oil Inc.
$ 66,200,000
+
1.1
Atlantic Richfield Co.
391,000,000 +
#24.1
Combustion Engineering Inc.
(28,500,000)
-
Compaq Computer Corp.
57,900,000
+
59.1
Crane Co.
20,700,000
+
24.0
Dow Corning Corp.


Pitt-Des Moines Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pitt-Des Moines Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
92,210,000
67,070,000
Net inc
1,788,000
b1,880,000
Share earns
.70
-
9mo rev
240,194,000
203,686,000
Net inc
4,944,000
b3,209,000
Share earns
1.93
-


P.L.O. Appeals to Israelis to Vote the 'Peace Choice'
LEAD: The Palestine Liberation Organization took the unusual step today of trying to influence Israel's general election, urging Arabs and Jews to vote for ''the forces which represent the real peace choice'' or face the prospect of war.


Poet Is Now a Player in Lithuania's Unfolding Epic
LEAD: Until the Movement for the Support of Perestroika sprang up last spring, Sigitas Geda, 45 years old, existed as a poet, a translator and as free a spirit as one could be living in the Soviet republic of Lithuania.


FPL Group Inc reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FPL Group Inc (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,739,366,000
4,318,074,000
Net inc
433,546,000
392,694,000
Share earns
3.31
3.03


Compuchem Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compuchem Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
10,413,000
6,734,000
Net inc
1,011,000
65,000
Share earns
.16
.01
9mo rev
27,271,000
16,368,000
Net inc
2,028,000
b41,000
Share earns
.32
-
b-Net loss


Dukakis Aides Say Racial Issue Reflects G.O.P.'s Tactics
LEAD: Top aides to Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis say there was no organized plan to accuse Vice President Bush's campaign of exacerbating racial fears, but they quickly seized on the issue to buttress their case against the tactics of the Republican campaign.


Return of 'Miss Rhythm'
LEAD: On records, Ruth Brown's career peaked in the early 1950's, when she had a string of No. 1 rhythm-and-blues hits.
But she sings far better now than she did in the 50's.
Her early set at the Lone Star Roadhouse on Wednesday night had the earthiness and sophistication of the best pre-rock rhythm-and-blues, the music that bridged blues, jazz and what was to become rock-and-roll.


Premier Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
9,300,000
b164,000
Per share
-
.01
9mo net loss
41,600,000
b2,800,000
Per share
-
.11
b-Net income and the 9 months included a gain of $24.8 million from the sale of the company's credit card portfolio in June 1987.


Excel Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Excel Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,897,185
2,850,800
Share earns
.29
.40
Shares outst
6,621,229
7,128,223
9mo net inc
5,343,079
8,775,290
Share earns
.80
1.23
Shares outst
6,680,395
7,143,445


Drew Brinkerhoff, Executive, 66
LEAD: Drew Brinkerhoff, a retired executive of CBS, died of cancer Sunday at Memorial Medical Center in Savannah, Ga.
He was 66 years old and had recently moved to Savannah from Fair Haven, N.J.


Egyptian Minister Named in Missile-Parts Scheme
LEAD: Lawyers for a California aerospace engineer accused of helping to smuggle missile components to Egypt asserted in court papers today that he was recruited for the scheme by Egypt's Defense Minister, Lieut.
Gen.
Abdel Halim Abu Ghazala.


Talking Business with Cavanaugh of Summit; Food Industry's Soviet Accords
LEAD: As the Soviet Union struggles to overhaul its balky food production and distribution system, it is increasingly seeking financing and expertise from Western companies.


Central Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,008,000
5,601,000
Net loss
2,132,000
742,000
9mo rev
26,518,000
7,795,000
Net loss
2,375,000
3,611,000


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
American Exploration Co., Houston, which is engaged in oil and gas exploration and production, appointed Peter C. Forbes president.


Nichols-Homestead reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nichols-Homestead (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
53,854,000
47,516,000
Net inc
2,960,000
1,752,000
Share earns
.55
.32
9mo sales
148,064,000
130,729,000
Net inc
5,602,000
5,439,000
Share earns
1.04
.99


Harford Steam Boiler Inspecion &amp; Insurance Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harford Steam Boiler Inspecion &amp; Insurance Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
115,625,000
104,504,000
Net inc
b18,738,000
c14,624,000
Share earns
.92
.72
9mo rev
333,241,000
311,734,000
Net inc
b52,351,000
c44,342,000
Share earns
2.57
2.16


The Race for Congress; In Nebraska Senate Contest, the Incumbent Is the Underdog
LEAD: As the incumbent, Senator David K. Karnes ought to have some important advantages in the contest to retain his seat.
As a Republican, he ought to have even more.


Vanguard Will Merge With Random House
LEAD: Vanguard Press, the 62-year-old independent publishing house that published the first books of Saul Bellow, Dr.
Seuss, Marshall McLuhan and Joyce Carol Oates, has been sold to Random House, spokesmen for both companies said yesterday.


Fiserv Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fiserv Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
36,248,000
21,028,000
Net inc
2,428,000
1,808,000
Share earns
.29
.22
9mo rev
87,206,000
62,910,000
Net inc
6,786,000
5,214,000
Share earns
.82
.68


BUYOUT SPECIALIST BIDS $20.3 BILLION FOR RJR NABISCO
LEAD: Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, a Wall Street investment house that has become one of the country's largest industrial holding companies, yesterday announced a $20.3 billion offer for RJR Nabisco, the nation's 19th-largest industrial company.


Poll Finds Americans Are Ignorant Of Science
LEAD: Nearly 500 years after Copernicus postulated that Earth revolves around the Sun, millions of Americans say otherwise, researchers have found.
They said their poll suggests that many of the nation's adults are ''scientifically illiterate.''


Salem Carpet Mills Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salem Carpet Mills Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
104,256,000
92,477,000
Net inc
2,486,000
1,705,000
Share earns
.31
.22
9mo sales
304,216,000
264,928,000
Net inc
5,365,000
3,899,000
Share earns
.67
.49


Judge Upholds Harvard Employees' Unionization
LEAD: An administrative law judge has upheld a vote by clerical and technical workers at Harvard University to join a union.


By Design; Coiffure Whimsies
LEAD: In this city especially during the seasonal collections - intriguing fashion notes are sounded everywhere.
One theme here has to do with hair.


Computer Entry Systems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Entry Systems Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
22,142,000
17,427,000
Net inc
1,148,000
601,000
Share earns
.23
.07
Shares outst
4,890,000
5,327,000
9mo rev
61,838,000
53,696,000
Net inc
2,267,000
2,191,000
Share earns
.46
.41
Shares outst
4,902,000
5,302,000


Crown Crafts Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Crafts Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Sales
25,664,000
18,377,000
Net inc
1,880,000
b1,685,000
Share earns
.61
.54
6mo sales
43,434,000
34,359,000
Net inc
3,069,000
b2,829,000
Share earns
1.00
.91


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The ice has been broken,''  - Mikhail S. Gorbachev, after meeting Helmut Kohl.  [ A10:1. ]


For the 101st Congress; Payne and Pallone for New Jersey
LEAD: The last time anyone other than James Howard represented New Jersey's Third Congressional District, Lyndon Johnson was in the White House.
And when Peter Rodino first won election to the House, Harry Truman was upsetting Thomas Dewey in the 1948 Presidential race.


Strategic Mortgage Investments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Strategic Mortgage Investments
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,293,000
2,635,000
Share earns
.42
.48
9mo net inc
8,327,000
9,275,000
Share earns
1.52
1.70


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page picture caption yesterday misidentified a Lithuanian official in some copies.
The official, Algirdas Brazauskas, is the new Communist Party leader in Lithuania.


Duquesne Light Co reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duquesne Light Co (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,004,971,000
891,615,000
Net inc
148,050,000
b135,471,000
Share earns
1.93
1.58
Shares outst
66,859,000
73,119,000
b-Includes a net charge of $23,800,000 on the sale of the company's interest in Beaver Valley Power Station unit no.


Bancorp of Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp of Mississippi
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,180,000
2,972,000
Per share
.66
.62
9mo net inc
9,329,000
8,441,000
Per share
1.95
1.76


Deluxe Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deluxe Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
301,489,600
236,546,354
Net inc
34,747,138
42,698,378
Share earns
.40
.50
9mo sales
863,365,818
702,517,072
Net inc
98,395,741
105,873,957
Share earns
1.15
1.24


Motel 6 LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Motel 6 LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 28
1988
1987
Revenue
97,393,000
86,323,000
Net inc
9,467,000
b1,122,000
Share earns
.19
-
9mo rev
256,298,000
226,076,000
Net inc
9,528,000
b4,671,000
Share earns
.19
-


Homeowners Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homeowners Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,785,000
7,032,000
Net inc
999,000
752,000
Share earns
.18
.15
9mo rev
22,929,000
17,949,000
Net inc
2,697,000
1,936,000
Share earns
.52
.39


Kansas Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
174,099,000
164,492,000
Net inc
46,139,000
37,288,000
Share earns
1.32
.90
Shares outst
34,826,000
40,820,000
9mo rev
407,692,000
403,298,000
Net inc
70,123,000
65,823,000
Share earns
1.88
1.56


Political Memo; Bush Striking Political Gold By Minimizing Silver Spoon
LEAD: As a rule, Americans do not like the idea of elites and look upon this society as a place where all people are created equal.


Nissan to Add To U.S. Plant
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Company's manufacturing unit in the United States said today that it would expand its operations by adding another car to the product line of its plant in Smyrna, Tenn., which now makes the Sentra model and a pickup truck.


Toxic Ash Is the Time Bomb in the Incinerator; New York City Lags
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jets Better Off Without Gastineau
LEAD: FOR more than nine seasons, Mark Gastineau was on the Jets' team.
But for all his sacks, he was never anybody's ''teammate.''


Union Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
656,780,000
617,554,000
Net inc
146,336,000
152,228,000
Share earns
1.36
1.40
9mo rev
1,606,974,000
1,532,612,000
Net inc
269,464,000
297,420,000
Share earns
2.40
2.64


Chicago Museum to Return Lintel Thais Say Was Stolen
LEAD: The Art Institute of Chicago has agreed to return to Thailand an ancient carved lintel that the Thais say was stolen from their country more than 20 years ago, the institute said today.


Goulds Pumps Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goulds Pumps Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
116,373,000
102,534,000
Net inc
7,050,000
5,799,000
Share earns
.35
.32
Shares outst
20,359,490
18,048,752
9mo sales
339,646,000
285,475,000
Net inc
18,711,000
14,699,000
Share earns
.95
.82
Shares outst
19,634,303
17,945,944


A Brooklyn Hospital Is Fined for Having Rodents
LEAD: A Brooklyn hospital has been fined by the New York State Department of Health for having rodents and cockroaches in its pediatrics unit.


Ampco-Pittsburgh Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ampco-Pittsburgh Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
59,867,000
61,968,000
Net loss
b19,275,000
c2,807,000
Share earns
-
.29
9mo sales
185,980,000
194,780,000
Net loss
b18,238,000
c9,533,000
Share earns
-
1.00


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q.Where does the Earth's water come from?
A.There are two chief schools of thought on the origins of the Earth's water.
Some believe the water was here from the start; some think it came later, from comets.


Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
84,964,000
63,311,000
Net inc
8,505,000
6,969,000
Share earns
.58
.48
9mo sales
201,394,000
172,595,000
Net inc
17,117,000
18,756,000
Share earns
1.17
1.29


Help! Nothing Works!
LEAD: IT seemed a clear case of pre-Halloween goblins.
Almost every piece of software and hardware in the dungeon was malfunctioning last week.


Smith Barney Names Chairman and Chief
LEAD: Frank G. Zarb, senior partner at Lazard Freres &amp; Company, has been named chairman and chief executive of Smith Barney Inc., a large Wall Street investment firm.


Surgery for Bosworth
LEAD: Brian Bosworth, the Seattle Seahawk linebacker, was scheduled to undergo arthroscopic surgery last night to have bone spurs removed from his left shoulder.
Coach Chuck Knox said that Bosworth might miss only one game.


Ryan, Beck reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryan, Beck
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,476,000
10,967,000
Net inc
878,000
2,148,000
Share earns
.19
.21
Shares outst
4,592,000
10,279,000
9mo rev
20,734,000
30,876,000
Net inc
3,618,000
5,233,000
Share earns
.44
.51
Shares outst
8,168,000
10,279,000


Coach Is Suspended
LEAD: The Canadian Track and Field Association yesterday indefinitely suspended Charlie Francis, the coach for Ben Johnson, the Canadian sprinter who tested positive for steroids after winning the 100-meter dash at the Olympics in Seoul, South Korea.
The association also ratified a two-year ban on Johnson that had been imposed by the International Amateur Athletic


Rene Killo as 'Parsifal' At San Francisco Opera
LEAD: ''Parsifal,'' with as strong-looking a cast as any opera house could assemble, joined the San Francisco Opera's current repertory Saturday evening in a performance that had many beauties but fell short of the work's heights.
This spacious score, in which a small core of motives is patiently plumbed for all its expressive potential, makes very special requirements on the conductor, and though Sir John


International Shipholding Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Shipholding Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
42,214,000
37,255,000
Net inc
b3,145,000
2,033,000
Share earns
.63
.50
9mo rev
130,135,000
97,824,000
Net inc
b8,322,000
4,004,000
Share earns
1.65
.98


Scientific-Atlanta Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scientific-Atlanta Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
124,944,000
128,275,000
Net inc
6,732,000
5,885,000
Share earns
.28
.25


Not-So-Captive Nations
LEAD: A year ago, a Lithuanian, Latvian or Estonian citizen who displayed his national flag might have earned 10 months in Siberia.
The official myth persisted that the Baltic peoples had outgrown bourgeois nationalism and had become contented citizens of Soviet republics.
It wasn't even possible to assert the historical fact that Stalin annexed the


Cardinal Distribution Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cardinal Distribution Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
164,357,000
124,387,000
Net inc
1,820,000
c1,225,000
Share earns
.32
.23
6mo sales
319,375,000
240,108,000
Net inc
b8,062,000
c2,411,000
Share earns
1.44
.45


First Michigan Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Michigan Bank Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,378,000
2,703,000
Per share
.60
.50
9mo net inc
9,164,000
7,951,000
Per share
1.67
1.47


Survey Shows Bush Is Ahead in California
LEAD: Vice President Bush is running comfortably ahead of Michael S. Dukakis in California, a poll by The Los Angeles Times shows.


Judge Jails Detroit's Counsel In Chrysler Plant Site Case
LEAD: The city's corporate counsel was jailed Monday on contempt of court charges for refusing to release documents detailing Detroit's acquisition of land for a Chrysler Corporation plant.


New Boeing Plant
LEAD: The Boeing Company said it would build a new fabrication plant here to diversify its operations away from the company's base in Seattle.
An airport-area site will be selected soon for the 230,000-square-foot plant that will initially employ about 350 persons, an official of Boeing's commercial airplanes unit said.


Origin of the Hot Dog Traced Back Farther
LEAD: To the Editor:


SmithKline Posts a Loss
LEAD: The SmithKline Beckman Corporation yesterday reported a third-quarter loss of $195.5 million, reflecting a charge for a previously announced restructuring, including the dismissal of 1,600 employees.


Exxon Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exxon Corporation (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
21,888,000,000
21,933,000,000
Net inc
1,225,000,000
1,065,000,000
Share earns
.93
.75
9mo rev
65,522,000,000
61,530,000,000
Net inc
3,880,000,000
3,285,000,000
Share earns
2.69
2.31


Toxic Ash Is the Time Bomb in the Incinerator
LEAD: To the Editor:


United Technologies Buying Sheller-Globe With Gibbons
LEAD: The United Technologies Corporation announced yesterday that it had joined with the merchant banking firm Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen to acquire the Sheller-Globe Corporation, a maker of automotive parts.


SmithKline Beckman Corporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SmithKline Beckman Corporation (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,172,700,000
1,102,200,000
Net loss
b195,500,000
c149,600,000
Share earns
-
1.18
9mo sales
3,472,100,000
3,130,200,000
Net inc
b69,800,000
428,100,000
Share earns
.56
3.36


CHESS
LEAD: The 12th Interpolis International Tournament last month in Tilburg, the Netherlands, was won by Anatoly Karpov in excellent form.
The former world champion from the Soviet Union finished the elite double-round competition with a two-point lead over the field and was awarded the first prize of 20,000 guilders (about $9,800).


Max Delson, 85, Dies; Socialist Party Leader
LEAD: Max Delson, a lawyer and Socialist Party leader, died of kidney failure Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.


Jostens Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jostens Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
96,231,000
92,017,000
Net inc
1,997,000
b3,730,000
Share earns
.06
.10
b-After net from discontinued operations of $1,998,000.


Amcore Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amcore Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,300,000
1,600,000
Share earns
.45
.30
9mo net inc
6,500,000
4,300,000
Share earns
1.28
.83


Preston Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Preston Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
154,963,000
129,972,000
Net inc
2,713,000
377,000
Share earns
.47
.07
9mo rev
442,424,000
370,885,000
Net inc
6,498,000
b6,784,000
Share earns
1.12
1.18


Hallmark Deal Ends Suit
LEAD: Hallmark Cards Inc. today agreed to replace a line of greeting cards that had been challenged in a lawsuit by Blue Mountain Arts, a small Colorado card company that had accused Hallmark of copying its card design.


Rescuing The Drug Bill
LEAD: Under the pressures of an election year and of a public in near-hysteria over the drug problem, Congress has been debating some horrendously punitive, in many cases irrelevant ''remedies.'' But as its last official act, the 100th Congress passed an anti-drug bill that critics -including me - are bound to concede is much less offensive than expected.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Krickstein Advances: Aaron Krickstein defeated Darren Cahill of Australia, 7-6, 7-6, yesterday to advance in the $1.1 million Paris Open, the richest on the Nabisco Grand Prix indoor circuit.
Jonas Svensson of Sweden beat David Pate, 6-4, 6-2, and Paul Annacone beat Sergio Casal of Spain, 6-4, 6-2.


Optimism by U.S. on Trade Is Factor as Dollar Gains
LEAD: The dollar rose yesterday, partly in reaction to a Treasury Department report that said strength in the dollar this year would not slow down reduction of the United States trade deficit.


Vulcan Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vulcan Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,817,092
7,833,570
Net inc
96,586
80,642
Share earns
.06
.05
9mo rev
21,640,845
21,585,311
Net inc
699,078
80,773
Share earns
.45
.05


Brand Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brand Cos (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
38,068,000
32,643,000
Net inc
1,179,000
b1,258,000
Share earns
.24
-
9mo rev
110,752,000
77,578,000
Net inc
2,565,000
b582,000
Share earns
.54
-
b


Genetech Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genetech Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
81,619,000
47,956,000
Net inc
5,302,000
5,242,000
Share earns
.06
.06
9mo rev
245,329,000
134,066,000
Net inc
35,987,000
15,057,000
Share earns
.42
.18


Pacific Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,556,712,000
1,188,197,000
Net inc
b64,560,000
c64,326,000
Share earns
.99
1.06
9mo rev
4,344,417,000
3,973,247,000
Net inc
b175,770,000
c194,388,000
Share earns
2.81
3.21


NBSC Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBSC Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,020,000
922,000
Per share
.33
.29
9mo net inc
2,754,000
2,700,000
Per share
.88
.86


Raymond Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raymond Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
39,200,072
29,564,085
Net inc
620,059
b963,061
Share earns
.10
-
9mo sales
117,415,207
93,026,933
Net inc
1,635,577
1,352,278
Share earns
.27
.21


Soweto Journal; In City Built by Apartheid, Party Boss Prospers
LEAD: Even by the accepted standards of campaign hyperbole, E. T. Tshabalala dares to be bold.


Book Publisher Lifts Earnings
LEAD: Helped by a best seller, the Houghton Mifflin Company yesterday reported a 7.3 percent earnings increase for the third quarter, to $28.7 million, or $2.02 a share, from $26.7 million, or $1.88 a share, a year earlier.
The Boston publisher said last year's figure included an after-tax gain of $4.2 million resulting from a settlement of pension obligations.


New Diamond Coatings Find Broad Application
LEAD: AS part of an international race to develop new ways to make synthetic diamonds, manufacturers have begun to coat objects as diverse as drills and dentures with synthetic diamond films.


Out of the Swing Era
LEAD: The American Jazz Orchestra, which usually builds its programs around the repertories of such well-known big jazz bands as Duke Ellington's, Count Basie's and Benny Goodman's, moved in a new and rewarding direction at Cooper Union on Thursday evening.
Gerald Wilson, a composer, arranger and bandleader whose work is relatively little known in the


First Colonial Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Colonial Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,745,600
2,513,400
Per share
.32
.29
9mo net inc
7,427,500
b7,697,900
Per share
.87
.89
b-After a credit of $515,000 from an accounting change.


Ast Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ast Research Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
108,352,000
78,600,000
Net inc
306,000
72,000
Share earns
.03
.01


2 Teen-Agers Are Arraigned As Murderers of 2 in Family
LEAD: Murder charges were filed today against a New Jersey teen-ager accused of helping her cousin plot the fatal bludgeoning of her father and aunt and the beating of her 8-year-old brother.


Illinois Governor Withholds Decision in 1977 Rape Case
LEAD: Gov.
James R. Thompson said today that he would withhold a decision on whether to pardon Gary Dotson in a 1977 rape case until he could determine the scientific reliability of a test that cleared Mr.
Dotson of the attack.


Sellerville Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sellerville Savings &amp; Loan Assn
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
209,033
161,862
Share earns
.26
.20


Compaq and Cray Results
LEAD: The Compaq Computer Corporation said today that its third-quarter profits jumped 58 percent, while Cray Research Inc. reported a 37 percent decline.


America's Company Town Is a City of Writers
LEAD: New York may be the place where the literary alliances are made and the book contracts are signed, but Washington is fast becoming a literary boom town.
Publishers, editors and agents are shuttling between the two cities.


GTE Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GTE Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,000,000,000
3,800,000,000
Net inc
b313,000,000
297,000,000
Share earns
.91
.86
9mo rev
12,200,000,000
11,300,000,000
Net inc
b898,000,000
785,000,000
Share earns
2.62
2.30


Ropak Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ropak Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
24,338,000
18,487,000
Net inc
932,000
442,000
Share earns
.33
.16
9mo sales
67,200,000
51,157,000
Net inc
2,436,000
1,199,000
Share earns
.88
.44
The year-ago figures for both periods restated to reflect the adoption of FASB Statement 96, accounting for income taxes.


The Basic Speech/Michael S. Dukakis; 'I Believe in an America That's in Command of Its Destiny'
LEAD: Candidates for President make dozens of speeches in their campaigns.
Some address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
But more often the candidate uses a ''basic speech.'' It summarizes, with little variation from one occasion to the next except for an obligatory local reference at the beginning, how the candidate wants to present himself to the voters.


15 Reported Killed in Raids By Leftist Colombian Rebels
LEAD: Leftist rebels raided four towns in northern Colombia late Sunday and early today, according to Gov.
Antonio Roldan Betancur of the state of Antioquia.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Thursday about the Presidential contest in three Midwest states omitted the margins of sampling error for the voting intentions of Catholics and white Protestants derived from two New York Times/CBS News Polls.
For Catholics, it was plus or minus seven percentage points in an August poll and six percentage points in an October poll.


Adobe Resources Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adobe Resources Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
35,521,000
22,772,000
Net inc
b1,073,000
c4,134,000
9mo rev
122,042,000
73,400,000
Net inc
b14,588,000
c25,570,000
Share earns
-
.44
b-Includes tax credits of $121,000 for the quarter and $4,685,000 for the 9 months.


Granite State Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Granite State Bankshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
397,000
263,000
Per share
.19
.13
9mo net inc
1,002,000
989,000
Per share
.48
.47


Yankees Trade Clark to the Padres
LEAD: Yesterday, less than 10 months after they surprisingly signed him as a free agent, the Yankees gave Jack Clark what he wanted: a return trip to a National League club on the West Coast.
In so doing, the Yankees got what they wanted: a couple of pitchers to bolster their decrepit pitching staff.


Senate Overrides Kean On a Solid-Waste Bill
LEAD: The Senate today voted to override Governor Kean's conditional veto of a bill that would provide $175 million to help towns pay rising solid-waste disposal costs.
The override vote was 28 to 6 and the measure was sent to the Assembly, which could enact the bill by also voting to override.


UST Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UST Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
7,624,790
6,961,000
Share earns
.60
.55
Net inc
20,460,538
17,657,000
Share earns
1.60
1.40


One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b523,000
c5,321,000
Per share
.06
.65
Shares outst
8,188,741
10,178,415
9mo net inc
b9,658,000
c15,657,000
Per share
1.18
1.94
b-Included for the quarter a charge of $2.5 million related to an investment in a joint venture residential construction project and a provision for loan losses of $3.1 million; the 9 months was after a tax credit of $251,000.


Countrywide Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Countrywide Mortgage (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,308,000
1,976,000
Share earns
.22
.26
Shares outst
10,630,870
7,745,000
9mo net inc
6,019,000
8,258,000
Share earns
.69
1.07
Shares outst
8,717,527
7,741,666


Cal Rep Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cal Rep Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,605,162
1,357,319
Per share
.70
.59
9mo net inc
4,413,988
3,807,490
Per share
1.93
1.66


Merger Stocks Climb, but Dow Loses 13.16
LEAD: Blue-chip stocks fell yesterday, and the overall market showed little movement except for activity in several takeover-related issues.


Regional Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regional Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,052,000
1,708,000
Per share
.34
.46
Shares outst
3,137,330
3,715,566
9mo net inc
3,242,000
5,426,000
Per share
.99
1.46
Shares outst
3,271,470
3,732,073


Eastland Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastland Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,063,000
1,241,000
Per share
.36
-
9mo net inc
4,176,000
3,874,000
The company converted to stock ownership in July.


Allwaste Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allwaste Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,005,000
12,250,000
Net inc
1,747,000
670,000
Share earns
.17
.08
Shares outst
10,319,000
8,910,000
Yr rev
67,804,000
45,894,000
Net inc
5,329,000
2,667,000
Share earns
.55
.33
Shares outst
9,725,000
8,202,000


Bankers First (Augusta, Ga.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers First (Augusta, Ga.) (O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,034,000
823,000
Per share
.24
.15
Shares outst
4,311,000
5,436,000
9mo net inc
3,349,000
b10,923,000
Per share
.72
-
b-Net loss


Berlin Symphony Plays An All-Beethoven Bill
LEAD: When Berlin was divided, after World War II, West Berlin got the venerable Berlin Philharmonic, one of the world's most finely polished orchestral engines, leaving East Berlin to rebuild a musical establishment of its own.
Part of that establishment is the Berlin Symphony, which was formed in 1952 and which has had several notable directors, among them Kurt Sanderling and Gunther


Telxon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telxon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
38,049,000
27,055,000
Net inc
b3,803,000
2,955,000
Share earns
.29
.22
6mo rev
72,450,000
54,670,000
Net inc
b7,221,000
6,318,000
Share earns
.54
.46


Oil Posts Steepest Fall In 2 Years
LEAD: Crude oil prices posted their largest one-day drop yesterday since early 1986 as OPEC failed again over the weekend to limit its members' export quotas.


Domain Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Domain Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
23,198,000
11,915,000
Net inc
1,830,000
805,000
Share earns
.24
.12
Shares outst
7,754,000
6,587,000


Cutbacks Hurt McKesson Net
LEAD: The McKesson Corporation today reported a rise in revenues but a decline in earnings, which it attributed to losses in discontinued operations.
The company had gains in operating income from continuing businesses and retail pharmacies.


Fort Howard Financing Priced by Morgan Stanley
LEAD: Morgan Stanley &amp; Company yesterday priced the Fort Howard Corporation's $1.7 billion debt issue, one of the largest high-yield deals to come to market this year.


Profits Rise at 4 Oil Companies and Decline at 2
LEAD: Another group of oil companies reported higher profits yesterday, a trend reflecting lower oil prices and stronger demand for their finished products.
The Mobil Corporation, Texaco Inc. and the Chevron Corporation, the nation's second-, third- and fourth-largest oil companies, each reported earnings sharply higher in the third quarter, compared with the same period last year.


First National Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Bank Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
617,000
601,000
Per share
.56
.55
9mo net inc
1,961,000
2,059,000
Per share
1.79
2.01
The bank is based in Michigan.


Prosecutor Says Iran-Contra Fund Imperiled Efforts to Free Hostages
LEAD: Oliver L. North's creation of a ''slush fund'' with profits from the sale of American weapons to Iran jeopardized President Reagan's efforts to free American hostages, Iran-contra prosecutors said today.


Defend Us From Any Sicilian Expeditions
LEAD: To the Editor:


EG&amp;G Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EG&amp;G Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Revenue
342,593,000
321,795,000
Net inc
13,997,000
13,918,000
Share earns
.51
.50
9mo rev
1,000,503,000
931,757,000
Net inc
45,756,000
41,153,000
Share earns
1.66
1.48


Alfred J. Marston, Economist, 64
LEAD: Alfred J. Marston, president of the Manhattan Downtown Community Council and a former chairman of Community Board 3 on the Lower East Side, died of a heart attack Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 64 years old.


Orders Fell For Durables Last Month
LEAD: The Government reported today that orders for durable goods fell 4.1 percent in September, but economists are reluctant to conclude that the boom in manufacturing is ending.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Florida Power and Light Company is offering $125 million of 9.80 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2018 at a price of 99 5/8 to yield 9.839 percent, through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


Boston Paper Endorses Bush
LEAD: The Boston Herald endorsed Vice President Bush for President in Wednesday's editions, saying it had erred in backing Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, the Democratic nominee, beginning with the New Hampshire primary.
The Herald cited the leadership of Mr.
Bush, the Republican nominee.


Talley Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Talley Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
94,281,000
59,746,000
Net inc
2,664,000
b22,540,000
Share earns
.21
-
9mo sales
264,513,000
183,891,000
Net inc
7,705,000
b17,006,000
Share earns
.62
-


Chubb Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chubb Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b90,200,000
c96,100,000
Share earns
2.14
2.29
9mo net inc
b275,700,000
c278,800,000
Share earns
6.55
6.72
b-After realized losses on investments of $400,000 and $3.5 million for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Chrysler Introduces New Line of Sedans
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation introduced the Dodge Spirit and Plymouth Acclaim and priced them at less than $10,000, but analysts said the sedans faced stiff competition.
The two models technically replace Chrysler's K-cars, the Plymouth Reliant and Dodge Aries, which will be phased out next year.
But the new models are larger, plusher and more advanced than their predecessors.


Review/Theater; 'Cafe Crown,' Bygone World of Yiddish Theater
LEAD: The audience - and it may not be the youngest audience you'll ever meet at the Public Theater - oohs and ahs in unison twice at the revival of ''Cafe Crown,'' a 1942 Broadway play by Hy Kraft.
The first peal of delight is prompted by Santo Loquasto's stunning set: a plush, sconce-lighted replica of an old Second Avenue cafe, with pickles at every table and autographed photographs on every wall.


Wells Fargo Mortgage &amp; Eqity Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wells Fargo Mortgage &amp; Eqity Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,510,000
b543,000
Share earns
.22
.08
b-Includes a loss of $879,000 on sale of investment.


Michael Ffolkes, 63, Cartoonist for Punch
LEAD: Michael Ffolkes, a cartoonist whose work appeared for decades in Punch and major American publications, died Oct. 18 in a London hospital.
He had acute pancreatitis and cirrhosis of the liver.


Mid-America Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid-America Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,592,000
2,229,000
Per share
.48
.40
9mo net inc
b7,249,000
6,535,000
Per share
1.35
-
b-After a cumulative effect of a change in accounting of $392,000.


Blue Cross to Study Executives' Spending
LEAD: The board of Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield, New York State's largest health insurance company, has ordered an investigation into allegations by a former treasurer that senior officials of the company had spent lavishly on perquisites and pensions.


Knicks Win Exhibition Against Lakers


Sumitomo Bank of California reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sumitomo Bank of California
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
6,240,000
5,340,000
Per share
.89
.76
9mo net inc
17,760,000
14,840,000
Per share
2.53
2.13


College Football Notebook; Stony Brook Punter Key Player in Upset
LEAD: Can a punter win a football game?
In the case of Stony Brook's upset of Fordham, David Lewis of the Patriots came close.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It is often easier to make strong speeches about foreign drug lords or drug smugglers than to arrest a pair of Wall Street investment bankers buying cocaine on their lunch break.''  - Nancy Reagan.  [ A1:5. ]


Police Arrest 10 Linked to Drug Ring
LEAD: Top leaders and dealers of what the law-enforcement officials call the largest drug gang in Queens were arrested yesterday in raids by the Queens narcotics division of the police.


Program on Satan Worship Spurs Controversy at NBC
LEAD: When NBC commissioned a prime-time program about Satan worship narrated by Geraldo Rivera, they had hopes for a sure-fire ratings winner.
But the show, which was broadcast last night, stirred such stout advertiser resistance that the network had to sell some commercials at rates as low as half-price, advertisers and N


Provident Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
b2,000,000
c1,700,000
9mo net inc
b6,900,000
d11,300,000
b-Includes a charge of $3.2 million for a writedown of the company's remaining investment in adjustable rate preferred stocks for both periods; the 9 months also includes a charge of $9 million.


Cray Shares Drop On Poor Forecast
LEAD: The stock of Cray Research Inc. plummeted yesterday after the supercomputer maker's chairman, John A. Rollwagen, said late Monday that the Minneapolis-based concern expected to increase its revenues by 10 percent in 1989.
Analysts had predicted that Cray would increase 1989 revenues by 20 percent.


Age Before Beauty
LEAD: ''Fidem meam obligo . . .''


Wine Talk
LEAD: WHEN times are good, it's nice to drink Champagne; when times are tough, it's important to drink Champagne.
The rule seems to fit the current circumstances.
Consider:


No Headline


3 May Have Been Sent to Kill Koch, Officials Say
LEAD: Three Colombians were arrested in Manhattan last week, and Mayor Koch and New York law-enforcement officials said they may have been hired by Colombian drug traffickers to kill the Mayor or the top Federal drug agent in New York.


First Recipient Of Award Named
LEAD: The Association of National Advertisers yesterday named Robert Haynes, the recently retired director of creative services for the General Foods Corporation, the first recipient of its Robert V. Goldstein Award for distinguished service as an Advertising Council campaign director.


A Plane Crash in Peru Kills 12 in the Andes
LEAD: A state-owned airliner carrying 65 passengers and a crew of 4 crashed today high in the Andes, killing 12 people, including one American, and injuring 56, airline officials said.
One person was missing.


Stotler Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stotler Group Inc
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
31,970,000
28,526,000
Net inc
1,908,000
1,360,000
Share earns
.83
.59
6mo rev
55,284,000
47,932,000
Net inc
2,482,000
1,831,000
Share earns
1.08
.80


United Financial Banking Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Financial Banking Cos
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
479,281
238,152
Per share
.55
.25
Shares outst
878,341
967,694
9mo net inc
1,014,045
744,357
Per share
1.10
.77
Shares outst
919,960
972,091


Ingersoll-Rand Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ingersoll-Rand Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
715,400,000
631,100,000
Net inc
29,600,000
22,300,000
Share earns
.54
.41
9mo sales
2,206,300,000
1,904,800,000
Net inc
103,300,000
b74,100,000
Share earns
1.91
1.35


Keystone International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
84,236,000
72,993,000
Net inc
7,865,000
6,154,000
Share earns
.30
.23
9mo sales
253,411,000
213,723,000
Net inc
23,332,000
15,947,000
Share earns
.88
.61


Nicaraguan Officials Barred From U.S. Entry By Reagan
LEAD: President Reagan issued a proclamation today barring the entry into the United States of most Nicaraguan Government officials and other leading Sandinistas.


Books of The Times; Dialectics of Vacuuming, Love and Other Trivia
LEAD:  Two Against One  By Frederick Barthelme  264 pages.
Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $17.95.


Cincinnati Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b27,982,000
c25,274,000
Share earns
1.72
1.59
9mo net inc
b99,056,000
c71,504,000
Share earns
6.11
4.45
b-Includes capital gains of $406,000 and $4,654,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Oct. 19 about the New York City landmark designation of the former Knickerbocker Hotel at Broadway and 42d Street gave an incorrect location in some editions for the nearby Bush Tower, which also received landmark status.


Millipore Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Millipore Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
150,749,000
128,348,000
Net inc
12,778,000
10,832,000
Share earns
.46
.39
9mo sales
451,434,000
374,513,000
Net inc
37,788,000
31,999,000
Share earns
1.36
1.14


Campaign Trail; Bentsen's Long Trip To Find His Roots
LEAD: How far will Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas go to dispel the image that he's a chilly patrician?
How far will the Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate go for a chance to have his photograph taken?


Armco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Armco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
820,400,000
692,500,000
Net inc
b36,700,000
c25,800,000
Share earns
.40
.27
9mo sales
2,396,000,000
2,139,800,000
Net inc
b121,100,000
c114,500,000
Share earns
1.32
1.41
Shares outst
87,400,000
76,700,000


Auction Rates Up At Citicorp
LEAD: Interest rates rose modestly at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.
It was the second straight week that rates have increased.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 3 P.M.


Man Is on Trial in Wife's Slaying One Year to Day After Wedding
LEAD: Today would have been the first wedding anniversary for Lisa and Matthew Solomon.
Instead, Mr.
Solomon, a 23-year-old sheet metal worker, entered a courtroom here to stand trial in the murder of his 22-year-old wife last December.


Pumpkin Doughnut: An Autumn Glory
LEAD: AROUND 2600 B.C., the Egyptians figured out how to make leavened bread.
Making a great leap forward, the Dutch in the 16th century developed the ''olykoek,'' or oily cake, a doughnut without a hole.
Moving closer to home, a Maine sea captain named Hanson Gregory, in 1847, punched a hole in his mother's dough to create the modern doughnut.


Oat Bran: The Muffin And the Mania
LEAD: OAT-BRAN-MUFFIN mania has reached a fever pitch.
Last week Between the Bread, a takeout business in New York City, was unable to supply its eager customers with oat-bran muffins because it was unable to get any oat bran.
Demand for oat bran is so great, the supplier told the shop, that he could charge anything he wanted for it.


Salvador Rebels, on Latin Tour, Meet With Costa Rica's President
LEAD: In a diplomatic offensive that underscores the divisions facing the Salvadoran left, the senior commanders of the Salvadoran guerrilla army met here Monday with President Oscar Arias Sanchez.


Falconbridge Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Falconbridge Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
525,000,000
329,000,000
Net inc
87,000,000
b19,000,000
Share earns
1.16
.26
9mo rev
1,470,000,000
906,000,000
Net inc
217,000,000
b30,000,000
Share earns
2.80
.43


Borden Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Borden Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,874,189,000
1,680,016,000
Net inc
91,924,000
78,995,000
Share earns
1.24
1.07
9mo sales
5,260,239,000
4,710,222,000
Net inc
218,031,000
185,740,000
Share earns
2.95
2.52


Stratus Computer Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stratus Computer Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
68,863,000
48,800,000
Net inc
7,552,000
5,281,000
Share earns
.37
.26
9mo sales
185,916,000
128,983,000
Net inc
20,146,000
12,852,000
Share earns
1.00
.64


Interpublic Group of Companies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interpublic Group of Companies Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
268,641,000
217,641,000
Net inc
b6,014,000
c4,873,000
Share earns
.27
.22
9mo rev
794,026,000
669,712,000
Net inc
b36,841,000
c30,613,000
Share earns
1.68
1.39


Booby Clark, Football Player, 37
LEAD: Booby Clark, a fullback who led the Cincinnati Bengals in rushing yardage in the 1975 and 1976 seasons during an eight-year National Football League career, died from an apparent blood clot in his lung today.
He was 37 years old.


Freeport-McMoran Copper Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Copper Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
75,588,000
44,647,000
Net inc
19,225,000
8,806,000
Share earns
.90
.54
9mo rev
206,553,000
113,031,000
Net inc
51,449,000
18,929,000
Share earns
1.59
-


Market Place; Kraft Plan Pares Margin for Error
LEAD: THE planned recapitalization at Kraft Inc. is more than just the largest such deal in history.
It also looks to be the most leveraged by any standard.


Washington Federal Savings Bank (Hillsboro, Ore) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Federal Savings Bank (Hillsboro, Ore)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
584,134
461,928
Per share
.37
.29
9mo net inc
1,194,568
b1,158,217
Per share
.76
.42
b-After a one-time writeoff of $143,500.


Campaign Trail; A Case of No News Being Good News
LEAD: Marilyn Quayle phoned her husband, Senator Dan Quayle, the other day. ''You must be making great speeches, drawing tremendous crowds, really getting them on their feet and saying all the right things because I haven't heard one thing about you this week,'' she said.


N.B.A. Notebook; Woolridge Thrives As a New Laker
LEAD: In years past, Red Auerbach would pick up players like Wayne Embry, Bailey Howell, Paul Silas, Don Nelson, Clyde Lovellette and Charlie Scott, who were either growing old or had run out of favor with their former teams, put them in Boston Celtic uniforms, squeeze the last bit of talent out of them and win championships.


Amerada Hess Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerada Hess Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
925,081,000
1,122,088,000
Net inc
15,765,000
38,570,000
Share earns
.20
.45
9mo rev
3,069,725,000
3,509,988,000
Net inc
57,940,000
309,428,000
Share earns
.71
3.66


Dissident Nuns Sue Diocese and Prioress
LEAD: Three of five nuns rebelling against their superiors at a monastery filed a lawsuit Monday against the Diocese of Paterson and their mother superior.


Grove Bank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grove Bank for Savings
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
402,000
644,000
Per share
.27
.44
9mo net inc
1,122,000
1,769,000
Per share
.76
1.20


Gradac Journal; Englishwoman Seeks and Finds Serenity in Serbia
LEAD: ''This reminds me of my riding country,'' said the tall, stern Englishwoman, looking from a hillside over the verdant mountains and dales of this remote corner of southern Serbia, miles from the nearest paved road. ''I grew up among horses.''


Sears Net Down by 15.8%, but Stock Rises
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company today reported a 15.8 percent decline in net income in the third quarter, reflecting lower earnings at its merchandise, insurance and real estate groups.


Bush Tries to Shift Emphasis Off the Tone of His Campaign
LEAD: Vice President Bush sought today to shift the political agenda away from debates over the tone of his own campaigning and toward Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, whose economic proposals he attacked as lacking a ''rational approach.'


S.E.C. Subpoenas Third Wall St. Brokerage in Ellis Case
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has subpoenaed Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company for information relating to one of the largest and longest insider trading cases in history, people familiar with the case said yesterday.


Cuomo Says He Gave Dukakis Bad Advice Cuomo Admits Giving Bad Advice to Dukakis
LEAD: Governor Cuomo of New York acknowledged today that he gave Michael S. Dukakis bad advice on ignoring attacks by Vice President Bush and said he now believes the Massachusetts Governor should capitalize on the underdog's role.


TSR Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSR Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,312,000
6,013,000
Net inc
116,000
168,000
Share earns
.05
.07
Year-ago revenue was restated.


In This Country, 25 Percent Makes a Majority
LEAD: To the Editor:


Father Urges Stiff Sentence For Killer of 'a Special Boy'
LEAD: The deaf father of a 16-year-old stabbing victim stood in an emotionally charged courtroom in Queens yesterday and appealed in sign language and through an interpreter to the judge to have no pity in sentencing his son's youthful killer on a first-degree manslaughter conviction.


Bridge
LEAD: One of the last links with the earliest days of contract bridge was lost last week when Richard Lincoln Frey died at the age of 83.
Half a century ago, he was part of the organization that made Ely Culbertson a household name to millions.


Banks Ask Fed for Power To Underwrite Securities
LEAD: Although Congress failed to pass legislation giving banks new powers to underwrite securities, at least three New York City banks and a large West Coast bank have asked the Federal Reserve Board to grant them the authority.


Amdahl Net Rises, Tandem Flat and Control Data in Red
LEAD: Four computer companies reported widely divergent financial results today.


Central Banking System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Banking System Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
458,000
1,713,000
Per share
.11
.39
9mo net loss
13,970,000
b4,935,000
Per share
-
1.13
b-Net income  The company said earnings for the third quarter reflected a $1.8 million writedown to market of the company's investment in the common stock of Financial Management Co., which it received from the sale of its computer division and sold through a secondary offering in September.


Phillips Petroleum Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phillips Petroleum Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,850,000,000
2,803,000,000
Net inc
215,000,000
31,000,000
Share earns
.89
.11
9mo rev
8,630,000,000
7,985,000,000
Net inc
515,000,000
2,000,000
Share earns
2.17
-
Shares outst
232,194,000
228,320,000


A Matter of State
LEAD: Unofficial personal travel by Secretary of State George P. Shultz cost the Federal Government $1,892,214 in the last three years, according to a new audit by the General Accounting Office.


500 IN PHILIPPINES LOST AS SHIP SINKS
LEAD: An inter-island ferry carrying more than 500 people sank Monday in a typhoon, and officials said this morning that they feared that most had drowned.


Comfed Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comfed Bancorp Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
866,000
3,045,000
Per share
.10
.36
6mo net inc
1,375,000
b3,896,000
Per share
.16
-
b-Net loss and after a $3,232,000 tax benefit.
The results for the latest quarter reflected a decline in loan origination fees of about $6.7 million due to a change in accounting methods.


Republic Gypsum Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Gypsum Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
12,347,000
12,874,000
Net inc
375,000
425,000
Share earns
.04
.04


Johnson &amp; Johnson Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson &amp; Johnson Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,199,000,000
1,993,000,000
Net inc
240,000,000
210,000,000
Share earns
1.42
1.22
9mo sales
6,800,000,000
5,984,000,000
Net inc
790,000,000
670,000,000
Share earns
4.61
3.88


Voters Evaluate the 1988 Campaign
LEAD:
Bush
Dukakis
TOTAL
Supporters
Supp orters
VOTERS
Describe the 1988 campaign as
52%
54%
53%
dull
Say they wish there were
55


Drug Testing Upheld for Police in Elite Corps
LEAD: Upholding an order by Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward, New York State's highest court ruled yesterday that an elite corps of undercover New York City police officers could be required to submit to periodic random drug testing.


Summcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summcorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,921,000
4,217,000
Per share
.56
.48
9mo net inc
14,061,000
11,603,000
Per share
1.60
1.27


A.&amp;P. President Quits To Join Gateway Chain
LEAD: Louis Sherwood, president of the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, has resigned to accept a position as chairman and chief executive of Gateway Supermarkets, a chain of 820 food stores in England, Wales and Scotland.


Packers Waive Kicker
LEAD: The Green Bay Packers waived their erratic place-kicker, Max Zendejas, and brought in four other kickers for tryouts yesterday.
Zendejas made only 9 of 16 field-goal attempts this season and missed a 24-yarder Sunday with 11 seconds left in a 20-17 loss to Washington.(AP)


Comings and Goings
LEAD: After playing with one arm almost useless in recent games, the linebacker Brian Bosworth will be out two or three weeks following arthroscopic surgery on his left shoulder, Seattle Seahawks officials said.
The operation was described as a success by a Seahawks spokesman, Gary Wright, who said the surgery on the second-year linebacker ''revealed some wear and tear on the shoulder, and a small piece of loose cartilage was removed.


From Vine to Dinner
LEAD: HERE is a glossary of winter squash:


Jets Fill Spot on Roster
LEAD: The Jets yesterday claimed on waivers Mark Garalczyk, a second-year defensive tackle with the Phoenix Cardinals.
He will take the place on the Jet roster that was occupied by Mark Gastineau, the defensive end who announced his retirement last week.


Repurchase Of Stock Set By Tenneco
LEAD: Two weeks after announcing that it expected to receive more than $7.3 billion by selling its oil company, Tenneco Inc. said today that it would spend $900 million to $990 million to repurchase 18 million of its common shares.


Sandstrom Looks Back
LEAD: When the Rangers face the Philadelphia Flyers at Madison Square Garden tonight, Tomas Sandstrom will be marking an anniversary that he prefers to forget.


Carter-Wallace Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carter-Wallace Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
132,590,000
125,988,000
Net inc
13,151,000
11,930,000
Share earns
.87
.79
6mo sales
260,758,000
242,788,000
Net inc
24,892,000
20,978,000
Share earns
1.64
1.39


Book Notes
LEAD:  McInerney Rights


East-West Accord In Chilly Waters
LEAD: IGNORING numbed fingers and cold feet as they assiduously cast through much of a nasty day of mixed snow and rain, two six-person fly-fishing teams, one from the United States and one from the Soviet Union, were able to coax 22 trout from the Beaverkill and Willowemoc rivers yesterday.


Police Say Hostage Photos Seized From Woman in Italy Are Copies
LEAD: Police investigators said today that photographs of American hostages carried by a Lebanese woman who was arrested here last week were copies of other photos and not originals.


About New York; Louie, Louie: So Succulent At $11.76 a Pound
LEAD: A word of warning.
This column will end with an attractive blonde in a flaming red dress dining on the hero, Louie.
Laughing, she will dip Louie in butter to enhance his flavor and wash him down with white wine.


Kimberly-Clark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimberly-Clark Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,367,700,000
1,223,200,000
Net inc
90,500,000
84,100,000
Share earns
1.12
.98
9mo sales
4,002,400,000
3,630,800,000
Net inc
283,900,000
243,000,000
Share earns
3.53
2.74
Shares outst
80,400,000
88,800,000


2 Sue Over Film Rights on Kennedy Slaying
LEAD: The son of Abraham Zapruder, the dress manufacturer who filmed the assassination of President Kennedy with a home movie camera, should be stopped from selling rights to the film, two researchers contend.


Xscribe reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xscribe (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,949,000
8,899,000
Net loss
b997,000
c642,000
Share earns
-
.14
6mo rev
15,132,000
16,998,000
Net loss
b1,754,000
c1,152,000
b-Includes $300,000 one-time charge for reserves associated with a termination agreement with the company's prior president and chief operating officer.


Inquiry on Fraternity 'Slave Auction'
LEAD: A student disciplinary committee at the University of Wisconsin began an investigation today into a fraternity's sponsorship of a mock slave auction held last week as part of a fund-raising event.


Sears Roebuck &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sears Roebuck &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
13,350,000,000
12,190,000,000
Net inc
344,200,000
409,000,000
Share earns
.90
1.08
9mo rev
38,490,000,000
34,390,000,000
Net inc
893,100,000
1,090,000,000
Share earns
2.35
2.86


Suburban Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suburban Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,937,000
1,929,000
Per share
.46
.50
Shares outst
4,242,000
3,861,000
9mo net inc
5,560,000
5,665,000
Per share
1.31
1.47


Convergent Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Convergent Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
119,127,000
104,075,000
Net inc
b6,369,000
c2,043,000
Share earns
.12
.04
9mo rev
318,417,000
284,397,000
Net inc
b4,264,000
d8,695,000
Share earns
.09
-


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Henry Armstrong, the only boxer to hold three world championships at the same time - the featherweight, lightweight and welterweight titles -gave an incorrect date for his death.


Taiwan and South Korea Stress Trade Cooperation Efforts
LEAD: Taiwan and South Korea, responding to Administration accusations of currency manipulation, said today that they had been given insufficient credit for their efforts to cooperate.


Lawrence Brown Service
LEAD: A memorial service with music for Lawrence Brown, a trombonist, will be held Friday at 5 P.M. at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church, 619 Lexington Avenue, at 54th Street.
Mr.
Brown, who played with the Duke Ellington Orchestra, died last month at the age of 81.
Those performing at the tribute, which is open to the public, will be Vince Giordano and the Nighthawks; the Bobby Short Trio; Geanie Faulkner, a soprano; Bobby Pring and Al Grey, trombonists, and Loren Schoenberg, a conductor.


Washington Post Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Post Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
329,371,000
312,910,000
Net inc
38,060,000
c61,314,000
Share earns
2.96
4.77
9mo rev
996,856,000
950,400,000
Net inc
b232,184,000
c122,325,000
Share earns
18.04
9.51


For Senate Rivals in Jersey, It's Personal
LEAD: After months of character attacks, the rivals in the race for a Senate seat from New Jersey have become engaged in what both acknowledge is a grudge match.


Delchamps Rejects A.&amp;P. Merger Bid
LEAD: Delchamps Inc., the grocery-store operator, said its board had unanimously rejected as inadequate a $224 million merger proposal from the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company.
A Delchamps spokesman, Joel Swanson, said the nine-member board met Monday night and rejected the $32-a-share bid for Delchamps's seven million shares, saying it was not in the best interests of shareholders.


Standard Pacific LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Pacific LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
115,499,550
88,739,216
Net inc
17,367,967
11,336,934
Share earns
.63
.41
9mo rev
327,261,855
248,062,737
Net inc
43,002,613
31,489,314
Share earns
1.57
1.15


Friedman Guilty in a Second Bribery Case
LEAD: Stanley M. Friedman, the former Bronx Democratic leader, was convicted yesterday for the second time on charges stemming from New York City's corruption scandals.


Culture Commissioner Looks Back in Humor At a Bumpy First Year
LEAD: When Dr.
Mary Schmidt Campbell was named New York's Commissioner of Cultural Affairs in July 1987, she announced her intention to ''rally the business community to kick in a pool of money to set up an arts stabilization fund'' to make the existence of some smaller arts organizations less precarious.


National Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Mercantile Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
789,000
162,000
Per share
.42
.09
9mo net inc
1,806,000
906,000
Per share
.96
.48
The per share earnings were adjusted to reflect 10 percent stock dividends declared in February 1987 and June 1988.


Crash of Helicopter Kills 8 Searching For Drug Smugglers
LEAD: An Army National Guard helicopter carrying sheriff's deputies looking for drug smugglers near the Mexican border struck a power line and crashed Monday night, killing all eight people aboard, officials said today.


Review/Pop; McGovern's 3 Voices in One
LEAD: Maureen McGovern is a singer of such formidable technique that she seems to harbor three different voices in the same body.
One is a big belting alto whose nasality strongly echoes Barbra Streisand.
Dipping into a contralto mode, the voice darkens, somewhat like Cleo Laine's.
Her most difficult feats are accomplished in a piccolo-like coloratura high soprano over which she exerts an iron discipline that enables her to sing intricate, perfectly pitched duets with other instruments for minutes on end without making a slip.


Suit Against the Klan Brings Verdict of Nearly $1 Million
LEAD: In a verdict unsealed today, a Federal jury found two white supremacist groups and 11 people responsible for the violent disruption of a 1987 civil rights march in Forsyth County, Ga., and awarded nearly $1 million in damages to demonstrators who filed the suit.


Sacramento Bonds Total $345 Million
LEAD: The Sacramento Municipal Utility District tentatively priced $345 million of tax-exempt bonds yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


In Arts, Dukakis Selects Realism, Not Escape
LEAD: Here are some things that you might not know about Michael S. Dukakis:


First Interstate Corp of Wisonsin reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate Corp of Wisonsin (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,264,000
b3,294,000
Per share
.39
.37
9mo net inc
9,673,000
b9,447,000
Per share
1.13
1.10
b-After tax credits of $191,000 for the quarter and $458,000 for the 9 months.


Jan Bell Marketing Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jan Bell Marketing Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
24,140,000
14,087,000
Net inc
1,910,000
963,000
Share earns
.25
.16
Shares outst
7,520,054
6,137,537
9mo sales
61,240,000
37,103,000
Net inc
b5,717,000
2,138,000
Share earns
.80
.38
Shares outst
7,128,018
5,593,037


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-18


Tambrands Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tambrands Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
145,625,000
135,346,000
Net inc
25,174,000
21,029,000
Share earns
1.13
.95
9mo sales
428,403,000
389,079,000
Net inc
70,526,000
61,875,000
Share earns
3.17
2.79


Buyouts Devastating Bondholders
LEAD: While many stockholders are rejoicing at the flurry of huge corporate takeover attempts, bondholders are wincing at the damage inflicted on their holdings.


Can the U.S. Still Reverse Its Industrial Slide?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,656,000,000
2,479,500,000
Net inc
63,500,000
b178,700,000
Share earns
1.11
3.13
9mo sales
7,983,200,000
7,280,800,000
Net inc
293,700,000
b603,900,000
Share earns
5.13
9.78


Cullen-Frost Bankers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cullen-Frost Bankers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
688,000
655,000
Per share
.08
.08
9mo net inc
1,700,000
1,583,000
Per share
.20
.20
Shares outst
8,378,901
8,104,361


Sun Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Co Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,460,000,000
2,520,000,000
Net inc
72,000,000
b137,000,000
Share earns
.67
1.27
9mo rev
7,280,000,000
7,210,000,000
Net loss
69,000,000
c265,000,000
Share earns
-
2.44


Jerrico Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jerrico Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 28
1988
1987
Revenue
169,662,000
159,100,000
Net inc
7,012,000
b12,687,000
Share earns
.36
.64
b-After a gain of $5,684,000 from an accounting change.
The year-ago quarter's figures restated to reflect an accounting change.


Sumner W. White 3d, Stockbroker, 58
LEAD: Sumner W. White 3d, a retired Manhattan stockbroker, died of lung cancer Monday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 58 years old and lived in Summit.


Campaign Finance; Independent Groups Putting 11th-Hour Millions in Races
LEAD: Independent groups are spending millions of dollars in the final weeks before the election for activities to help their preferred candidates.
Among other things, two groups are paying for the television advertisements attacking Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's prison furlough program in Massachusetts.


Cave-In Shows Infrequency Of Inspection
LEAD: The building collapse that killed a man in midtown Manhattan Monday highlighted the reality that New York City annually makes only scores of random inspections aimed at detecting construction work for which no permits had been issued.


Fruehauf Layoffs At Trailer Unit
LEAD: The Fruehauf Corporation is restructuring its slumping trailer operations, a move that will result in an unspecified number of layoffs and early retirements at its headquarters here, the company said.
The truck-trailer and auto-parts maker began layoffs last week in its engineering department, said David Hladik, a spokesman.


Israel Bars 3 Reporters Over 'Undercover' Articles
LEAD: Israel today suspended the press credentials of three foreign correspondents who wrote that Israeli undercover squads were operating in the occupied territories.
It said it would investigate if the three had violated military censorship regulations.


Kraft Sets Terms for Philip Morris
LEAD: In a letter from one chairman to another, Kraft Inc. yesterday told the Philip Morris Companies that it was prepared to negotiate if the tobacco and foods giant, which bid $90 a share for Kraft last week, would be willing to pay more than $110 a share.


Centerbank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centerbank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,387,000
2,991,000
Per share
.20
.24
9mo net inc
8,978,000
10,201,000
Per share
.74
.83


Plains Petroleum Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plains Petroleum Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,741,000
5,953,000
Net inc
2,478,000
2,027,000
Share earns
.27
.22
9mo rev
22,687,000
16,558,000
Net inc
7,968,000
b7,085,000
Share earns
.87
.78


Thornburgh Debut
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh is scheduled to appear before the Supreme Court next week, apparently to stress his commitment to the drug war, arguing the Government's side in a case over the legality of drug testing.


C.I.A. Chief Says Libya Develops A Huge Chemical Weapons Plant
LEAD: William H. Webster, the Director of Central Intelligence, said tonight that Libya is developing ''the largest chemical plant I know of for chemical warfare.''


Review/Film; Taking an Animated Dip In Psychological Waters
LEAD: In ''Voices,'' Joanna Priestley offers a glimpse of her own fears: her animated face grows fat and old, the world seems to destroy itself.
All the while, she races through artistic styles from realistic to mock-symbolic.


Seaboard Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seaboard Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
113,366,000
89,125,000
Net inc
10,309,000
1,159,000
Share earns
6.93
.78
9mo sales
297,226,000
269,121,000
Net inc
22,120,000
6,599,000
Share earns
14.87
4.44


Images at the Mall
LEAD: It is a bit early for Halloween, but ghostly images are making nightly visits to the Mall this week.
Projected images by Krzysztof Wodiczko, a Polish-born Canadian artist, are appearing on the exterior of the Smithsonian's Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden between 8:30 P.M. and midnight.
The 25-foot-tall images, projected on the Mall side of the Hirshhorn, consist of two disembodied hands, one holding a pistol, the other a candle.


Salomon Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salomon Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,293,000,000
1,559,000,000
Net inc
65,000,000
27,000,000
Share earns
.38
.18
9mo rev
4,333,000,000
4,674,000,000
Net inc
318,000,000
216,000,000
Share earns
2.07
1.42


Texaco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texaco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,689,000,000
8,962,000,000
Net inc
239,000,000
108,000,000
Share earns
.98
.44
9mo rev
26,799,000,000
25,955,000,000
Net inc
b1,008,000,000
355,000,000
Share earns
4.14
1.46


Harry Evans, 92, Dies; Founded Family Circle
LEAD: Harry Evans, the founder and first editor of Family Circle magazine, died Oct. 11 at his home in St.
Augustine, Fla., where he had lived since his retirement in the late 1960's.
He was 92 years old.


Cuomo Says Shoreham Deadline May Change
LEAD: Three days after he threatened to call a special session to force New York State lawmakers to consider the Shoreham settlement by the Nov. 18 deadline, Governor Cuomo said today that it was possible the deadline could be extended.


Periodic Inspections Check for Permits
LEAD: New York City requires that building permits be clearly displayed at every construction site.
Teams of building inspectors conduct periodic, block-by-block surveys in an attempt to insure compliance, but can only make scores of such surveys each year, officials say.


Campaign Trail; Avoiding Talk Of Future Jobs
LEAD: With Election Day two weeks away, Washington's second-biggest guessing game - after who will win - is who will get what job in the new Cabinet.


Israeli Troops Kill Palestinian Girl in Gaza
LEAD: Israeli troops opened fire on stone-throwing Palestinian demonstrators in the occupied Gaza Strip today, killing a 14-year-old girl, hospital officials said.


Applied Power Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Power Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
48,383,000
35,612,000
Net inc
4,376,000
c4,353,000
Share earns
.67
.83
Yr sales
177,054,000
129,449,000
Net inc
b15,197,000
d1,619,000
Share earns
2.35
-


Rail Foreman Falls And Is Killed by Train
LEAD: A Metro-North Commuter Railroad foreman was killed yesterday in a tunnel near Grand Central Terminal when he fell off a platform and under a slow-moving train, a spokesman for Metro-North said yesterday.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Rush in Election Spending  Independent groups, barred by law from coordinating efforts with their preferred candidates, are spending millions as the vote nears.
Page A23.
Steroid Tests for N.F.L.
Starting next season, the National Football League intends to impose stiff penalties on players testing positive for steroid use.


Times Names Bureau Deputy
LEAD: Philip Taubman, Moscow bureau chief of The New York Times, will become deputy Washington editor Jan. 1.
Mr.
Taubman's new position, reporting to the Washington editor, Howell Raines, was announced yesterday by Max Frankel, the executive editor.
Mr.
Taubman, 40 years old, joined the Washington bureau of The Times in 1979 and has won two George Polk awards: in 1981 for national reporting and in 1983 for foreign affairs coverage.


Valley National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b8,403,824
c7,587,278
Per share
.66
.60
9mo net inc
b24,437,224
c22,863,089
Per share
1.92
1.80
b-Included pre-tax gains on the sale of securities of $57,776 for the quarter and $920,732 for the 9 months.


Reviews/Music; Baton Rouge Symphony
LEAD: It is always nice to welcome an unfamiliar orchestra to Carnegie Hall.
The Baton Rouge Symphony from Louisiana is at the beginning of its 40th season and made the trip here on Saturday night.
The music was by Chadwick, Beethoven and Sibelius.


Edward Uhlan, 76, Founder and Leader Of Vanity Publisher
LEAD: Edward Uhlan, the founder and longtime president of Exposition Press, died of prostate cancer on Sunday at his home in Coconut Creek, Fla.
He was 76 years old.


NEW POLL SHOWS ATTACKS BY BUSH ARE BUILDING LEAD
LEAD: Voters are giving Vice President Bush a widening lead over Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll, but they say they dislike the choice they have been offered and regard the Presidential campaign as negative, uninteresting and insubstantial.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: IT is fascinating to me how flavors, like fashions in clothes and automobiles, peak and ebb in popularity.
For example, two years ago it seemed that you could not get a restaurant meal without coriander.
This year, on a trip to Paris, I repeatedly found chervil in places ranging from the simplest brasserie to the famed Taillevent.


Morrison Knudsen Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morrison Knudsen Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
575,419,000
464,195,000
Net loss
51,150,000
c68,243,000
9mo rev
1,524,232,000
1,408,602,000
Net loss
b97,848,000
c56,218,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $41 million.


Topics of The Times; At Last, a Warning on Alcohol
LEAD: Prodded by health and consumer groups, Congress finally acted last week to inform consumers better about the most abused drug: alcohol.
A provision tucked in the new omnibus drug bill requires that all liquor, beer, wine and wine coolers carry labels warning of the risks of drinking during pregnancy and of drinking and driving.


Boxing Notebook; Lalonde-Leonard: It's Same Old Hype
LEAD: When the Nov. 7 match between Donny Lalonde, the World Boxing Council light heavyweight champion, and Sugar Ray Leonard was announced to the public in August, the two fighters acted more like corporate executives than combatants in a 12-round bout.


Mobil Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mobil Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
13,116,000,000
13,136,000,000
Net inc
557,000,000
c330,000,000
Share earns
1.36
.80
9mo rev
40,987,000,000
37,124,000,000
Net inc
b1,625,000,000
c874,000,000
Share earns
3.95
2.13


Campaign Trail; For One in Group, Reason to Remember
LEAD: Meeting with representatives of Asian-American groups in a hotel room here the other day, Governor Dukakis discussed a large home-building program after World War II.
Referring to the war and pointing to California's senior Senator, he said, ''Alan Cranston and I are the only people old enough here to remember that.


Avon Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avon Products Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
725,600,000
620,200,000
Net loss
b405,900,000
c20,700,000
Share earns
-
.29
9mo sales
2,051,800,000
1,734,700,000
Net loss
b481,100,000
cd86,800,000
Share earns
-
1.23


The Cream Of the Crop Gets a Lift To College
LEAD: Bright, overachieving students from academically and socially elite preparatory schools are not exactly an oddity at the Yale Office of Undergraduate Admissions.
But even here the 11 students who arrived in two vans from New York City this weekend stood out.


Bush's Choices: Quayle, Hucksters
LEAD: There are two ways to look at George Bush's cheap-shot campaign.


Enserch Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enserch Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
645,599,000
585,088,000
Net loss
b257,963,000
c219,000
9mo rev
2,026,825,000
1,892,412,000
Net loss
b173,332,000
c23,695,000
Share earns
-
.22
b-Includes losses from discontinued operations of $2,702,000 and $1,350,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively, and a provision for the loss on disposal of discontinued operations of $224,911,000 for both the quarter and 9 months, and the 9-month also includes gains of $50,000,000 from account


EATING OUT With Stephen King; Writer Eats Steak Before It Eats Him
LEAD: HALLOWEEN is a busy time for the novelist Stephen King, what with all those vampires, witches, zombies, cuddly pets-turned-bloodthirsty killers, possessed teen-agers and other socially maladjusted types rattling around his house in Maine.
Nonetheless, he managed to squeeze in a business trip to New York last week and took time out one evening to share a monstrous steak with me at the Peter Luger restaurant in the Williamsburg section of


Cilcorp Inc reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cilcorp Inc (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
460,938,000
472,190,000
Net inc
32,320,000
47,090,000
Share earns
2.38
3.47


Veterans' Agency Rises To Departmental Rank
LEAD: At ceremonies today marking the fifth anniversary of the American invasion of Grenada, President Reagan signed legislation creating the Department of Veterans Affairs and took the opportunity to stress the differences between the Presidential candidates on defense policy.


BSD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BSD Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
821,000
792,000
Per share
.23
.23
9mo net inc
1,544,000
1,682,000
Per share
.44
.49


Net Up 63% at ABC Parent
LEAD: Capital Cities/ABC Inc. said yesterday that its third-quarter net income third quarter rose 63 percent, to $62.6 million, or $3.55 a share, from $38.4 million, or $2.23 a share, a year earlier.


Coins of the Realm
LEAD: On Monday the very day the Treasury Department accused Taiwan and South Korea of manipulating their national currencies to stimulate sales of their goods in the United States by linking them to the dollar, the mail brought a kind of pre-emptive strike of Asian gentility to a number of Washington offices: an expensively bound hardcover book.


Polaroid Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Polaroid Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
436,300,000
425,900,000
Net loss
b50,400,000
c24,400,000
Share earns
-
.39
9mo sales
1,330,000,000
1,260,000,000
Net loss
15,100,000
c76,300,000
Share earns
-
1.23


Magna Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magna Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,201,000
3,933,000
Per share
.41
.39
9mo net inc
12,875,000
11,866,000
Per share
1.25
1.18


CVB Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CVB Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,560,000
1,139,000
Per share
.64
.47
6mo net inc
3,970,000
2,892,000
Per share
1.63
1.20


Xerox Profit Rises by 9%
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation's earnings rose 9 percent, to $146 million, in the third quarter, with a strong showing from its financial services division, the company said today.


People
LEAD: *
Harvey W. Greisman has been appointed vice president, corporate public affairs at GTE, Stamford, Conn., a telecommunications, lighting and precision materials company.


Puget Sound Power &amp; Light Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puget Sound Power &amp; Light Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
168,675,000
154,176,000
Net inc
17,191,000
13,299,000
Share earns
.32
.25
9mo rev
564,227,000
525,695,000
Net inc
84,430,000
80,626,000
Share earns
1.57
1.54


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Oct. 21
Oct. 14
Oct. 23
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.9
6.8
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.8
2.8
Gasoline stocks
216.0
220.1
222.3
Distillate stocks
126.9
129.9
125.3
Crude imports, daily
5.2
5.2
4.8
Product imports, daily
2.1
2.4
2.1
Crude stocks
333.4
327.1
337.9
Crude production, daily
8.0
8.0
8.3
Refinery utilization (%)
83.4
83.8
81.8


Review/Music; Sweet Honey's Messages In a Mixture of Styles
LEAD: Sweet Honey in the Rock - part community sing, part singing community - performed its annual Carnegie Hall concert on Friday evening, with songs about maternal love, third-world debt, disarmament, freedom, determination and faith in God.
Like the gospel music it draws on, Sweet Honey in the Rock delivers messages with luminous, virtuosic singing, and the five women's voices blend and soar in a spectrum of styles few other ensembles could match.


Ecolab Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ecolab Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
337,692,000
294,434,000
Net inc
18,982,000
b101,255,000
Share earns
.70
3.76
9mo sales
899,954,000
740,547,000
Net inc
30,013,000
b133,108,000
Share earns
1.11
4.98


First Commercial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,600,000
2,500,000
Per share
.87
.61
9mo net inc
9,500,000
7,600,000
Per share
2.28
1.83
The results included those of First Security Corp., accounted for as a purchased transaction effective Dec.


Framingham Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Framingham Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,252,000
1,213,000
Per share
.31
.30
9mo net inc
4,159,000
5,037,000
Per share
1.02
1.24


About Education
LEAD: ''I look for diamonds in the rough,'' said Caroline S. Donnan.


A Corporate Milestone; RJR Nabisco Bid Gives New Respectablity To Giant Deals Financed With Huge Debt
LEAD: The proposal to turn RJR Nabisco into a privately owned company represents a milestone in the brief history of the financial tool known as the leveraged buyout.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Penguins 6, Flames 1: Mario Lemieux had two goals and three assists. and Steve Guenette stopped 43 shots last night for the Penguins at home.
Lemieux leads the league with 15 goals and 31 points in 8 games.
Guenette has a 4-0-0 record and has allowed only nine goals in four games.(AP)


DEVILS ALSO LOSE; Maple Leafs 4, Islanders 3
LEAD: With three minutes left in the game and the Islanders a goal behind, Brent Sutter found himself just in front of the Toronto goaltender, Ken Wregget, in position to tip in a tying goal.
Alan Kerr blasted a shot that obediently skidded right onto Sutter's stick for the deflection, but instead of passing


LaRussa Wins Poll
LEAD: Tony LaRussa, a lawyer who piloted the Oakland Athletics to a club-record 104 victories and the pennant, was named American League Manager of the Year yesterday by the Baseball Writers Association of America.
It was the second time LaRussa won the award.
He was also honored in 1983, when he led the Chicago White Sox to the West title.


Independence Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independence Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
27,942,000
b7,393,000
Per share
-
.77
9mo net loss
15,470,000
b22,914,000
Per share
-
2.40
b-Net income  The latest periods' losses resulted from previously announced transactions taken to restructure the company's investment portfolio.


Companies Create 'Model School' for Urban Poor
LEAD: Vowing to teach the public schools a lesson, a group of corporate leaders have opened a grammar school here in a poor West Side neighborhood.
The school is intended to serve as a model for educating inner-city children.


Hispanic Influx Spurs 3 Ballots on Language
LEAD: With 300,000 Hispanic immigrants a year pouring into the South and the West, Spanish has supplanted English in some areas, and many Americans who say they feel like aliens in their own country are stepping up a battle to reaffirm English as the language of public life.


Nancy Reagan, at U.N., Says U.S. Must Do More to Combat Drugs
LEAD: Nancy Reagan told the United Nations today that the United States must do more to solve its drug problem itself through stricter law enforcement and education.
She said the United States should stop blaming developing countries that produce most of the illegal drugs consumed by Americans.


Optimism at Aqueduct
LEAD: Gerard S. McKeon, president of the New York Racing Association, said last night that he was ''somewhere between hopeful and optimistic'' that Aqueduct's striking jockeys would be riding again by Saturday. ''I don't really see any insurmountable problems,'' McKeon said after meeting with leaders of the jockeys and the horse owners.


Orion Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orion Research Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Sales
8,407,000
7,392,000
Net inc
310,000
b443,000
Share earns
.11
.17
6mo sales
17,110,000
15,401,000
Net inc
957,000
b1,022,000
Share earns
.36
.40


Children's Museum Plans to Move and Grow
LEAD: The Children's Museum of Manhattan will move to the Upper West Side under a $6.5 million expansion program announced yesterday at a breakfast at the Regency Hotel.


Amax Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amax Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
997,900,000
871,900,000
Net inc
132,500,000
cd176,200,000
Share earns
1.61
1.81
9mo sales
2,945,300,000
2,470,800,000
Net inc
b452,700,000
c332,000,000
Share earns
5.03
3.86


Honda Accepts European Demand
LEAD: The chairman of the Honda Motor Company said that Honda's new British-built Concerto would have at least 80 percent local content, thus conforming with European car makers' demands. ''Screwdriver factories are not good; we want to install real industrial units,'' Satoshi Okuba said at a seminar here.


Amdahl Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amdahl Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
464,676,000
362,708,000
Net inc
53,388,000
36,784,000
Share earns
.50
.35
9mo rev
1,256,096,000
1,022,225,000
Net inc
150,358,000
92,983,000
Share earns
1.40
.90


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
C-Tec Corp., Wilkes-Barre, Pa., said it had received a $43-a-share bid from AWSC Acquisition Corp., a group formed by members of the company's management, and one partner.


Reviews/Music; 'Flying Dutchman,' Without Intermission
LEAD: A seven-performance run of ''The Flying Dutchman'' under Jerome Kaltenbach ended with a respectable Sunday matinee performance at the War Memorial Opera House here.
Mr.
Kaltenbach did not work wonders of symphonic drama or telling detail in Wagner's score, but he propelled the show in a good basic way and kept the momentum for two and a half hours - without intermissions, as the composer originally wished it.


Capital Cities/ABC Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Cities/ABC Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,009,555,000
946,211,000
Net inc
62,634,000
38,436,000
Share earns
3.55
2.23
9mo rev
3,457,848,000
3,032,207,000
Net inc
246,865,000
162,094,000
Share earns
14.43
9.56


N.F.L. Tightens Steroids Policy
LEAD: Starting next season, players who test positive for steroids will be subject to a three-step plan that could result in their permanent ban from the National Football League, Commissioner Pete Rozelle announced today at the owners' fall meeting.


BMR Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BMR Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
642,000
282,000
Share earns
.25
.24
Shares outst
2,546,551
1,169,267
9mo net inc
1,444,000
768,000
Share earns
.71
.66


Harsco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harsco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
324,457,000
278,359,000
Net inc
11,296,000
17,702,000
Share earns
.43
.61
Shares outst
26,435,000
28,894,000
9mo sales
941,916,000
811,979,000
Net inc
49,065,000
44,702,000
Share earns
1.84
1.53
Shares outst
26,680,000
29,143,000


Letters by Anne Frank Auctioned for $165,000
LEAD: Pen-pal letters sent by Anne Frank and her sister to two girls in Iowa in April 1940 were purchased for an unidentified buyer for $165,000 last night, and are to be given to the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles.


Poles Offer Vatican a Diplomatic Deal
LEAD: Poland has offered to guarantee broad powers and freedoms for the Roman Catholic Church in exchange for full diplomatic recognition from the Vatican, senior Vatican officials said today.


Over-the-Counter Short Sales Rose 8.4% in Month
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers yesterday reported an 8.4 percent monthly increase in the short interest for the most active over-the-counter securities in its national market system.


Jersey Denies Permit for Ciba-Geigy Plant
LEAD: The Ciba-Geigy Corporation's record contributed to a state decision yesterday to deny the chemical company's application to build a pharmaceutical plant, a Department of Environmental Protection official said.


Reviews/Dance; Salute to Hispanic Arts
LEAD: Dance Theater Workshop's ambitious ''Tour de Fuerza'' festival, a 10-day salute to the new Latin American movement in dance, performance and music, has gotten off to a provocative start.
Seen on Saturday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, the opening program of dance by Viveca Vazquez and the team of Merian Soto and Pepon Osorio explored the life of the transplanted Puerto


Xerox Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xerox Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,100,000,000
3,800,000,000
Net inc
146,000,000
134,000,000
Share earns
1.37
1.23
9mo rev
12,000,000,000
11,000,000,000
Net inc
465,000,000
423,000,000
Share earns
4.33
3.92


Sales of U.S. Car Makers Rose 14.8% in Mid-October
LEAD: New American-made cars and light trucks sold at a daily rate of 35,407 units in mid-October, up 14.8 percent from last year's comparable period.


USLife Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USLife Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
328,438,000
293,818,000
Net inc
b14,863,000
c17,882,000
Share earns
.83
.96
9mo rev
950,820,000
897,532,000
Net inc
b50,951,000
c59,624,000
Share earns
2.84
3.11


Tennant Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tennant Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
45,780,000
41,356,000
Net inc
2,851,000
2,646,000
Share earns
.54
.50
9mo sales
130,983,000
117,244,000
Net inc
7,086,000
6,038,000
Share earns
1.34
1.13


Soviet Icebreakers Join Whale Rescue Effort


First Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,012,000
617,000
Share earns
.29
-
The company converted to stock form in September 1987.
Results also reflect the acquisition of Citizens Federal Savings Bank on Sept.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.31
7.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.45
7.50
5.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.56
7.62
6.02
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.70
8.71
8.72
30-YR.


Tellabs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tellabs Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
37,470,000
33,682,000
Net inc
3,053,000
2,915,000
Share earns
.23
.22
9mo sales
111,795,000
91,346,000
Net inc
9,379,000
6,857,000
Share earns
.72
.52


Call to Arms To Oppose Ad Curbs
LEAD: A SERIES of speakers yesterday lambasted public officials who would tax, restrict or ban advertising and urged members of the Association of National Advertisers to be unyielding in the fight for unfettered ads.


Dukakis Second-Guesses Himself In Bitterly Assailing Bush Tactics
LEAD: In an unusual 90-minute television interview, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis bitterly criticized his opponent's political tactics today and expressed confidence that his Presidential campaign message was finally getting through to American voters.


Mapco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mapco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
457,378,000
409,653,000
Net inc
23,508,000
22,423,000
Share earns
1.18
1.07
9mo rev
1,345,272,000
1,160,200,000
Net inc
87,266,000
b96,229,000
Share earns
4.38
4.56


Shell Canada Ltd reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shell Canada Ltd
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
(
Revenue
1,240,000,000
1,260,000,000
Net inc
94,000,000
94,000,000
Share earns
.84
.80
9mo rev
3,760,000,000
3,560,000,000
Net inc
299,000,000
261,000,000
Share earns
2.62
2.24


As Values in U.S. Shift, So Does Spending
LEAD: BY focusing on month-to-month changes in consumer spending habits, it is easy to get a distorted view of how people are spending their money.
While much attention has been paid to the sluggishness in apparel sales, for instance, Americans seem to be spending about the same percentage of their incomes on clothing.


Freeport-McMoran Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
458,150,000
350,026,000
Net inc
97,833,000
47,995,000
Share earns
1.40
.68
9mo rev
1,385,807,000
1,057,236,000
Net inc
234,071,000
181,480,000
Share earns
3.35
2.65


Campaign Trail; Coming Soon on TV: 'Tank Ride, Part IV'
LEAD: It is, perhaps, the ultimate in inside baseball.
Or, quite possibly, the campaign has gone on too long.


Premium Wines of Greece No Longer Taste of Resin
LEAD: GREEK wines have long mystified Americans.
Many whites and some reds smell and taste of pine or turpentine.
This exotic characteristic, which discourages wine enthusiasts, is caused by retsina - that is, resin.
A number of Greece's 290 wine producers are no longer putting resin, which comes from the aleppo pine, into fermenting wine.


Kroger Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kroger Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,584,522,264
5,152,865,076
Net inc
56,200,205
45,295,902
Share earns
.65
.54
9mo sales
14,405,091,127
13,251,425,212
Net inc
153,525,595
b199,242,239
Share earns
1.81
2.41
Shares outst
78,788,396
80,810,088


A Toast to Spirits Blithe and Drinkable
LEAD: GLASSES - mostly long-stemmed and frequently fluted - were raised high in the Rainbow Pavillion on the 65th floor of the RCA Building the other evening, all to toast ''Blithe Spirits,'' a lavishly illustrated $50 cocktail-table book.
It celebrates what Jill Spalding, the author, calls the revival of ''Hollywood-type cocktails and dressy cocktail parties.


Reviews/Dance; Japanese Folk Dances
LEAD: The Odori Festival of Japan - the program that the Japan Folkloric Art Dance Troupe offered Sunday afternoon at Lehman Center for the Performing Arts in the Bronx - included folk dances from many regions of Japan.
Appropriately, therefore, the presentation, directed by Hideo Kimura, resembled a communal enterprise.


Review/Television; 3 New Series Are Having Premieres
LEAD: Don't despair.
There will indeed be a new television season, giving all television watchers their annual opportunity to moan about how everything is even more dreadful than expected.
Postponed by the writers' strike, the new series are slowly surfacing.
This evening, three are on tap: ''The Van Dyke Show'' at 8 o'clock and Mary Tyler Moore's ''Annie McGuire'' at 8:30, both on CBS, and ''Tattingers'' at 10 o'clock on NBC.


BRIEFS
LEAD: Common Stock


Some Adoption Data Must Be Confidential
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gold Fields Takeover Is Blocked
LEAD: The British Government today blocked a $4.9 billion takeover bid by the overseas investment arm of South Africa's Anglo-American Corporation and DeBeers gold and diamond group for Consolidated Gold Fields P.L.C., the mining company based in London.


Critic's Notebook; Dancing in the Dark, or, Learning to Love Ambiguity
LEAD: They could have been lost in the desert, or on some tundra, or out on the steppes.
Or were they symbolically journeying through the dark night of the soul?
It was impossible to say where the dancers in David Dorfman's ''Silent Station'' were supposed to be.
It was also impossible to say precisely who they were supposed to represent.


For the New York Legislature
LEAD: Here are endorsements in some tightly contested races for New York's Senate and Assembly.
Incumbents who have served effectively establish a claim to continue, even when opposed by well-qualified challengers.


Micropolis Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micropolis Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
95,010,000
75,185,000
Net loss
12,600,000
b7,043,000
Share earns
-
.62
9mo sales
273,041,000
207,902,000
Net loss
4,281,000
b20,055,000
Share earns
-
1.77


Coca-Cola Bottling Consoliated reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca-Cola Bottling Consoliated (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
86,932,000
96,723,000
Net inc
1,103,000
d182,000
Share earns
.13
.02
9mo sales
249,654,000
280,546,000
Net inc
b1,251,000
cd16,860,000
Share earns
.15
-


Ohio Casualty Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Casualty Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b27,369,000
c21,683,000
Share earns
1.26
.96
9mo net inc
b85,416,000
c91,863,000
Share earns
3.91
4.07
b-Includes realized investment losses of $2,069,000 and $8,104,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Account
LEAD: *
CPC International's Best Foods Baking Group, a unit of Best Foods, to Backer Spielvogel Bates, for the company's Thomas' English muffins, Toast-R-Cakes, and Sahara pita bread.
The client assigned North Castle Partners, Greenwich, Conn., to its Arnold and Brownberry bread and rolls.


Dollar Ends Mixed as Gold Recovers Some Ground
LEAD: The dollar finished mixed against major foreign currencies yesterday, weighed down by a Government report of a slowdown in durable goods orders.


Sharon Plays the Outcast, Even on Israel's Right
LEAD: With a nod and a knowing smile, Ariel Sharon says he could have ended the Palestinian uprising many months ago.


Jones Intercable Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jones Intercable Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,495,000
8,014,000
Net loss
5,211,000
b1,297,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income  The year-ago first quarter revenue included $1,739,000 received as a fee and distribution upon the sale of all the cable television properties owned by a managed limited partnership.


Procter &amp; Gamble Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Procter &amp; Gamble Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,267,000,000
4,664,000,000
Net inc
400,000,000
356,000,000
Share earns
2.36
2.09


PNC Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PNC Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
109,969,000
97,062,000
Share earns
1.26
1.14
9mo net inc
327,112,000
223,157,000
Share earns
3.77
2.63


Cynthia Freeman Is Dead at 73; Writer of Best-Selling Romances
LEAD: Beatrice Cynthia Freeman Feinberg, who became a best-selling author of romance novels under the name Cynthia Freeman after beginning her writing career at the age of 50, died of cancer last Saturday at the University of California Medical Center in San Francisco.
She was 73 years old.


Cooper Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,090,368,000
881,239,000
Net inc
57,017,000
44,411,000
Share earns
1.12
.88
9mo rev
3,065,049,000
2,576,959,000
Net inc
149,665,000
117,422,000
Share earns
2.94
2.35


Big Names Ready For Breeders' Cup
LEAD: Almost every star on the American horse racing scene and a few of Europe's flashiest runners were among the 87 preliminary entries announced yesterday for the seven Breeders' Cup Day races at Churchill Downs Nov. 5.


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Federal Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
15,600,000
15,100,000
Per share
.51
.50
9mo net inc
b49,700,000
c54,600,000
Per share
1.63
1.85
b-After a credit of $5 million from the cumulative effects of an accounting change.


Activity in Bonds Remains Light
LEAD: The corporate bond market, rattled by the implications of the huge takeover bids for Kraft Inc. and RJR Nabisco, struggled through another difficult session yesterday as few issues changed hands.
But market participants said that buyers for selected investment-grade industrial issues were beginning to emerge in contrast to recent days.


USX Net Rises by 63%; Armco Posts 42% Gain
LEAD: The USX Corporation and Armco Inc. reported increased earnings yesterday.


Interpublic Net Up
LEAD: The Interpublic Group of Companies announced yesterday that net income for its third quarter was up 23 percent, to $6 million, or 27 cents a share, compared to $4.9 million, or 22 cents a share, during the same period last year.


Flagler Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flagler Bank Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
431,000
330,000
Per share
.21
.16
9mo net inc
1,363,000
1,209,000
Per share
.67
.60


Cyprus Minerals Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyprus Minerals Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
326,600,000
213,800,000
Net inc
35,100,000
8,500,000
Share earns
1.20
.33
9mo rev
914,000,000
565,200,000
Net inc
b104,600,000
16,100,000
Share earns
3.89
.63


Reviews/Dance; Ways of the Yugoslavs
LEAD: Balkan folk-dancing as a recreational activity on the American college circuit is as popular as square dances once were.
Even experimental choreographers like Mark Morris now list Balkan folk-dancing on their resumes.


Cummins Engine Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cummins Engine Co Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
808,250,000
668,354,000
Net loss
17,625,000
6,245,000
9mo sales
2,440,888,000
2,013,021,000
Net loss
8,428,000
b18,328,000
Share earns
-
1.14


U.S. Egg Output Slips
LEAD: An estimated 5.55 billion eggs were produced commercially in the United States last month, down 2 percent from September 1987, the Agriculture Department said on Monday.
The number of laying hens was down 3 percent in September, compared with last year, the department said in its monthly report.
Thus, 100 hens averaged 2,037 eggs, up from 2,024 in September 1987, the report said.


Profits Fall at Washington Post
LEAD: The Washington Post Company said yesterday that its third-quarter net income dropped 37.8 percent, to $38.1 million, or $2.96 a share, compared with $61.3 million, or $4.77 a share, a year earlier.


First Amarillo Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Amarillo Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b287,626
129,752
Per share
.10
.05
9mo net inc
b1,781,113
2,893,367
Per share
.62
1.01
b-After gains of $38,085 for the quarter and $1,194,570 for the 9 months from the extinguishment of debt.


San Francisco Journal; A Collision Of Grime, Glamour
LEAD: At a new Nordstrom department store here, customers can order tea from the dressing room or relax with an herbal body treatment after shopping.
They can buy custom-blended face powder, dine in a restaurant that serves Louis XIII cognac for $500 a bottle or be entertained by a musician playing the largest piano


Standex International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standex International Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
107,247,000
102,755,000
Net inc
4,973,000
3,902,000
Share earns
.43
.32


Abington Bancorp reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abington Bancorp
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
563,000
642,000
Per share
.25
.27
9mo net inc
1,319,000
1,579,000
Per share
.58
.67


Vallone Proposes Sweeping Package of Drug Laws
LEAD: The New York City Council majority leader, in an effort to disrupt and deter drug trafficking, introduced a legislative package yesterday intended to attack the assets of those who either sell or use illicit substances.


Afghan Leader Finds 'Reconciliation' Elusive
LEAD: President Najibullah of Afghanistan has acknowledged that his policy of ''national reconciliation'' between the Government and guerrilla armies is not working, Western diplomats said here today.


Hershey Foods Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hershey Foods Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
597,642,000
519,012,000
Net inc
b102,159,000
c47,738,000
Share earns
1.13
.53
9mo sales
1,495,798,000
1,330,414,000
Net inc
b167,717,000
c107,653,000
Share earns
1.86
1.19


Freeport-McMoran Reources Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Reources Partners LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
274,954,000
211,084,000
Net inc
48,300,000
30,377,000
Share earns
.61
.44
Shares outst
78,983,000
69,010,000
9mo rev
847,041,000
620,533,000
Net inc
163,334,000
84,099,000
Share earns
2.23
1.30


Eating Well
LEAD: SQUASH has been around for a long time, but except for zucchini, which has made it big, it is seldom at the top of anyone's list as a favorite vegetable.
This prejudice appears to go back to the Pilgrims.
Although the Indians told the Pilgrims about squash, not many recipes for its use survive, with the exception of pumpkin pie.


Rate of Gain In Wages Holds Steady
LEAD: Upward pressure on wages has abated somewhat, a favorable sign for containing inflation, Government figures indicated today.


Independent Candidate Plays a Spoiler's Role
LEAD: Lenora B. Fulani, independent candidate for President, says she will be happy on Nov. 8 if her campaign helped Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis lose by taking away enough black votes from him.


Regional Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regional Federal Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
276,917
309,578
Per share
.36
.41


Williams, A L Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Williams, A L Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
74,553,000
71,514,000
Net inc
b13,549,000
c10,153,000
Share earns
.53
.41
9mo rev
220,001,000
206,529,000
Net inc
b37,201,000
c28,976,000
Share earns
1.44
1.17


Marine Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marine Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,039,000
1,804,000
Per share
.34
.30
9mo net inc
5,785,000
5,334,000
Per share
.96
.89


Correction
LEAD: In some editions yesterday, the name of the Democratic Congressional candidate in the Fifth District of Connecticut was misspelled.
He is Joseph Marinan.


Solidarity Rejects New Move by Warsaw
LEAD: The Government called today for further preliminary talks to remove what it said were obstacles to full-scale discussions with Solidarity, the outlawed labor federation.
The union rejected the call, leaving the prospect of any talks uncertain.


Typhoon Hits Philippines; Hundreds May Be Dead
LEAD: Residents of a suburb of Manila being rescued from flooding caused by Typhoon Ruby.
More than 500 passengers were reported missing after a ferry sank in the storm, and officials feared most had drowned.
The storm has left at least 100 others dead and 50,000 homeless. (Page A5.) (Agence France-Presse)


Provident Life &amp; Accident Inurance Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Life &amp; Accident Inurance Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b33,700,000
c13,100,000
Share earns
.72
.28
9mo net inc
b49,200,000
c76,000,000
Share earns
1.05
1.63
b-Includes realized capital gains of $7.1 million and $8.6 million for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Review/Jazz; Melding Rhythm To Strings
LEAD: Frank Gordon's Sunday afternoon performance at Merkin Concert Hall sought the elusive ideal blend of European concert music and jazz, and it came closer than most attempts.
Mr.
Gordon, a trumpeter, composer and member of the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, brought with him a 16-piece string ensemble, along with a fine rhythm section - Ronnie Matthews on piano, Clint Houston on bass and Carl Allen on drums.


FICO Offering Bonds at 9.65%
LEAD: The Financing Corporation, also known as FICO, a mixed-ownership Government corporation chartered by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, is offering $700 million of 9.65 percent bonds due in 2018 at a price of par through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


Lawyer Attacks Sukhreet Gabel Over Recording
LEAD: A defense lawyer attacked the character and credibility of Sukhreet Gabel yesterday, accusing her of deceiving her mother by secretly taping a conversation with her and then giving the tape to prosecutors in the Bess Myerson case.


Group Promotes Study Of Religion as a Subject
LEAD: Fearing that debate over the place of religion in the public schools has frightened school officials into all but banishing the subject, a group of educators have come up with a curriculum that they say teaches religion without promoting a faith.


Tandem Computers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandem Computers Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
383,997,000
293,773,000
Net inc
30,176,000
29,806,000
Share earns
.31
.30
Yr rev
1,314,721,000
1,047,532,000
Net inc
94,485,000
105,229,000
Share earns
.96
1.07


U.S. Woman Is Named Reborn Buddhist Saint
LEAD: When one of the supreme leaders of Tibetan Buddhism made Catharine Burroughs one of his religion's most revered figures by declaring her a tulku, or reincarnation of a 16th century lama, the first thought that popped into the head of her husband, Michael, was this:


New York State Agencies Struggle to Meet Information Requests
LEAD: To the Editor:


Checking Out A Bee's Day
LEAD: Entomologists studying the behavior of honey bees have adapted bar code scanning technology from the supermarket checkout counter to keep track of bees as they come and go from the hive.
They want to know how often and at what time bees leave on pollen-gathering trips, and when they return.
Since a honey bee lives for only four weeks, the entomologists have long sought a means of monitoring a bee's lifetime of comings and goings.


Australian Inflation Up
LEAD: Australia's consumer price index rose by 1.9 percent in the third quarter, up from 1.7 percent in the previous quarter.
The latest rate was well above market expectations of a rise around 1.5 percent.


Quick Appearance
LEAD: Ben Johnson, the sprinter, made a quick appearance yesterday in Provincial Court in Toronto, the city where he will return next April 24 to plead on charges of common assault and possession of a weapon dangerous to the public peace.
Johnson was charged earlier this month after an unidentified motorist said a man in a black Porsche pointed a gun at him on the Trans-Canada Highway near Toronto.


New Western Series Stresses Family Drama
LEAD: David Jacobs, the writer and producer who changed the face of television in 1978 when he created ''Dallas,'' the first successful nighttime soap opera, is once again challenging established wisdom at the networks.
Thursday night at 9 o'clock, CBS is to present the first episode of ''Paradise,'' a western on which Mr.


Food Notes
LEAD:  Smoked Salmon Is Up


U.S.-Japan Rice Dispute
LEAD: Japan's largest farm group has been accused of violating United States antitrust laws in its efforts to persuade the Reagan Administration to reject a trade complaint against Tokyo's ban on rice imports.


Greyhound Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greyhound Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
857,351,000
624,392,000
Net inc
30,758,000
15,046,000
Share earns
.80
.38
9mo rev
2,466,453,000
1,786,746,000
Net inc
b78,106,000
c68,329,000
Share earns
2.03
1.73


Lac Minerals Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lac Minerals Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
54,100,000
48,200,000
Net inc
12,200,000
10,200,000
Share earns
.13
.12
9mo rev
153,900,000
143,500,000
Net inc
38,500,000
28,700,000
Share earns
.42
.33


Reactor Storage Plan Opposed
LEAD: A panel of citizens and scientists objected today to a plan for mothballing a reactor disabled in the accident at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania nearly 10 years ago.
The panel members said they were afraid that if the reactor was sealed up, as planned, it would never be decontaminated.


Emerson Radio Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emerson Radio Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
210,402,000
243,181,000
Net inc
3,255,000
c5,490,000
Share earns
.09
-
6mo sales
373,758,000
397,870,000
Net inc
b4,568,000
c11,363,000
Share earns
.13
-


Fireman's Fund Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fireman's Fund Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b49,144,000
c233,786,000
Share earns
1.02
3.71
Shares outst
48,316,000
63,035,000
9mo net inc
b164,072,000
c327,155,000
Share earns
3.21
5.06
Shares outst
51,041,000
64,635,000


Panel Criticizes Elections Board On Ethics Case
LEAD: The New York State Board of Elections, in a 15-month investigation of allegations of political corruption in Poughkeepsie, failed to uncover almost $600,000 in secret campaign contributions and expenditures and did not interview important figures in the case, investigators told the State Government Integrity


New Process Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Process Co
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
102,657,828
84,523,643
Net inc
6,943,735
3,770,353
Share earns
.76
.40
9mo sales
307,433,709
258,853,229
Net inc
23,146,397
13,442,105
Share earns
2.51
1.43


Satellite Use By Business Is Growing
LEAD: Lured by the availability of idle satellite channels and falling hardware prices, more and more American businesses are setting up their own private satellite communications networks.
Small dishes - the hallmark of the systems - are popping up on the rooftops of discount stores, car dealerships and even corner drugstores across the country.


Teaching the Basic Skills Is Still Principals' Top Goal
LEAD: Teaching the basics of reading, writing and arithmetic remains the most important goal for high school educators who responded to a survey.


Control Data Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Control Data Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
841,400,000
831,400,000
Net loss
b2,400,000
cd6,800,000
Share earns
-
.16
9mo rev
2,695,300,000
2,439,000,000
Net inc
b14,500,000
d8,500,000
Share earns
.34
.19


Yanks Still Looking for Pitching Help
LEAD: Could a young man from the tiny town of Eakly, Okla., find success and happiness in New York?
If he sheds his preference for spring training in Arizona, Mike Moore could have the opportunity to learn the answer.


Proud Yankee Concern Petitions for Protection
LEAD: It was a symbol of Yankee ingenuity, the small Connecticut company that became the premier maker of ball bearings, but now it is a symbol of industrial malaise, forced to swallow its pride to ask Washington for the first time for protection against imports.


Lessons
LEAD: College presidents have been known to pick fights with governors, faculties and even an occasional basketball coach.
The new president of Dartmouth, James O. Freedman, might be the first to take on a whole culture.


High Court Delays Execution
LEAD: The Supreme Court today blocked the execution of Leo Edwards, a convicted murderer.
Mr.
Edwards, 33 years old, was to have been executed at 12:01 A.M.
Wednesday in the gas chamber at Mississippi State Penitentiary at Parchman.
The justices, by an 8-to-0 vote, granted the emergency stay pending further appeals in the case.


USX Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USX Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,153,000,000
3,860,000,000
Net inc
b228,000,000
c140,000,000
Share earns
.80
.46
9mo sales
12,419,000,000
10,604,000,000
Net inc
b598,000,000
233,000,000
Share earns
2.07
.67


Friedman Again Guilty In Graft Case
LEAD: Stanley M. Friedman, the former Bronx Democratic leader who was convicted of Federal racketeering charges in 1986, was found guilty yesterday of state charges that he bribed a former New York National Guard general in an effort to sell a hand-held computer to the state militia.


Minister Is Indicted in Assault
LEAD: The director of a fundamentalist children's home and two assistants were indicted by a state grand jury today on charges of assaulting officers who raided the home June 13 and took custody of children said to have been abused and neglected.


For Moscow and Bonn, A Range of Agreements
LEAD: The Soviet Union and West Germany reached agreements or partial agreements on a diverse range of political, economic and scientific issues today, as the second day of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's visit continued with a tone of cautious optimism.


Jersey's Top Court Limits the Death Penalty to Intentional Murders
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled today that the death penalty could be imposed only on those who intentionally commit murder.


The Promise of $20 Billion Poker
LEAD: Pillsbury, RJR Nabisco, Kraft: the latest in a long and ever more spectacular series of multibillion dollar restructuring initiatives that have rocked corporate America.
Do they help or hurt the economy?
Or are they merely games played for the fun and profit of investment bankers, which have little effect on productivity and jobs?


Mt. Holyoke Dedicates Vance Professorship
LEAD: Mount Holyoke College dedicated its new Cyrus R. Vance Professorship in International Relations last night in an effort to draw more women into that field.
The women's college in South Hadley, Mass., plans to name prominent practitioners to the position and share their experience with associated colleges in the region.


Economic Scene; Deficit Bang or Deficit Whimper?
LEAD: ''READ my lips,'' repeats George Bush: ''No new taxes.'' But professional campaign watchers prefer to read his eyes, and many discern hints of the Big Wink.


Police Officer Arrested as a Cocaine Buyer
LEAD: A Brooklyn police officer was arrested last night after he was observed buying cocaine on a street in the Sunset Park section, the police reported.


Trainer in Trouble
LEAD: Kevin Rooney, trainer of the heavyweight champion Mike Tyson, was convicted last week of third-degree assault for beating a man he found in the home of his estranged wife, Bonnie.
Yesterday, Rooney pleaded guilty in Catskill, N.Y., only to charges of harassing her, and surrendered to the police.
He was released by Justice Frank McDonald on $5,000 bond, ordered to pay a $250 fine and given a conditional discharge on a 15-day sentence.(


Chevron Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chevron Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,200,000,000
7,700,000,000
Net inc
420,000,000
297,000,000
Share earns
1.23
.87
9mo rev
22,000,000,000
21,700,000,000
Net inc
1,593,000,000
1,016,000,000
Share earns
4.66
2.97


Ungaro and Valentino: Firm Footing
LEAD: The 10-year reign of the shoulder pad is just about over.
Long skirts are a fact of life.
Fabrics have been lightened to the point of transparency, and the new shape of clothes is gentle, following the lines of the body.


Logicon Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Logicon Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
57,163,000
53,067,000
Net inc
2,637,000
2,455,000
Share earns
.58
.51
6mo rev
113,986,000
100,927,000
Net inc
5,218,000
4,736,000
Share earns
1.15
.99


Stanford Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanford Telecommunications (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
21,076,000
13,788,000
Net inc
775,000
38,000
Share earns
.16
.01
6mo rev
39,311,000
26,046,000
Net inc
1,431,000
b957,000
Share earns
.30
-


Columbia Savings &amp; Loan Association reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia Savings &amp; Loan Association (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
16,322,000
31,174,000
Share earns
.39
.76
9mo net inc
48,711,000
154,175,000
Share earns
1.17
3.98
The company increased its provision for losses on investment securities and loans to $23,594,000 in the latest quarter, compared with $11,315,000 in the year-ago quarter; for the latest 9 months, the provision was $57,619,000, compared with $31,873,000 in the year-ago period.


Campaign Trail; Bush Survives Guerrilla Tactics
LEAD: Shortly after Vice President Bush and his entourage arrived here yesterday for a rally, leaflets were surreptitiously distributed to the journalists following him, announcing that the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Paul G. Kirk Jr., was holding a news conference nearby.


First Security (Utah) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Security (Utah) (O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
9,114,000
7,100,000
Per share
.74
.58
9mo net inc
24,192,000
21,007,000
Per share
1.97
1.72.


DEVILS ALSO LOSE; Sabres 7, Devils 4
LEAD: The Devils have learned how to limit the shots of their opponents, but in the last two they haven't demonstrated the ability to win.
New Jersey allowed 19 shots to the Buffalo Sabres and suffered a 7-4 defeat tonight, only two nights after they yielded 19 in Detroit and settled for a 3-3 tie.


Operators Got Millions in Bonuses Despite Hazards at Atom Plants
LEAD: The Department of Energy has routinely awarded millions of dollars in performance bonuses over the last decade to contractors that run nuclear weapon factories racked by safety, health and environmental deficiencies, Government documents show.


Household Workers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Symbolics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Symbolics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Revenue
16,289,000
23,954,000
Net inc
415,000
b4,458,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss and includes a charge of $2,290,000 from the buyout of a research and development joint venture and corporate restructuring charges.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: HALLOWEEN  Dusk  calls out to candied kids who  bellow back in raucous fright and  Evening  screams past pumpkins, goblins and  wind wild leaves while  Night  shouts in chillied laughter and  ignores unfinished homework as  Tomorrow  winks at the expansive delight and  sleeps softly in gentle celebration.


Reining In Unfettered Development
LEAD: To jaded metropolitan eyes, the city of Santa Rosa, Calif., an hour's drive up Highway 101 from San Francisco, looks like a friendly, easygoing town out of the 50's.
At high noon, businessmen in shirt sleeves, their coats over their backs, stroll through the low-slung downtown.
In accord with local style, even the Kentucky Fried Chicken store is tastefully low-key and bereft of the customary red and white striped bucket rotating overhead.


Shell Oil Company reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shell Oil Company
(
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,450,000,000
5,650,000,000
Net inc
352,000,000
420,000,000
9mo rev
15,920,000,000
15,330,000,000
Net inc
1,860,000,000
795,000,000
Shell Oil is a unit of Royal Dutch- Shell Group.


Algeria Leader Rejects A Multiparty System
LEAD: President Chadli Benjedid of Algeria today ruled out a multiparty system as part of the political changes he has proposed after the riots that shook the country this month.


Surgery for 3 Dodgers
LEAD: Three members of the Los Angeles Dodgers - John Tudor, the left-handed pitcher, and Mike Scioscia and Rick Dempsey, catchers - are scheduled to undergo surgery tomorrow by Dr.
Frank Jobe.
Tudor, who left Game 2 of the World Series with a sore elbow, will undergo ligament reconstruction surgery on his pitching arm.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  The British Government blocked a takeover bid for Consolidated Gold Fields by companies affiliated with two South African mining groups.
The Monopolies and Mergers Commission was ordered to study the effect of such an acquisition. [ D1. ] Shearson Lehman Hutton met with its competitor, Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts, in a meeting that was said to include talks on a possible combined bid for RJR Nabisco.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Loggins in Transition


Primebank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Primebank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
661,458
600,365
Per share
.59
.54
9mo net inc
1,072,453
1,328,818
Per share
1.52
1.19


Utah Medical Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Utah Medical Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,475,523
1,890,664
Net inc
378,644
180,324
Share earns
.05
.03
Shares outst
7,530,000
6,720,000
9mo rev
8,990,963
5,254,266
Net inc
985,748
457,734
Share earns
.13
.07
Shares outst
7,510,000
6,690,000


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
A.M.E.
Inc., Burbank, Calif., a videotape and post-production film-service company, named Bernard Weitzman president and chief operating officer of its new Coloring Division.


RJR Nabisco Bidders Said to Talk
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton and Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the two Wall Street titans competing over a record buyout of RJR Nabisco Inc., held talks yesterday morning to discuss the possibility of a combined bid, according to Wall Street professionals with knowledge of the discussions.


Second National Federal Savngs Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Second National Federal Savngs Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,100,000
2,300,000
Per share
.29
.32
9mo net inc
5,477,000
6,921,000
Per share
.76
.97


S.E.C. Studies Changes On Private Placements
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today proposed liberalizing trading in the private placement market, a move that could significantly cut the cost of raising capital in the United States.


Melville Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Melville Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Sales
1,624,567,780
1,392,935,098
Net inc
66,377,036
51,649,855
Share earns
1.22
.95
9mo sales
4,489,030,299
3,915,788,409
Net inc
149,250,393
123,474,308
Share earns
2.74
2.27


Stock Buyback Set by Digital
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation announced plans today to buy back shares with a current market value of more than $900 million.
Its stock rose amid sketchy takeover rumors.


Real Estate; Seaport Link For a Tower In Manhattan
LEAD: EARLY in this decade, strong demand for expansion space from financial service companies riding a wave of prosperity sent developers of commercial buildings stampeding toward Wall Street.


History Is Hazy on Cocktails' Origins
LEAD: YEARS ago, maybe 20 or 30, two of my aunts decided that they would like to see how many drinks they would need to become giddy.
Not having been brought up in the imbibing tradition - wine was used for sacramental purposes only, and shots of brandy were just for men - they came late to cocktails.


Oakite Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oakite Products Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
22,133,000
20,878,000
Net inc
721,000
1,248,000
Share earns
.43
.76
9mo sales
64,076,000
60,393,000
Net inc
2,810,000
3,166,000
Share earns
1.70
1.93


Topics of The Times; Prize Package
LEAD: A New Yorker visiting Ontario last summer bought an issue of The Toronto Star to keep him company at breakfast.
He was delighted to find that the newspaper contained a smart, British-style crossword puzzle, and he completed it with his coffee.
Then he noticed that The Star offered a $10 prize for the earliest postmarked correct solution.


Prosecution Says Steinberg Beat Lisa and Left Her to Die
LEAD: The prosecution in Joel B. Steinberg's murder trial charged yesterday in its opening statement that he ''brutally beat 6-year-old Lisa Steinberg'' and that with ''depraved indifference'' left her to die in his apartment while he went to dinner with a friend.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1988
From '87
Amdahl Corp.
$ 53,400,000
+
45.1
Amerada Hess Corp.
15,800,000 -
59.1
Armco Inc.
36,700,000
+
42.2
Avon Products Inc.
(405,900,000)
-
Borden Inc.


British Inflation Outlook
LEAD: The Confederation of British Industries reported today that more than 33 percent of the companies in Britain expect to raise their wholesale prices in the next four months.
The proportion of such companies has grown from 25 percent in July.


REAGAN APPROVES LIMITED INSPECTION OF WEAPONS SITES
LEAD: President Reagan has resolved a longstanding dispute between the State and Defense Departments over how much on-site inspection would be needed in a strategic arms treaty under negotiation with the Soviet Union, Adminstration officials said today.


Bush Holds Lead in Gallup Poll
LEAD: Vice President Bush continues to hold a strong lead over Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis in the latest survey of public opinion by The Gallup Organization, which released its findings yesterday.


The Champ and the Ghost
LEAD: AN empty feeling came over me when I finished my perusal of several morning newspapers yesterday, and I couldn't figure out what it was.
It nagged.
It gnawed.
Then it hit me!
Not one word did I find in the papers concerning Robin Givens, Ruth Roper and Mike Tyson and their domestic bliss.


Zions Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zions Bancorporation (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
8,433,000
b4,310,000
Per share
-
.75
9mo net loss
5,587,000
7,337,000
b-Net income


First Community Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Community Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,716,000
1,654,000
Per share
.44
.43
9mo net inc
4,863,000
4,308,000
Per share
1.25
1.12


Irving Elias, Executive, 88
LEAD: Irving Elias, a businessman and philanthropist, died of pneumonia Saturday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Centerior Energy Corp reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centerior Energy Corp (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,989,246,000
2,002,817,000
Net inc
315,232,000
421,217,000
Share earns
2.24
3.10


Arab Hints and Israel's Election
LEAD: Have Arab leaders overstepped proper bounds by endorsing Shimon Peres, the Labor Party leader, in Israel's Nov. 1 election?
Yitzhak Shamir and his Likud backers charge that, but they are either being hilariously naive or just plain cynical.


Block Drug Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Block Drug Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
105,911,000
94,058,000
Net inc
10,766,000
9,340,000
Share earns
.65
.55
6mo sales
206,723,000
178,147,000
Net inc
21,530,000
18,358,000
Share earns
1.30
1.11


Electronic Data Systems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electronic Data Systems Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,224,700,000
1,126,000,000
Net inc
95,900,000
82,300,000
Share earns
.79
.68
9mo rev
3,543,100,000
3,240,000,000
Net inc
280,700,000
218,900,000
Share earns
2.30
1.80


If Your Closets Make You a Basket Case
LEAD: WHEN Gary and Anita Engel moved into their spacious contemporary house in Ardsley, N.Y., Mrs.
Engel had high hopes that the oversize bedrooms and generous closets would prevent the clutter and chaos that had always seemed to trail in her family's wake.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-15  The Soviet Union may free prisoners.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany said he had been assured of the plan to free political prisoners by the Soviets.
But neither Mr.
Kohl nor the West German Foreign Minister defined the commitment.
Page A1


Talking Deals; Burger King Role In Pillsbury Fight
LEAD: IT is hard enough for a company to decide what to do when an unsolicited takeover offer lands on its doorstep.
But, in the case of the Pillsbury Company, finding a workable alternative is being made more difficult by the intervention of an unlikely group - its Burger King franchisees.


Granato's Goal Paces Rangers
LEAD: The Rangers entered the third period against the Flyers last night down, 3-2, and experience had conditioned their goalie, John Vanbiesbrouck, to suspect where the Rangers were ultimately headed.
On to defeat was the anticipated travel schedule.
Last season, the Rangers were 1-25-3 in games in which they trailed after two periods.


Noga Brothers Report Threats
LEAD: The lives of two brothers who play for National Football League teams have been threatened by people associated with organized crime in Hawaii, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said Tuesday.


Peru Official Assails Airline After a Crash That Killed 12
LEAD: The state airline, Aeroperu, should be reorganized, Peru's Vice President said today, the day after 12 people died in a jetliner crash.


Ford Motor Co of Canada Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ford Motor Co of Canada Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
3,290,000,000
2,590,000,000
Net inc
34,200,000
b22,900,000
Share earns
4.12
-
9mo sales
11,550,000,000
10,200,000,000
Net inc
156,500,000
c66,300,000
Share earns
18.87
8.00


U.S. Farm Credit Agency Sets $2.47 Billion Offering
LEAD: The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation is offering $2.47 billion of consolidated systemwide bonds through various securities dealers.


Korean Trade Surplus
LEAD: Spurred by strong exports, South Korea's current-account surplus for September reached a record high of $1.44 billion, the Bank of Korea reported today.
The surplus was $1.12 billion in September 1987.
The previous record was $1.3 billion in June, the bank said.
The current account broadly measures financial flow and includes trade in goods and services and other transfers.


PROFIT SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1988
From '87
AMP Inc.
$ 72,400,000
+15.3
Anheuser-Busch Cos.
226,500,000 +
16.0
Bethlehem Steel Corp.
101,400,000
+233.6
Centel Corp.
37,300,000
-4.8
Culbro Corp.
(1,500,000)
-
E.I. du Pont de Nemours
461,000,000
+2.0
Electronic Data Systems
95,900,000
+16.5
Ford Motor Co.


Cabinet Steps Down in a Yugoslav Republic
LEAD: The Cabinet of Montenegro, one of the country's six republics, resigned during a debate over its crackdown on an anti-government protest, official news reports said today.


Amgen Officer Shifts Surprise to Analysts
LEAD: Some analysts were surprised when Amgen Inc., a biotechnology company based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., announced Tuesday that Gordon M. Binder had been elected chief executive officer and that Harry F. Hixson Jr. had been elected president and chief operating officer, succeeding George B. Rathmann, who has been chairman, president and chief executive.


American Maize-Products Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Maize-Products Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
150,965,000
137,015,000
Net inc
2,301,000
b4,335,000
Share earns
.35
.72
9mo sales
409,170,000
378,237,000
Net inc
5,966,000
b9,177,000
Share earns
.91
1.58


Galoob, Lewis, Toys reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galoob, Lewis, Toys (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
50,053,000
25,149,000
Net inc
4,686,000
b6,024,000
Share earns
.51
-
9mo sales
94,463,000
42,881,000
Net inc
3,306,000
b15,188,000
Share earns
.36
-


COASTAL OFF, OCCIDENTAL UP
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said yesterday that third-quarter earnings had more than doubled because of strong gains in its chemical unit, while the Coastal Corporation said lower crude oil prices drove its quarterly earnings down sharply.


Profits Decrease 64.5% at Goodyear
LEAD: The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company Tuesday reported a 64.5 percent drop in its third-quarter net income, primarily because of lower tire sales in the United States and because several unusual items had enhanced its net income in the 1987 period.


Bethlehem Steel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bethlehem Steel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,431,500,000
1,156,500,000
Net inc
b101,400,000
30,400,000
Share earns
1.27
.47
9mo sales
4,156,600,000
3,415,400,000
Net inc
b337,300,000
337,300,000
Share earns
4.56
4.56


Public Service Co of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Co of Colorado (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
354,411,000
351,689,000
Net loss
18,574,000
b25,577,000
Share earns
-
.43
9mo rev
1,271,358,000
1,237,235,000
Net inc
74,575,000
138,051,000
Share earns
1.24
2.44


X-Rite Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* X-Rite Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,916,689
5,148,917
Net inc
587,652
b1,144,970
Share earns
.11
.22
9mo sales
14,835,195
13,228,653
Net inc
2,226,657
b2,312,601
Share earns
.43
.44


Oil Prices Mostly Higher; Livestock and Pork Decline
LEAD: Prices of petroleum futures finished mostly higher yesterday in a tumultuous day of trading after a report showed a sharp drawdown in gasoline reserves.


Campaign Trail; Muriel Humphrey Has Her Say
LEAD: Mr.
Bush has made liberal, the ''L word'' a derisive term.
But the wife of a man who was synonomous with liberalism speaks unsparingly of Mr.
Bush.


Falling Sculpture Injures 2 in SoHo


17 Said to Die as Israeli Jets Hit Lebanon
LEAD: Israel mounted two air raids on Palestinian targets today, and its Lebanese militia allies clashed with Palestinian and Lebanese Moslem guerrillas.


Calendar: A Silver Collection Displayed
LEAD:  Historic Collection, New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West at 77th Street; 212-873-3400.


Panhandle Eastern Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Panhandle Eastern Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
270,371,000
287,668,000
Net loss
b245,000,000
c9,369,000
Share earns
-
.18
9mo rev
986,380,000
1,177,095,000
Net loss
b139,354,000
c72,298,000
Share earns
-
1.36


Contrasts in Tobacco Strategy
LEAD: Hamish Maxwell, the deliberate 62-year-old chairman of the Philip Morris Companies, and F. Ross Johnson, the impatient 56-year-old chief executive of RJR Nabisco Inc., are taking very different approaches in struggling with tobacco, which may be the most profitable and the most plagued consumer product on store shelves today.


Next Stop, Madison Avenue
LEAD: Although this year's Olympians have received a generally lukewarm reception from large corporate advertisers, Florence Griffith Joyner is emerging as one of the likely winners in endorsement earnings.


Nerco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nerco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
163,100,000
164,800,000
Net inc
11,300,000
15,300,000
Share earns
.34
.46
9mo rev
483,100,000
480,600,000
Net inc
b53,400,000
45,600,000
Share earns
1.60
1.37


Review/Dance; Kathy Gatto Presents Works for Nondancers
LEAD: Choreographers occasionally cast dances with nondancers: people with little or no dance training or experience.
Two dances of this sort were on the program offered by Kathy Gatto and Friends on Monday night at the Mulberry Street Theater.


Death of an N.F.L. Player: Questions Persist
LEAD: About two and a half weeks ago, David Croudip could look at his football career and conclude that it was in the best shape it had ever been in.


First Financial Savings (Ohio) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Savings (Ohio)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
461,000
423,000
Per share
.70
.64
9mo net inc
1,017,000
868,000
Per share
1.54
1.31


The New Look at the Public Schools


What Is a Man Profited?
LEAD: Thirty-eight years ago an American politician sought power by a campaign of character assassination.
Joe McCarthy had great success playing cynically to public fears.
Truth and decency eventually caught up with him, but not before he did lasting damage to our institutions.


U.S. Proposes Limit on 'Star Wars' Tests
LEAD: Administration officials said today that the United States, in arms talks in Geneva, had for the first time proposed limiting the scope of tests in space of some ''Star Wars'' anti-missile devices.


Reebok International Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reebok International Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
539,357,000
408,419,000
Net inc
37,067,000
49,723,000
Share earns
.32
.44
9mo sales
1,455,367,000
1,048,977,000
Net inc
130,277,000
131,002,000
Share earns
1.14
1.19


Hein-Werner Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hein-Werner Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
25,744,000
23,719,000
Net inc
798,000
544,000
Share earns
.35
.30
9mo sales
83,837,000
64,569,000
Net inc
2,581,000
1,380,000
Share earns
1.13
.92


Microsoft-I.B.M. Program Expected
LEAD: The Microsoft Corporation and the International Business Machines Corporation are planning to announce in New York Monday morning that they are shipping the Presentation Manager, a program that acts as a graphical interface for the OS/2 operating system, several computer industry sources said.
Presentation Manager was announced in April 1987, when I.B.M.


Home Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b27,200,000
c42,400,000
Share earns
.80
1.19
9mo net inc
b74,000,000
c164,200,000
Share earns
2.17
4.54
b-Includes realized capital gains of $2.9 million and $9.9 million for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Ford's Net Rose 21.7% In Quarter
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company, continuing its string of financial successes, today reported record third-quarter net income of $856 million, or $1.78 a share, up 21.7 percent from $703.2 million, or $1.38 a share, in the third quarter last year.


Booker Prize Awarded For 'Oscar and Lucinda'
LEAD: Peter Carey won the Booker Prize, Britain's top literary award, on Tuesday for ''Oscar and Lucinda,'' a love story set in 19th-century England and Australia about a puritanical priest and a young heiress drawn together by their gambling addictions.


Review/Television; A Gunfighter as Four Orphans' Dad
LEAD: David Jacobs, who created ''Dallas'' and ''Knots Landing,'' is now bringing his clearly marketable, if somewhat askew, sense of family and community values to what is called an ''authentic'' western format, set in 1890. ''Paradise,'' having its premiere on CBS at 9 o'clock this evening, is about as authentic as a Gene


French Fashion Industry Joins AIDS Fight


Kimball International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimball International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
135,876,000
136,992,000
Net inc
7,134,000
10,371,000
Share earns
.34
.49


Abraham Schlesinger, Ex-Labor Lawyer, 82
LEAD: Abraham Schlesinger, a retired labor lawyer, died of lung cancer yesterday at his home in Wilton, Conn.
He was 82 years old.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: THE reactions of children when their single parents start to date can vary from active encouragement -even crude attempts at matchmaking - to none-too-subtle sabotage.


Health: Treatments; Breast Cancer Patients Face Daunting Array Of Options on Therapy
LEAD: While experts now agree that almost all women who have breast cancer should undergo some form of chemotherapy or hormonal therapy after surgery, women and their doctors are confronted with a bewildering array of treatments and the fear that a wrong choice could be deadly.


A 16-Ton Sculpture Falls, Injuring 2
LEAD: Two workers were injured, one seriously, when a 16-ton steel sculpture toppled on them in a SoHo art gallery yesterday morning, pinning the men for several minutes.


Metro Datelines; Koch Says Murderer Must Not Be Paroled
LEAD: Mayor Koch urged the state yesterday to deny the parole application of a man who killed two East Side women 25 years ago.


Tecumseh Products Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tecumseh Products Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
244,758,000
207,672,000
Net inc
14,388,000
15,551,000
Share earns
2.64
2.84
9mo sales
834,292,000
716,976,000
Net inc
52,123,000
53,616,000
Share earns
9.55
9.80


Yields Rise In Week
LEAD: Yields for certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds rose for the week ended yesterday, with depositors focusing on short-term C.D.'s now offering yields nearly compatible with those offered by instruments with longer maturities.


Ipalco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ipalco Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
165,668,000
148,059,000
Net inc
32,553,000
31,022,000
Share earns
.87
.83
9mo rev
463,411,000
417,020,000
Net inc
79,441,000
73,068,000
Share earns
2.12
1.95


Eric Larson Dies at 83; Disney Film Animator
LEAD: Eric Larson, who helped bring to life classic Walt Disney cartoon characters in such films as ''Pinocchio'' and ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs'' during a 50-year career in animation, died Tuesday at his home in La Canada-Flintridge, a suburb of Los Angeles.
He was 83 years old.


Jurors Dismissed Without Verdict In Trial of Georgia Congressman
LEAD: Representative Pat Swindall lost hope of a pre-election verdict in his trial on perjury charges today when a Federal district judge dismissed the jury because the Republican Congressman had mailed out campaign literature mentioning the case.


Malaysia's Ruling Party Breaks in 2
LEAD: A split in the dominant party that brought Malaysia to independence has deepened, providing the potential for an alternative political coalition for the first time since the British left in 1957.


Maxus Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxus Energy Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
131,200,000
169,300,000
Net loss
35,900,000
29,500,000
9mo sales
445,500,000
502,300,000
Net loss
58,800,000
b484,500,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $52.7 million.


Sports People; Free-Agent List Grows
LEAD: Baseball's free-agent list grew to 26 yesterday when 12 players added their names to it.
Bruce Benedict became the second Atlanta catcher to file for free agency - Ozzie Virgil was the first - and he was joined by another catcher, Jamie Quirk of Kansas City, as well as Rick Mahler of Atlanta, Bud Black of Cleveland, Bob Forsch of Houston, Dave LaPoint of Pittsburgh, Frank DiPino of the Chicago Cubs and Larry McWilliams of St.


Who Will Undo the Catastrophic Surcharge?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Judge Bars Teen-Age Mother From Traveling for TV Show
LEAD: A judge who sentenced a teen-age mother to lifetime birth control for neglecting her two young children has denied her permission to travel to New York to appear on television.


Corte Madera Journal; Brain Tuneup at 'McMeditation' Spas
LEAD: On a recent sunny Saturday afternoon, Joan D'Amico, a contracts supervisor for a shipping company, hopped into her car and zipped over to the Paradise Shopping Center in this residential town a few miles north of San Francisco for a few repairs.
Nothing major, just a quick brain tuneup.


Metro Datelines; Blue Cross Contract Is Delayed by Board
LEAD: The New York City Board of Estimate moved yesterday in an executive session to delay approval of a municipal contract providing health care insurance for city workers by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield.


Mountain Medical Equipment Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mountain Medical Equipment Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,375,000
6,294,000
Net inc
345,000
56,000
Share earns
.11
.02
6mo rev
15,699,000
12,164,000
Net inc
596,000
b390,000
Share earns
.19
.12


Trans World Airlines Inc (TWA) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans World Airlines Inc (TWA) (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,270,059,000
1,209,824,000
Net inc
87,999,000
c57,134,000
Share earns
2.39
1.41
9mo rev
3,330,377,000
3,088,814,000
Net inc
b132,747,000
c55,160,000
Share earns
2.89
.45


Alumnae Gifts Increase At Women's Colleges
LEAD: A record-breaking year in gifts to Smith College here bears out a study that found that alumnae of women's schools give more to their alma maters than do graduates of coeducational schools, fund-raisers at the college said.


Shelton Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shelton Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
264,000
239,000
Per share
.22
.21


Avalon Marketing Offers 14% Notes
LEAD: Avalon Marketing Inc. is offering $100 million of 14 percent senior subordinated notes due in 1998 at a price of 98.687 to yield 14.25 percent through underwriters led by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.


Profits Up For Pan Am And T.W.A.
LEAD: Trans World Airlines Inc. and the Pan Am Corporation yesterday reported increases in their third-quarter profits from a year earlier, while US Air Group Inc.'s net income was reduced by merger costs.


Let F.D.A. Examine Smokeless Cigarette
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pacificorp Merger Wins Approval
LEAD: The proposed $2.2 billion merger between Pacificorp and Utah Power and Light was approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, but only on the condition that the new company provide space on its transmission lines for other utilities to ship electricity.
In a 70-page order, the commission said requirements that the merged company ''wheel'' electricity from other utilities were intended to alleviate fears that it would dominate the sale of power from the inland Northwest to the Southwest.


Potters Give An Annual 'Tea Party'
LEAD: WHEN they opened nine years ago, Leslie Ferrin and Mara Superior, owners of the Ferrin Gallery at Pinch Potter, 179 Main Street, Northampton, Mass., decided to hold an exhibition called ''A Tea Party'' to attract customers to their new shop at Christmas time.
Now, the owners report, collectors arrive at the gallery each year from all over the nation to attend what has become a much-awaited annual event.


Federal-Mogul Stake Is Sought by Nortek
LEAD: The Federal-Mogul Corporation, a leading maker of auto parts and industrial equipment, said today that Nortek Inc. had requested Federal approval to buy more than 25 percent of its stock.


Domtar Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Domtar Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
684,000,000
651,000,000
Net inc
27,000,000
35,000,000
Share earns
.28
.37
9mo sales
2,000,000,000
1,910,000,000
Net inc
88,000,000
123,000,000
Share earns
.92
1.32


Home Federal Savings Bank (Ga) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal Savings Bank (Ga)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
532,500
217,070
Per share
.30
.22
9mo net inc
962,331
1,185,352
Per share
.54
.70


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''You park your car, you run in, you get your anxiety released.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Pressure Grows for Better Weapon-Plant Safety
LEAD: A majority of the House Armed Services Committee, the Governor of Ohio and an anti-nuclear group took steps today to put pressure on the White House and the Energy Department to raise safety standards in the nuclear weapon industry.


Diagnostic Products Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagnostic Products Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
12,621,000
9,100,000
Net inc
3,171,000
2,407,000
Share earns
.51
.39
9mo sales
34,161,000
26,605,000
Net inc
9,059,000
6,675,000
Share earns
1.46
1.08


Earnings Up At Salomon
LEAD: Salomon Inc. announced Tuesday that it earned $65 million, or 37 cents a share, in the third quarter, more than double the $27 million, or 18 cents a share, earned in the 1987 quarter.


Versa Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Versa Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
11,708,000
11,890,000
Net inc
1,562,000
1,364,000
Share earns
.32
.28
6mo sales
23,778,000
23,641,000
Net inc
3,182,000
2,842,000
Share earns
.65
.59


Brooklyn Union Gas Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brooklyn Union Gas Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
125,922,000
132,927,000
Net loss
8,864,000
11,716,000
Yr rev
898,698,000
924,101,000
Net inc
61,728,000
59,106,000
Share earns
2.49
2.43


Primerica Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Primerica Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
990,500,000
1,035,800,000
Net inc
124,600,000
55,400,000
Share earns
2.37
.94
9mo rev
3,073,800,000
2,554,900,000
Net inc
229,300,000
170,800,000
Share earns
4.24
2.90


Wyoming National Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wyoming National Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,043,000
126,000
Per share
.52
.10
9mo net inc
2,435,000
b1,148,000
Per share
1.55
-
b-Net loss


Cumberland Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cumberland Federal Savings
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,812,000
1,594,000
Per share
.73
.66
9mo net inc
b5,065,000
c4,276,000
Per share
2.05
1.75
b-After an extraordinary loss of $142,000.
c-After a tax credit of $260,000.


Sweden Bars Asylum to 10, Citing New Soviet Changes
LEAD: Sweden has denied asylum to 10 Soviet defectors on the ground that political changes in the Soviet Union make it unlikely they will be punished when they return home, officials said today.


Sports of The Times; Hunter on the Hunted
LEAD: INSIDE a tree-shaded Tudor home on a sunny street, Fred Dryer, the television detective known as Hunter, was talking to his director about the next take.
In this scene the Los Angeles plainclothes policeman is checking out the vestibule where the dead body landed after being thrown downstairs.


Howell Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howell Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
60,927,000
50,007,000
Net loss
15,168,000
b490,000
Share earns
-
.11
9mo rev
188,801,000
126,564,000
Net loss
14,493,000
b1,274,000
Share earns
-
.27


M.A.C. Funds Sought To Renovate Schools
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Richard R. Green, searching for money for a large-scale renovation of New York City's schools, is asking Mayor Koch to give him funds originally intended to promote commercial development, largely in Queens and the Bronx, city officials say.


'Burn This' to Close
LEAD: ''Burn This,'' a drama by Lanford Wilson, will close after the evening performance on Saturday at the Plymouth Theater.
The play, directed by Marshall W. Mason and starring Scott Glenn, Lisa Emery, Lonny Price and Jonathan Hogan, will have run for 7 previews and 437 regular performances.


Reviews/Theater; A Restoration Tragedy
LEAD: The Restoration produced a wealth of plays that came to be known as the Comedy of Manners.
Playwrights like Congreve, Wycherley, Etherege and Farquhar satirized the sexual mores of the upper classes in farcical plots that featured gallants, bawds, country squires, licentious clerics and sexually starved young widows.


State by State; Bush's Growing Appeal Fails to Include Women
LEAD: Despite Vice President Bush's considerable success in building a lead over Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis in the last two months, his appeal remains much stronger among men than women, a ''gender gap'' that has long plagued him and other Republican candidates.


143 From Ferry Rescued in Philippine Typhoon
LEAD: More than 140 people who abandoned a ferryboat sunk by a typhoon swam or floated in lifeboats for hours in stormy seas to reach safety on small islands, officials said today.


Sterner Lighting Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterner Lighting Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
10,214,000
8,096,000
Net inc
683,000
510,000
Share earns
.44
.28
9mo sales
25,220,000
23,582,000
Net inc
1,222,000
1,433,000
Share earns
.78
.79


WASHINGTON TALK: Ethnic Organizations; Baltic Americans Watch the Soviets With High Hope but Deep Skepticism
LEAD: Baltic American organizations are rejoicing over the resurgence of nationalist sentiment sweeping their ancestral homelands.
Yet at the same time they continue to express profound skepticism about whether the Soviet Union will give up any power over the Baltic states - Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.


Harris Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harris Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
495,856,000
517,522,000
Net inc
20,584,000
b53,823,000
Share earns
.53
1.30
b-Includes a $35,985,000 gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


In Sharpeville, Black Rivals Contest Sluggish Vote
LEAD: Samuel Marx Kolisang waited patiently at a deserted polling station here today for voters to support him.


Murphy Oil Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Murphy Oil Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
381,829,000
427,237,000
Net inc
10,123,000
7,806,000
Share earns
.30
.24
9mo rev
1,109,631,000
1,129,093,000
Net inc
13,091,000
18,017,000
Share earns
.39
.54


When Paint Is Not Just A Cover-Up
LEAD: TO celebrate the current profusion of painted finishes in decorating, the New York School of Interior Design is opening an exhibition, ''Painted Surfaces,'' on Nov. 1, to run through Dec. 16.
Included are rare examples of trompe l'oeil, false marble and wood finishes, and stenciling from many leading practitioners.


File-Destroying Efforts Cited By Arms Fraud Investigators
LEAD: Federal agents investigating fraud and bribery in Pentagon weapons procurement intercepted a series of telephone conversations last June during which a Long Island businessman told an associate to get rid of what a prosecutor described as ''incriminating'' evidence, court papers unsealed yesterday stated.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Ties That Bind
LEAD: The range of other Soviet-American contacts seems to broaden each week.
Consider these events:


First Federal Savings Bank of Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank of Tennessee
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b339,296
247,242
Per share
.67
-
b-Included a gain of $95,470 from the sale of a portion of its Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. preferred stock.


DRUG MAKER STOPS ALL DISTRIBUTION OF ABORTION PILL
LEAD: In a move that stunned the proponents of a woman's right to choose an abortion, a French company that developed a revolutionary drug to induce abortion early in pregancy announced today that it was suspending distribution of the drug because of pressure from anti-abortion groups.


Dollar Drops on G.N.P. Data; Traders See a Further Slide
LEAD: The dollar declined sharply yesterday, falling against the yen to a level below where it stood before last summer's rally.
The dollar also fell against the mark and other currencies, as the downward trend of the last three weeks continued.


Newmont Mining Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmont Mining Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
137,246,000
94,346,000
Net loss
b8,788,000
cd21,351,000
Share earns
-
.32
9mo sales
342,623,000
262,589,000
Net inc
b124,991,000
d336,887,000
Share earns
1.86
5.31


Reviews/Theater; Shadow Over a 1950's Home: Incest
LEAD: Sharon and Billy are sister and brother, a couple of adolescents growing up in a California tract house in the 1950's; Dad lays pipe, Mom cooks meatloaf with onions.
One afternoon, Sharon and Billy, in swim suits, are fooling around and before you know it - well, you probably knew it before they did - there they are on the floor, and in the next scene she is pregnant and blaming it on somebody else and Dad (''Sharon was my little girl!


2 Partnerships In Joint Deal For Wickes
LEAD: Investment partnerships controlled by two of Manhattan's leading investment boutiques have reached agreement to acquire the Wickes Companies of Santa Monica, Calif., for $539 million in cash and stock, the diversified manufacturing and retailing company said today.
The assumption of Wickes's debt will raise the purchase price to $2.7 billion, it added.


Ex-Chief of Plaza Hotel To Head Clio Group
LEAD: Jeffrey Flowers, who was managing director of the Plaza Hotel in New York for four years before its recent sale to the Trump Organization, has been named president of the Clio Group of Companies, a Japanese enterprise that is on the prowl for hotel properties in the United States.


Ward's 5 Years at the Helm: Higher Goals Remain Elusive
LEAD: In his nearly five years as New York City Police Commissioner, Benjamin Ward has shaken up the department with a score of new programs, overcome deep resistance and suspicion and gained much respect from his 27,000-member force.


USAir Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USAir Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,482,884,000
790,777,000
Net inc
68,507,000
71,755,000
Share earns
1.58
1.66
9mo rev
4,224,061,000
1,875,314,000
Net inc
142,212,000
167,951,000
Share earns
3.28
4.82
Shares outst
43,293,000
35,799,000


Catholic Church Is Said to Settle Molestation Suit
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Washington made a secret out-of-court settlement with a 20-year-old man who sued the church for negligence after he was molested by a Catholic priest in the early 1980's, The Washington Post reported today.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. I recently learned that the roofing shingles on my 58-year-old house are made of asbestos and that roofers are reluctant to work on this type of roof because they are afraid of the toxic effects of asbestos.
Is this true, and if so, what recourse do I have when roof repairs are needed?
A.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; '50-Plussers' Are Studied by Grey
LEAD: Americans over 50 years old are to the late 1980's what yuppies were to the early 1980's: the object of insatiable hunger among marketers.


Seagate Posts a Loss
LEAD: Seagate Technology Inc., the largest maker of hard disk drives for personal computers, has reported a loss of $52.8 million for the quarter ended Sept. 30, compared with earnings of $14.8 million, or 30 cents a share, a year ago.
Revenues were $303.2 million, up 34.1 percent from $226.1 million in the period last year.


Seagate Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seagate Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
303,220,000
226,063,000
Net loss
52,807,000
b14,797,000
Share earns
-
.30
b-Net income


Union Exploration Partners Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Exploration Partners Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
137,200,000
165,400,000
Net inc
36,500,000
43,600,000
Share earns
.15
.18
9mo rev
479,700,000
513,100,000
Net inc
157,800,000
180,000,000
Share earns
.64
.76


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Airborne Freight Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airborne Freight Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
196,258,000
162,095,000
Net inc
2,221,000
418,000
Share earns
.32
.06
9mo rev
558,155,000
461,716,000
Net inc
b5,308,000
4,180,000
Share earns
.76
.65


Wicor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wicor Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
119,228,000
120,510,000
Net loss
3,582,000
3,383,000
9mo rev
541,695,000
488,575,000
Net inc
21,103,000
11,592,000
Share earns
3.04
1.54


Joint Deal For Nabisco Is Rejected
LEAD: The competition grew more intense yesterday in the battle for RJR Nabisco, as F. Ross Johnson, the company's chief executive, announced that he and his financial partner, Shearson Lehman Hutton, would not work with Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company on a combined buyout bid.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Jan Bell Marketing Inc., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., a supplier of jewelry products, appointed Edward Altman senior vice president for product development.


Kissinger Praises Bush as Ready for the Job
LEAD: Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger lavished praise today on Vice President Bush and his running mate, Senator Dan Quayle, while portraying a Dukakis Administration as ''an invitation to international turmoil.''


Forest Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forest Laboratories Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
24,233,000
21,620,000
Net inc
5,173,000
4,149,000
Share earns
.29
.23
6mo rev
46,681,000
41,023,000
Net inc
9,891,000
7,828,000
Share earns
.56
.45


Whither City Opera? Chairman of the Board Has Some Ideas, Too
LEAD: As the New York City Opera prepares for the departure early next year of Beverly Sills as general director, opera watchers looking for cues to the company's future are thinking not just about the beloved diva's successor, Christopher Keene, but also about the man who had the leading role in engaging him.


For Congress From New York
LEAD: Here are our recommendations in four contested races for Congressional seats. 15th District (Manhattan East Side): This ''silk stocking'' district has had the good fortune to be represented since 1978 by Bill Green, a moderate Republican.
Well placed on the House Appropriations Committee, he has repeatedly delivered for his district and New York, fighting successfully to preserve


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
141,498,000
-
Net inc
33,576,000
-
Share earns
.90
-
9mo rev
398,001,000
-
Net inc
83,139,000
-
Share earns
2.24
-
The company said the year-ago figures are not applicable; the partnership began operations Nov.


Du Pont de Nemours, E I, &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Du Pont de Nemours, E I, &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
7,985,000,000
7,585,000,000
Net inc
461,000,000
c452,000,000
Share earns
1.91
1.87
9mo sales
24,748,000,000
22,705,000,000
Net inc
b1,690,000,000
c1,347,000,000
Share earns
7.03
5.57


Dubai Journal; A Barometer of Gulf Riches: How Now the Dhow?
LEAD: Below the high-rises, where the boats called dhows depart from this emirate for the waters of the Persian Gulf, the merchant vessel Kalyampasa loaded up the other day with vacuum jugs and grain, tomatoes in tin cans and vegetable oil by the tub.


Path Cleared in Ice, Whales Swim Free
LEAD: Flying the Stars and Stripes and the Hammer and Sickle, a Soviet icebreaker today cleared a path to the open sea for two whales trapped in ice off Point Barrow since Oct 7.


When a Daughter Is a Witness Against Her Mother
LEAD: For the last week, a riveting family spectacle has unfolded each morning at the Federal Courthouse in Manhattan.


Cambrex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cambrex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
30,768,900
26,756,800
Net inc
1,822,600
1,539,700
Share earns
.32
.42
Shares outst
5,620,000
3,650,000
9mo rev
92,084,200
82,420,400
Net inc
6,125,200
b6,583,200
Share earns
1.09
1.92
Shares outst
5,611,000
3,301,000


In a Welfare Hotel, an Earnest Teacher and a Willing Class
LEAD: EVERY Friday afternoon at the Prince George Hotel, in a room that smells of apple juice and diapers, the women and their children sit on folding chairs and strain to hear.


USBancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USBancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
564,000
248,000
Per share
.11
-
9mo net inc
1,506,000
b4,233,000
Per share
.25
-
b-Net loss  The year-ago quarter's per share earnings was less than 1 cent after preferred dividend requirements of $293,250.


Sports People; Simmons Rejoins Cards
LEAD: Ted Simmons, a former All-Star catcher who set a St.
Louis Cardinal record by catching 1,440 games for the club, has returned to the team as director of player development.
The 39-year-old Simmons was hired yesterday to fill the vacancy created when Jim Riggleman was named the team's first-base coach.


Metro Matters; 8 Anxious Weeks As a Criminal End for a Victim
LEAD: After nearly eight weeks, Barbara Sparhawk's nightmarish encounter with the criminal justice system ended in just eight minutes yesterday.


U.S. Says People Give Kin $19 Billion a Year
LEAD: The Census Bureau reported today that nearly $19 billion changes hands annually in this country in family assistance, such as children aiding aging parents or parents helping children set up housekeeping.


Datascope Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datascope Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
24,700,000
21,300,000
Net inc
1,562,000
976,000
Share earns
.34
.22


Health; Personal Health
LEAD: A man who quenched his thirst in a seemingly pristine mountain stream in New England and a woman who did the same while hiking in the Colorado Rockies later developed debilitating diarrhea, abdominal cramps, flatulence, belching and fatigue.


LARGE SAVINGS UNIT WANTS TO SWITCH DEPOSIT INSURERS
LEAD: The nation's third-largest savings and loan association announced today that it wanted to leave the beleaguered Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation in favor of the much stronger insurer for commercial banks.


Review/Opera; New Principals in 'Tosca'
LEAD: There were two new principals in the New York City Opera's production of Puccini's ''Tosca'' on Sunday evening at the New York State Theater: Elizabeth Holleque in the title role, and Roger Roloff as Scarpia.


German Leader Says Soviets Vow To Free Political Prisoners in '88
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany said today that Soviet officials had assured him that ''all persons regarded in the West as political prisoners'' would be freed by the end of the year.


Washington Scientific Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Scientific Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 28
1988
1987
Sales
13,848,000
7,562,000
Net inc
693,000
534,000
Share earns
.28
.22
Yr sales
42,650,000
35,442,000
Net inc
b69,000
1,698,000
Share earns
.03
.69


Home Federal-Upper East Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal-Upper East Tennessee
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,296,000
2,231,000
Per share
.52
.50
9mo net inc
6,727,000
b6,192,000
Per share
1.51
1.40
b-Included a writeoff of FSLIC secondary reserve of $402,000.


The Editorial Notebook; Expressions of Death
LEAD: It's not surprising that George Bush finds it politically rewarding to favor the death penalty or that Congress feels obliged to write it into a new drug bill.
More than 70 percent of Americans support capital punishment.


2 Senators Undercut by Kean After Voting Against a Veto
LEAD: Immediately after the State Senate voted Monday to override Governor Kean's veto of a $175 million measure to help towns pay for solid-waste disposal, the Governor's office moved to rescind nominations it had submitted on behalf of two Republicans who joined the override.


Washington Talk: Briefing; 'Routine' Soviet Call
LEAD: This not a Red October.
Twenty-six years after the missile crisis, when American naval vessels blockaded Cuban waters and diverted Soviet ships from the area, the Russians are steaming toward Cuba again.


Union Texas Petroleum Holdngs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Texas Petroleum Holdngs (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
236,344,000
329,751,000
Net inc
b27,600,000
9,300,000
Share earns
.19
-
Shares outst
84,523,000
67,208,000
9mo rev
897,189,000
972,044,000
Net inc
94,498,000
43,385,000
Share earns
.70
.05
Shares outst
84,752,000
67,080,000


CK Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CK Federal Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
474,000
596,000
Per share
.46
-
Yr net inc
1,825,000
1,807,000
Per share
1.77
-
There are no per share earnings for the year-ago periods because the bank converted from mutual to stock ownership in July 1987.


New Generation of Blacks Drawn Less to Democrats
LEAD: A new generation of black voters, for whom the New Deal and even the civil rights legislation of the 1960's are only history lessons, appears less committed than older blacks are to the Democratic Party and its Presidential nominee, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.


Versatile Cassava Is Well Suited to Africa's Mixed-Crop System
LEAD: To the Editor:


Vote Shifts U.N. Council Toward Nonaligned
LEAD: Five new members were elected to the Security Council today, and diplomats said the changes may make the council more receptive to the views of nonaligned nations.


Sports People; Manager Search Begins
LEAD: The Chicago White Sox have begun their search for a manager to replace Jim Fregosi, who was dismissed earlier this month.
Larry Himes, the general manager of the team, began the search on Tuesday by talking to two major league coaches, Bill Robinson of the Mets and Gene Lamont of the Pittsburgh Pirates.


Dukakis Loses Appeal On Power Over Guard
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis, who attempted to use his power as Governor of Massachusetts to block a National Guard training mission in Central America, has lost an appeal challenging Federal authority over the Guard.


Dukakis Battles Image of Defeat At Rally in West
LEAD: In a meeting in Denver with Hispanic officials from 14 states and a speech in this depressed former steel town under the blazing Colorado sun, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis tried today to dispel the aura of defeat that has been dogging his Presidential campaign.


Santa Anita Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Anita Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,269,000
2,084,000
Net inc
964,000
b509,000
Share earns
.11
-
9mo rev
89,283,000
77,834,000
Net inc
10,296,000
b10,142,000
Share earns
1.21
-


Modern Controls Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Modern Controls Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,241,000
1,859,000
Net inc
447,000
346,000
Share earns
.21
.16
9mo sales
6,255,000
5,246,000
Net inc
1,223,000
927,000
Share earns
.58
.43


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -10:30 A.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Cynthia Ozick Reading
LEAD: Cynthia Ozick will read from her work on Monday at 8 P.M. at the Poetry Center of the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The reading, which is part of a series at the Poetry Center, is in place of one that was to have featured Isaac Bashevis Singer, who had to cancel because of illness.
Tickets are $12.


Report Finds Perils at Atom Plant Greater Than Energy Dept. Said
LEAD: The decision by the Energy Department to close part of the Rocky Flats nuclear weapon plant this month was based on far more extensive safety problems than the department publicly acknowledged at the time, according to a report by the General Accounting Office, the investigative and auditing arm of


Kroger Store Sales
LEAD: The Kroger Company announced that it is selling 21 stores in North Carolina and South Carolina to Bi-Lo Inc. for $34 million.
Kroger, a Cincinnati-based food retailer and supermarket operator, said the proceeds of the sale would be used to help finance the $4.6 billion restructuring the company is undertaking.


Wm Wrigley Jr Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wm Wrigley Jr Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
232,051,000
203,086,000
Net inc
23,024,000
19,793,000
Share earns
.57
.47
9mo sales
688,772,000
596,692,000
Net inc
73,653,000
57,255,000
Share earns
1.83
1.36


Who Will Undo the Catastrophic Surcharge?; A Tax Is a Tax Is a Tax
LEAD: To the Editor:


Muzafer Sherif, 82, Psychologist Who Studied Hostility of Groups
LEAD: Muzafer Sherif, a social psychologist who was the author of 17 books, died of a heart attack Oct. 16 at Fairbanks Memorial Hospital in Fairbanks, Alaska.
He was 82 years old and lived in Fairbanks.


Luther Lassiter, 69, Billiards Star Who Captured Six World Titles
LEAD: Luther (Wimpy) Lassiter, who won six world billiards championships, died Tuesday.
He was 69 years old.


Total Petroleum (North Amerca) Ltd (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total Petroleum (North Amerca) Ltd (A)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
487,322,000
486,140,000
Net inc
b39,271,000
1,312,000
Share earns
1.37
-
9mo rev
1,341,957,000
1,288,790,000
Net inc
33,102,000
c23,951,000
Share earns
1.15
-


A Giant Receiver Adds Some Muscle
LEAD: Last spring and summer, Stephen Baker went on a weight-training program and gained a pound, all the way up to 158.
He is 5 feet 8 inches and skinny, and people refuse to believe he plays pro football for the Giants.


Jefferies Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferies Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
31,199,000
32,321,000
Net inc
2,343,000
1,795,000
Share earns
.31
.23
9mo rev
108,378,000
108,258,000
Net inc
11,130,000
7,004,000
Share earns
1.50
.89


Metro Datelines; Upsala President Resigns From Post
LEAD: Dr.
David E. Schramm has resigned as president of Upsala College over differences on how to run the school, a college spokeswoman said yesterday.


Kerr-McGee Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kerr-McGee Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
660,000,000
694,000,000
Net inc
30,500,000
b18,800,000
Share earns
.63
.39
9mo sales
2,054,000,000
1,967,000,000
Net inc
76,600,000
b66,300,000
Share earns
1.58
1.37


Joseph B. Terbell, Executive, 82
LEAD: Joseph B. Terbell, a retired steel company executive and a former deputy housing commissioner for New York State, died of cardiac arrest Monday at his home in Fairfield, Conn.
He was 82 years old.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: SUCCESS in applying wallpaper depends greatly on choosing appropriately patterned paper and on arranging a layout of strips that minimizes mismatches in the pattern.
When choosing paper, a careful assessment of the walls and trim is necessary.
When determining a layout, special consideration must be given to choosing a strategic point in the room at which to start.


Review/Music; Soul From South African Townships
LEAD: The second half of a night of South African music at the Apollo theater on Saturday night started with Philip Tabane's group Malumbo.
Mr.
Tabane, a guitarist, gave the theater what it was looking for.
With his two band members, he tore the place up.


Pan Am Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pan Am Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,204,000,000
1,059,000,000
Net inc
67,400,000
63,400,000
Share earns
.47
.45
9mo rev
3,179,085,000
2,715,519,000
Net loss
21,000,000
19,800,000


Bethlehem Earnings Up Sharply
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, continuing its financial turnaround, said yesterday that its third-quarter earnings more than tripled, a result of higher steel demand and improved productivity.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Culbro Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Culbro Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
234,188,000
220,075,000
Net loss
b1,515,000
cd21,492,000
Share earns
-
5.01
9mo sales
707,543,000
654,617,000
Net inc
b5,508,000
d27,898,000
Share earns
1.28
6.51


A.&amp;P. Withdraws Bid for Delchamps
LEAD: The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company withdrew its merger and tender offers for Delchamps Inc., concluding the third attempt by A.&amp;P. to take over the supermarket chain, which is based in Mobile, Ala.
On Tuesday, the Delchamps board rejected A.&amp;P.'s offer of $32 a share, or $224 million.
The bid was sweetened from A.&amp;P.


Centel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
325,522,000
309,724,000
Net inc
b37,313,000
c39,173,000
Share earns
.89
.89
Shares outst
41,671,000
43,487,000
9mo rev
923,684,000
890,611,000
Net inc
b100,598,000
c106,511,000
Share earns
2.34
2.43


Southwest Airlines Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest Airlines Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
239,117,000
200,743,000
Net inc
26,586,000
20,432,000
Share earns
.85
.63
9mo rev
634,614,000
564,014,000
Net inc
41,879,000
11,233,000
Share earns
1.33
.35


Jets Strive To Fill Position
LEAD: The Jets may have lost a problem child when Mark Gastineau suddenly quit last week, but now they have another problem: replacing him.


Security Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Federal Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b498,496
266,097
Per share
.34
.18
b-Included a gain of $113,000 on the sale of investment securities.


Queens Housing Plan Combines Market-Rate and Cheaper Units
LEAD: The Koch administration yesterday unveiled a multimillion-dollar plan to build market-rate housing for as many as 10,000 families on long vacant city-owned land along the Rockaway peninsula in Queens.


Morgan Guaranty Yield Is 8.652%
LEAD: The Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, a unit of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, is offering $100 million of 8 5/8 percent notes due in 1990 at a price of 99.95 to yield 8.652 percent, through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


David Zelinka, 83, Ex-Maker of Coats And Women's Suits
LEAD: David Zelinka, a former producer of women's coats and suits and a chairman of the Fashion Institute of Technology, died of liver failure yesterday morning at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.


Questionable Question In the Oct. 13 Debate
LEAD: o the Editor:


Man Refuses Parentage Tests for Girl
LEAD: A 43-year-old roofing supply salesman said today that he would not allow tests on his 9-year-old daughter to determine whether she is really the child of a Pennsylvania couple.
The couple say there is a strong possibility that their baby and the salesman's baby were switched shortly after birth in a


'International Position' For Sanders Housewares
LEAD: D. F. Sanders, the housewares retailer, is going national.
In the works are three new stores planned to open in time for Christmas.
One of them, New York City's third Sanders store, is being completed in a two-story 3,000-square-foot town house next to the Place des Antiquaires at 127 East 57th Street.


Sports People; Surgery for Johnson
LEAD: Howard Johnson, the Mets infielder, will undergo arthroscopic surgery Saturday to repair a slight cartilage tear in his right shoulder.
Dr.
James Parkes, the Mets' team physician, will perform the operation, which is not considered to be major.
Johnson, who injured the shoulder at Houston in July, should be healthy well before spring training, according to the Mets.(


Midwest Financial Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midwest Financial Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,826,040
c4,190,937
Per share
.74
.93
9mo net inc
b13,146,501
c11,225,002
Per share
2.68
2.48
b-After a gain of $1,863,430 from a trust accounting change.


Growth Slowest in Nearly 2 Years For Drought-Hampered Economy
LEAD: Restrained by the drought and a worsening trade situation, economic growth slackened in the third quarter to an annual rate of 2.2 percent, the Commerce Department said today.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.24
8.26
6.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.41
7.45
5.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.52
7.56
5.88
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.67
8.70
8.77
30-YR.


Slayings in New York Heading for a Record High
LEAD: Murder and manslaughter accelerated in New York City in the summer, headed for a new record, according to Police Department statistics made public yesterday.


Paul Fitzpatrick, 60, Head of Bank on L.I.
LEAD: Paul J. Fitzpatrick, a banker and former supervisor of Smithtown, L.I., died of heart failure Sunday at St.
Charles Hospital in Port Jefferson, L.I.
He was 60 years old and lived in Hauppague, L.I.


Metal Resources Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metal Resources Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
63,619,000
29,757
Net inc
338,210
b14,541
Share earns
.13
-
6mo rev
96,892,524
43,609
Net inc
556,195
b41,359
Share earns
.21
-
b-Net loss


SOVIETS TO LAUNCH SHUTTLE SATURDAY
LEAD: The Soviet Union said today that it would launch its first space shuttle on an unmanned mission Saturday, after months of delays similar to those that plagued the maiden voyage of the United States' re-usable spacecraft.


Stormy TV Debate Fires Up Canadian Campaign
LEAD: An angry, finger-pointing confrontation on national television has brought new life to Canada's election campaign.


Questionable Question In the Oct. 13 Debate; A Presidential Reply
LEAD: To the Editor:


Boy, 15, Is Shot to Death on a Bronx Street
LEAD: A 15-year-old boy was shot to death on a Bronx street yesterday morning by a 14-year-old companion after an apparent dispute between the two boys, the police reported.


Lynch Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lynch Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
17,415,000
4,864,000
Net inc
345,000
b240,000
Share earns
.27
-
9mo rev
27,900,000
12,348,000
Net inc
840,000
184,000
Share earns
.66
.13
b-Net loss


Health: Medical Practice; What Physicians Most Dislike About Their Patients' Behavior
LEAD: A novel study has provided the first glimpse at what traits doctors find most provoking in their patients.


Lawyers for Marcos Request Change in Arraignment Site
LEAD: Lawyers for Ferdinand E. Marcos have asked that his arraignment on Federal racketeering charges be moved from New York to Honolulu, citing the poor health of the deposed President of the Philippines.


Audit Cites Faked Reports On Buildings
LEAD: Three New York City Buildings Department inspectors who were followed by auditors from the New York State Comptroller's office conducted only ''perfunctory inspections'' and falsified records of buildings they checked, according to an audit the Comptroller released yesterday.


Founders Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Founders Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
235,312
117,506
Per share
.33
.17
9mo net inc
602,339
305,345
Per share
.85
.47


Tucson Electric Power Co reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tucson Electric Power Co (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
536,902,000
451,190,000
Net inc
130,674,000
b133,032,000
Share earns
5.05
5.27
b-Includes a $9,332,000 gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Hard-Up Oxford Opens Fund-Raising Drive
LEAD: Prompted by cuts in Government spending for education, England's oldest university began a private fund-raising drive today to raise nearly $375 million for teaching positions, laboratories and endowment by 1993.


Sports People; An Eye Toward Japan
LEAD: Orel Hershiser, the most valuable player of the World Series, said yesterday that during an exhibition tour of Japan next month he will explore the possibility of playing a season there. ''I'll be a free agent in a year, and you never know what's going to happen,'' the Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher told reporters during his team's visit to the White House to received congratulations for winning the Series from President Reagan.


Campaign Trail; Boys on Bush's Bus Have a Long Day
LEAD: Given the Presidential polls, the Bush campaign should be riding high.


Milan Architect: From High Tech to High Tea
LEAD: MARIO BELLINI, the Italian architect who has had a hand in designing everything from computers for Olivetti to furniture for Cassina, has just introduced, for Rosenthal China, his version of the teapot.


First American Savings (Pa) F.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Savings (Pa) F.A.
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,419,543
1,952,004
Per share
.70
.57
9mo net inc
5,892,417
5,065,462
Per share
1.71
1.47


Public School Uniforms Make a City Hall Debut
LEAD: Mayor Koch presided at the first showing of New York City's new public school uniform yesterday, expressing the hope that the concept would spread throughout the city.


Numerica Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Numerica Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,005,000
1,258,000
Per share
.23
.29
9mo net inc
3,025,000
2,297,000
Per share
.68
.52


Cut in Payments Seen for Tunisia
LEAD: A United States bond offering totaling $196 million and arranged with banks in the United States in August will save Tunisia about $37 million in interest payments, according to its Finance Minister, Nouri Zorgati.


3 Subsidiaries At G.M. Post 10.6% Decline
LEAD: The three main non-automotive subsidiaries of the General Motors Corporation today reported combined earnings of $517.4 million for the third quarter, down 10.6 percent from $578.5 million in the period last year.


Muncie Indicted on Cocaine Charges
LEAD: Chuck Muncie, a former National Football League running back, was indicted by a Federal grand jury today on cocaine distribution charges.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Maize-Products Co., Stamford, Conn., said it had received several offers from parties interested in buying its building materials business.


Arthur E. Duram, Executive, 76
LEAD: Arthur E. Duram, president of the advertising firm of Fuller &amp; Smith &amp; Ross from 1966 until 1975, when he retired, died of bone cancer Tuesday in Norwalk (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 76 years old and lived in New Canaan, Conn.


S.I. Girl's Kidnapper Convicted
LEAD: A 44-year-old man described as a drifter was found guilty yesterday of kidnapping in the abduction and killing of a 12-year-old Staten Island girl with Down's syndrome.
The jury was to continue deliberations on a murder count.


Intermec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermec Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
28,018,000
20,145,000
Net inc
1,477,000
936,000
Share earns
.22
.15
6mo rev
52,330,000
38,575,000
Net inc
2,424,000
1,894,000
Share earns
.37
.30


April Subway Series
LEAD: The Mets and the Yankees, who last played each other in 1985, have scheduled a series of six exhibition games for next March in Florida and April in New York.


The Plant-Closing Law Reaches Into Wall St.
LEAD: When the political battle raged last summer over a plant-closing bill that required 60 days' notice of shutdowns and large layoffs, much of the debate centered on blue-collar jobs.
Few participants would have guessed that Wall Street bankers and brokers might be among the first people affected after the bill passed.


TV Notes
LEAD:  'Nighthawk' Protests


HWC Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HWC Distribution (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
32,757,000
23,788,000
Net inc
2,287,000
979,000
Share earns
.42
.19
6mo sales
62,233,000
43,875,000
Net inc
4,131,000
1,651,000
Share earns
.76
.34


Anheuser-Busch Companies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anheuser-Busch Companies Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,545,226,000
2,394,616,000
Net inc
226,503,000
195,225,000
Share earns
.78
.65
Shares outst
289,117,000
301,144,000
9mo sales
7,337,522,000
6,882,442,000
Net inc
590,371,000
505,100,000
Share earns
2.01
1.67
Shares outst
293,771,000
302,350,000


Shared Medical Systems Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shared Medical Systems Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
95,041,000
99,072,000
Net inc
b4,218,000
10,858,000
Share earns
.18
.43
9mo rev
283,279,000
291,647,000
Net inc
b23,298,000
34,369,000
Share earns
.98
1.36


Varity Ends Fruehauf Deal
LEAD: The Fruehauf Corporation said today that the Varity Corporation had pulled out of a merger agreement to which it had tentatively agreed three weeks ago.


First World Cheese Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First World Cheese Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
20,174,241
6,059,957
Net inc
400,112
b133,838
Share earns
.13
.05
9mo sales
50,921,559
14,993,716
Net inc
1,882,145
b345,097
Share earns
.36
.12


Iowa Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iowa Resources Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
110,341,000
102,517,000
Net inc
15,628,000
19,281,000
Share earns
.71
.87
9mo rev
262,390,000
265,160,000
Net inc
25,989,000
33,416,000
Share earns
1.18
1.50


Liz Claiborne Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liz Claiborne Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
317,660,000
303,862,000
Net inc
31,614,000
35,520,000
Share earns
.36
.41
9mo sales
893,988,000
814,908,000
Net inc
83,740,000
91,956,000
Share earns
.96
1.06


M-I Schottenstein Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* M-I Schottenstein Homes (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
56,947,000
44,163,000
Net inc
1,729,000
2,113,000
Share earns
.28
.35
9mo rev
136,341,000
104,043,000
Net inc
3,634,000
3,745,000
Share earns
.59
.62


10 Marines Die as 2 Copters Crash in Arizona
LEAD: Two Marine Corps helicopters crashed in the desert in a night training exercise Tuesday evening, killing all 10 men aboard, the military said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the New York State bribery conviction of Stanley Friedman, the former Bronx Democratic leader, described the status of Bernard G. Ehrlich, former commander of the state militia, incorrectly.
Mr.
Ehrlich was found not competent to stand trial with Mr.
Friedman in the state case.


Sukhreet Gabel Tells of Taping Of Her Mother
LEAD: Sukhreet Gabel acknowledged on the witness stand yesterday that she had never heard of anyone else doing what she did - secretly taping a conversation with her mother in a criminal investigation.


Georgia Teen-Age Suicides Studied
LEAD: The suicides of 14 Cobb County teen-agers in 25 months has triggered a study on teen-age suicide by the Centers for Disease Control and the county health department.


China Buys More Wheat
LEAD: Private exporters have sold an additional 400,000 metric tons of American wheat to China at subsidized prices, the Agriculture Department said on Tuesday.


First Mutual Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Mutual Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b16,781
348,629
Per share
.01
.29
9mo net inc
b784,150
1,052,890
Per share
.65
.89
b-After extraordinary losses of $285,188 for the quarter and $326,420 for the 9 months.


A Frenzied Pace, and the Task of Choosing for Baby Boomers


For Sari Designer, Tradition and Daring
LEAD: To the outsider's eye, an Indian sari is six yards of exquisitely woven cotton or silk.
To the Indian woman, it is a proud national symbol that has never been seriously challenged or undermined by Western dress.


Review/Concert; All-Brahms Program At Carnegie
LEAD: First-rate recitals by violin and piano duos probably have never been commonplace.
Even in a past generation when the fiddle fancier could pick and choose favorites from such big names as Heifetz, Elman, Milstein, Oistrakh, Menuhin, Grumiaux, Francescatti and Rabin, there was seldom any question about which partner dominated the performance.


Getting Help: A Tidy List
LEAD: FOLLOWING are some of the companies and interior designers who specialize in closets and closet accessories and work in the New York region.
Many offer a wide choice of systems and products, and some have showrooms for further information and ideas.


Sports People; Workout Barred
LEAD: Marty Denkin, a state boxing official, said yesterday that Sugar Ray Leonard, who was not allowed to spar on Tuesday because he did not hold a boxing license in California, had been told previously that he could not engage an opponent in the ring.
Leonard arrived on the West Coast Tuesday for a public workout to promote his Nov.


First Federal Savings (Montana) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings (Montana) (O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
515,191
382,435
Per share
.40
.30


Sysco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sysco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Sales
1,558,106,000
1,044,029,000
Net inc
26,113,000
22,136,000
Share earns
.58
.49


Health; Birth Experts Caution on Repeated Caesareans
LEAD: The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the nation's leading organization of childbirth specialists, released new guidelines today recommending that most women who have had a Caesarean delivery should try to have vaginal delivery in subsequent births.


Bonds Up Slightly in Sluggish Day
LEAD: The prices of Treasury notes and bonds inched higher in sluggish trading yesterday, as a report on economic conditions in the third quarter sent conflicting signals to market participants.


Burmese Rebels Press Government Attacks
LEAD: Burmese insurgents are now beginning to push into their country's interior from bases just inside the borders of Burma, and they are attacking Government troops, the official radio of Rangoon has reported.


Children's Problems In Cities Are Viewed By Mayors as Rising
LEAD: The problems of children in American cities have increased in the last five years despite programs to address drug abuse, child care, teen pregnancy and school dropouts, the United States Conference of Mayors said today.


Profits Drop at 2 Insurers
LEAD: Two leading property and casualty insurance companies, the Fireman's Fund Corporation and the Chubb Corporation, Tuesday reported lower quarterly results for the three months ended Sept. 30, compared with the corresponding period in 1987.


Occidental Petroleum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Occidental Petroleum Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,913,000,000
4,222,000,000
Net inc
b105,000,000
46,000,000
Share earns
.38
.20
9mo sales
14,133,000,000
12,707,000,000
Net inc
b295,000,000
c202,000,000
Share earns
1.23
.90


Greenspan Hints of Need To Curb Debt
LEAD: Citing ''massive increases'' in borrowing to finance multibillion-dollar corporate takeovers, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, asked the Senate today to consider changing the tax laws to discourage such borrowing.


World Series Champions Honored at the White House


Lawyer Told to Repay Aliens
LEAD: A lawyer who was accused of taking fees from more than 400 aliens seeking legal residency, and then failing to file their Federal amnesty applications, has been ordered to pay nearly $400,000 in damages.
Edward Triwush, whose law license was suspended by the Illinois Supreme Court earlier this year, was ordered Monday by Circuit Judge Anthony Scotillo to pay a total of $395,568 in damages to 417 aliens and 11 employers.


Air-Conditioner Falls, Killing a Pedestrian
LEAD: A man walking down East 23d Street was fatally injured yesterday when an air-conditioner slipped from the window of a building, plunged seven stories and struck him on the head.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page news analysis article yesterday about leveraged buyouts gave an incorrect title for F. Ross Johnson.
He is president and chief executive officer of RJR Nabisco.


New Football Beer Policy
LEAD: Giants Stadium will be a bit drier beginning Sunday when beer sales are cut off at the start of the third quarter instead of continuing until the end of football games, a stadium spokesman said today.


LIFE IN THE 30'S
LEAD: RIDING in the car, weaving through traffic, I told the boys the story of how I was hit by a car when I was 5 years old.
It's a pretty good story but a bad morality play.


George Dukakis, Michael S. Bush
LEAD: The prime reason Vice President Bush is running ahead of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis in the polls is that he has taken stands on a wide range of national issues that a majority of the American people support and believe in.
It's that simple.
If you don't believe this, let's try a game of ''what if.''


Botha Party Leads in Municipal Election
LEAD: The governing National Party appeared early today to have withstood a political challenge from the right-wing Conservative Party, which has campaigned on a promise to toughen up apartheid.


Campaign Trail; Child's Questions Source of Unease
LEAD: Dan Quayle was plainly a little tired yesterday in Florida, like virtually everyone else who has endured the campaign.
Instead of repeating his usual line, ''Say good night, Mike,'' the Republican Vice-Presidential candidate ended a speech before an audience here this morning with the words, ''And so, good night.


Reviews/Theater; John Kelly, Alone, as Anyone Else
LEAD: Sitting at his dressing table on stage, John Kelly bears a fleeting resemblance to Jean-Louis Barrault.
One would certainly not want to carry the comparison too far - for one thing, Mr.
Kelly is primarily a comic performer - but there is something in his gaunt look that suggests the French master.


Florida First Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida First Federal Savings
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b127,000
254,000
Per share
.07
.14
9mo net loss
889,000
c84,000
Per share
-
.04
b-Included a gain of $797,000 on the sale of FHLMC preferred stock.


For This Airline Passenger, Her Own Plane
LEAD: For airline passengers who may have been cramped, insulted, bumped from a flight or served cold food, here is a tale of a truly satisfied customer.


Arkla Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arkla Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
341,308,000
349,547,000
Net inc
4,645,000
b8,475,000
Share earns
.03
.07
9mo rev
1,454,513,000
1,408,716,000
Net inc
82,708,000
b17,318,000
Share earns
.91
.16


In a Tiny Storefront, Big Design Ideas Grow
LEAD: It is a small building on Kenmare Street in lower Manhattan - 85 feet long, but only 15 feet wide at one end and 3 feet wide at the other.
It is home to the Storefront for Art and Architecture, a nonprofit organization that is a gallery, meeting place and nexus between architects and artists and the people who give awards, grants and recognition.


Books of The Times; A Dan Jenkins Novel Full of the Taste of the 30's
LEAD:  Fast Copy  By Dan Jenkins  396 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Four Win Maria Moors Cabot Prize
LEAD: Four journalists - three from South America and one from the United States - have been awarded Columbia University's 1988 Maria Moors Cabot prizes, given annually to journalists from the Western Hemisphere in recognition of ''distinguished contributions to the advancement of inter-American understanding and freedom of information.


Middleby Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Middleby Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,900,000
7,088,000
Net inc
381,000
530,000
Share earns
.05
.07
9mo sales
25,005,000
22,110,000
Net inc
2,785,000
1,481,000
Share earns
.38
.20


Reagan Won't Sign Bill Aiding Whistleblowers
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he would not sign a bill aimed at protecting Federal workers who expose waste and mismanagement.
The bill will die because Congress has adjourned.


At High Point, a Revival for Everyone
LEAD: As High Point goes, so goes the nation.


Coastal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coastal Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,902,900,000
1,755,900,000
Net inc
9,200,000
11,700,000
Share earns
.12
.17
Shares outst
56,000,000
46,500,000
9mo rev
6,124,100,000
5,371,900,000
Net inc
86,300,000
78,100,000
Share earns
1.45
1.43
Shares outst
53,600,000
46,400,000


'E.T.,' Box-Office Champ, Sets Video Records
LEAD: With advance sales of more than 11 million cassettes, ''E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial,'' the top money-making movie ever, finally reaches video store shelves this week.


Ford Motor Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ford Motor Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
17,700,000,000
15,246,800,000
Net inc
856,000,000
703,200,000
Share earns
1.78
1.38
9mo sales
60,859,200,000
52,885,500,000
Net inc
4,142,300,000
3,693,000,000
Share earns
8.53
7.17


Market Place; Movie Companies Hot on Wall St.
LEAD: SOME of the strongest gainers in the stock market this year are the movie companies.


Reagan Backs Replacing Moscow Embassy
LEAD: President Reagan has decided that the United States should tear down its new Moscow embassy building, which is heavily penetrated by Soviet listening devices, and build a replacement, Administration officials said today.


For Bush, Culture Can Be a Sometime Thing
LEAD: Here are some things that you might not know about George Bush:


Hydraulic Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hydraulic Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
17,972,000
18,058,000
Net inc
2,854,000
3,103,000
Share earns
.60
.65
9mo rev
50,626,000
51,037,000
Net inc
6,711,000
7,439,000
Share earns
1.41
1.66


General Binding Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Binding Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
62,055,000
53,363,000
Net inc
3,603,000
2,490,000
Share earns
.33
.23
9mo sales
184,900,000
155,701,000
Net inc
11,806,000
7,088,000
Share earns
1.03
.66


Philips Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philips Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
245,059,000
186,776,000
Net inc
13,760,000
12,905,000
Share earns
.48
.45
6mo rev
470,327,000
360,113,000
Net inc
28,773,000
27,185,000
Share earns
1.00
.95


Election Isn't Over Just Yet
LEAD: Before conceding the 1988 Heisman Trophy to Troy Aikman, the fine U.C.L.A. quarterback, there are two things to consider.


Relational Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Relational Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
26,503,000
16,203,000
Net inc
1,540,000
816,000
Share earns
.12
.09
Shares outst
12,444,000
9,300,000


Newmont Gold Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmont Gold Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
108,283,000
68,037,000
Net inc
27,200,000
23,000,000
Share earns
.26
.22
9mo sales
260,457,000
192,920,000
Net inc
70,900,000
62,000,000
Share earns
.68
.60


Roe v. Wade's Future
LEAD: A heated if informal argument is going on within the Supreme Court right now about abortion law since the landmark Roe v.
Wade decision in 1973.


Bush Praises U.S. Economic Record
LEAD: Declaring that he wanted to ''cut through the demagoguery,'' Vice President Bush today disputed Michael S. Dukakis's contention that the United States has been losing economic ground under Republican leadership.


Review/Music; Percussive Creations
LEAD: Dary John Mizelle, a composer born in 1940, offered a retrospective of his works on Tuesday evening at Symphony Space, with the help of a 12-piece percussion ensemble called Essential Music and four soloists who played his inventive and original music with skill, devotion and, when the music allowed, warmth and charm.


6 U.S. Incumbents Favored to Win in Connecticut
LEAD: When a Republican, Christopher Shays of Stamford, won a special election to the House of Representatives 13 months ago to fill the seat left vacant by the death of Stewart B. McKinney of Westport, he inherited a high likelihood of re-election.


Bankeast Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankeast Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,674,000
1,783,000
Per share
.16
.17
9mo net inc
6,286,000
5,587,000
Per share
.59
.52


Russians Back in Marathon
LEAD: With perestroika on their lips, running on their minds and their eyes on the chance of winning some hard American currency, seven Soviet runners, the first to enter the New York City Marathon since 1982, proclaimed yesterday that the political barriers to Soviet athletic participation in the United


Campaign Trail; Mrs. Bentsen Shows Her Concern
LEAD: B. A. Bentsen, Senator Lloyd Bentsen's wife, has become concerned about the care and feeding of his staff and the Secret Service agents and journalists accompanying her husband as he campaigns for Vice President.
Not that they minded the usual processed turkey and American cheese on white bread slathered with mayo, but Mrs.


King World Productions Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* King World Productions Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
64,991,000
65,947,000
Net inc
13,049,000
12,060,000
Share earns
.51
.40
Shares outst
25,420,000
29,902,000
9mo rev
279,803,000
241,306,000
Net inc
60,731,000
33,981,000
Share earns
2.28
1.11
Shares outst
26,610,000
30,555,000


Bentsen to Move From Supporting Cast to Role With More TV Time
LEAD: Senator Lloyd Bentsen received word from Boston today that he was going to be given a more prominent role in the lagging Democratic national campaign in its final 13 days.


Enron Sets Layoffs
LEAD: About 250 employees of the Enron Corporation are being laid off as part of a reorganization that will combine positions in the corporate staff and natural gas pipeline group, the company said.
Enron's chairman, Kenneth L. Lay, cited intense competition for natural gas markets and low prices as the primary reasons for the cutbacks.


Saint Laurent: Sensible And Serene
LEAD: For a collection not designed to shake the foundations of fashion, Yves Saint Laurent received a standing ovation today, the last day of the spring and summer ready-to-wear showings here.


ESI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ESI Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
30,470,141
27,755,070
Net loss
273,453
c898,519
Share earns
-
.18
9mo rev
93,595,362
76,806,337
Net inc
b1,421,375
2,812,056
Share earns
.30
.57


Judge Dismisses Murder Charge For Nussbaum
LEAD: The murder charge against Hedda Nussbaum was dismissed yesterday at the request of Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, on the ground that she bore no responsibility for the death of Lisa Steinberg.


Daniel G. Redmond Jr., Publisher, 63
LEAD: Daniel G. Redmond Jr., president and publisher of Current History, a monthly journal on world affairs, died Tuesday of a heart attack while walking near his office in Philadelphia.
He was 63 years old and lived in the suburb of Gladwyne.


Mine Safety Appliances Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mine Safety Appliances Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
94,133,000
88,603,000
Net inc
5,735,000
3,030,000
Share earns
.87
.45
9mo sales
288,796,000
279,433,000
Net inc
16,404,000
6,298,000
Share earns
2.48
.94


GM Hughes Electronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GM Hughes Electronics Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,633,800,000
2,517,200,000
Net inc
142,400,000
134,000,000
Share earns
.45
.43
9mo rev
8,178,300,000
7,824,600,000
Net inc
521,000,000
412,800,000
Share earns
1.58
1.31


Illinois Power Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Power Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
391,961,000
347,735,000
Net inc
95,936,000
113,764,000
Share earns
1.21
1.54
9mo rev
996,497,000
927,163,000
Net inc
183,577,000
b248,933,000
Share earns
2.22
3.30


Scana Corp reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scana Corp (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,065,679,000
1,126,871,000
Net inc
115,521,000
134,345,000
Share earns
2.87
3.33


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Preserving The Value Of Brands
LEAD: THE annual meeting of the Association of National Advertisers was a desultory affair, with speakers skipping between subjects like schoolchildren on a hopscotch board.
But motif was apparent amid the disorder.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Free at Last  Two California gray whales, trapped by polar ice since Oct. 7, were freed when Soviet icebreakers helped clear a path to open water.
Page A16.
Local Voting in South Africa  The ruling party appeared to have withstood a political challenge from the far right in segregated local elections in which all races voted simultaneously for the first time.


Old and New Racist Groups Joining, Report Finds
LEAD: Neo-Nazi youths with shaved heads are joining forces with the Ku Klux Klan and other racist groups in an alliance that could rejuvenate the struggling white supremacy movement, a report released today by the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith says.


Speculation On Sears Move
LEAD: The stock of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company jumped $1 a share today, to $44.75, on speculation that the nation's largest retailer would announce a significant restructuring within the next four to eight weeks.


Net Doubles At Primerica
LEAD: The Primerica Corporation said today that its third-quarter earnings had more than doubled, largely beause of the sales of two subsidiaries and the redemption of some debentures.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Red Wings 4, Canadiens 2: Paul MacLean scored with 6 minutes 50 seconds remaining in the third period to snap a 2-2 tie last night and Detroit beat Montreal, 4-2, in Detroit.
After the Canadiens tied the score on Claude Lemieux's goal 3:30 into the final period, MacLean scored the game-winner after a muffed clearing pass by Patrick Roy, Montreal's goalie.


Civil War-Era Letter Is Sold
LEAD: A penciled message from Robert E. Lee to Ulysses S. Grant that begins ''I ask a cessation of hostilities,'' was bought for $220,000 yesterday morning by Malcolm Forbes, the magazine publisher, at Sotheby's.


Sun Exploration and Production Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Exploration and Production Co
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
357,000,000
412,000,000
Net loss
29,000,000
c80,000,000
9mo rev
1,131,000,000
1,198,000,000
Net loss
b307,000,000
c121,000,000
b-Includes a net charge of $260 million for a writedown of oil and gas properties.


New Hampshire Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Hampshire Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,452,000
3,232,000
Per share
.40
.52
9mo net inc
4,337,000
6,744,000
Per share
.70
1.09


Ex-Morgan Analyst Is Sentenced to 3-Year Prison Term
LEAD: Stephen Sui-Kuan Wang Jr., a former junior analyst with Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, was sentenced yesterday to three years in Federal prison for his part in an insider trading scheme that involved at least two other people.


Corrections Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corrections Corp of America (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,234,604
4,345,721
Net inc
101,057
b562,137
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
16,496,691
12,500,332
Net loss
510,579
1,294,505
b-Net loss


Hitler Considered Munich Pact a Blunder
LEAD: To the Editor:


Avnet Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avnet Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
491,500,000
441,100,000
Net inc
11,700,000
12,200,000
Share earns
.33
.34


Campaign Trail; Democrats Line Up For a Party Fight
LEAD: Some Democratic insiders believe that the best reason to elect Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts as President is to avoid the bloodbath that might engulf the party if he loses.
The first post-election fight will be over who should succeed Paul G. Kirk Jr. as chairman of the Democratic National Committee.


In Reversal, 3 Endorse Pact On Shoreham
LEAD: Three major opponents of the Shoreham nuclear power plant reversed themselves today and endorsed Governor Cuomo's plan to close Shoreham.
The move appeared to be the opening round of a series of compromises that will most likely lead to legislative approval of the accord.


F &amp; M National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* F &amp; M National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,985,000
1,997,000
Per share
.31
.31
9mo net inc
6,004,000
5,807,000
Per share
.95
.92


Linear Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linear Technology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Sales
14,856,000
11,065,000
Net inc
2,200,000
b2,135,000
Share earns
.13
.13
b-After a tax benefit of $715,000.


Witco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Witco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
402,662,000
368,796,000
Net inc
20,036,000
17,737,000
Share earns
.85
.75
9mo sales
1,201,864,000
1,059,216,000
Net inc
b71,542,000
50,280,000
Share earns
3.00
2.15


French Fashion Leaders Join AIDS Fight
LEAD: It was billed as a sober evening, but it turned into a brilliant one.


Jockeys May Settle Soon
LEAD: New York's striking jockeys picketed Aqueduct Race Track for a seventh straight racing day yesterday but said they were hopeful the strike would be over by Saturday.


Fixing Broken Zippers
LEAD: ''ANYTHING that zips, our motto is that we fix it,'' said Marvin Rosen, co-owner of Superior Leather Restorers.
The 58-year-old firm repairs zippers on dresses, leather jackets, duffle bags, trousers, ski parkas, handbags, coats, backpacks, briefcases, luggage, wallets, cosmetic cases - you name it; they even fix tent zippers.


Nucor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nucor Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
268,772,297
221,940,426
Net inc
17,032,749
12,696,400
Share earns
.80
.60
9mo sales
786,867,063
618,238,078
Net inc
53,081,048
37,466,575
Share earns
2.50
1.77


Critic's Notebook; The Writer's Enduring Struggle for Faith
LEAD: Earlier ages, secure in their faith, once produced works like ''The Divine Comedy,'' ''Paradise Lost'' and ''The Oresteia'' - works of religious artists who used their talent not to annotate the ways of men, but to ratify man's relationship to the everlasting.
With the dawning of more secular times, it seemed, art began to focus more insistently on the machinery of society, the world of love, money and work.


First Capital Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Capital Holdings (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
188,530,000
130,558,000
Net inc
14,124,000
9,469,000
Share earns
.55
.32
9mo rev
531,390,000
298,826,000
Net inc
36,366,000
26,662,000
Share earns
1.36
1.14


Bridge
LEAD: The problems of communication by the defenders in the play of the hand are far more complex than used to be thought, and many new ideas in this area have been generated in the last decade, particularly in North America and Scandinavia.


Metro Datelines; Court Spares Woman On Jersey Death Row
LEAD: The State Supreme Court ruled yesterday that the only woman on death row in New Jersey should not face capital punishment because the torture of her goddaughter did not directly lead to her death.


Who Will Undo the Catastrophic Surcharge?; More Premiums, Please
LEAD: To the Editor:


Exclusion of Jews as Jurors Is Seen
LEAD: A State Supreme Court Justice in Queens Tuesday accused a prosecutor in a drug case of systematically excluding jurors with Jewish surnames because of a notion they would be too liberal, and sympathetic to the defendant.
The prosecutor denied deliberately excluding Jews as jurors.
The unusual incident set off a series of exchanges that ended with the judge declaring a mistrial in front of the jury after the prosecutor refused to proceed because some jurors had been empanelled over his objections.


LAURA STEIN, AUTHOR, WED TO E. V. WOLSK, PRODUCER
LEAD: Laura Stein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Stein of Milford, Conn., and Eugene V. Wolsk, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Isidore Wolsk of New York, were married yesterday at their home in New York by Judge Franklin R. Weissberg of the New York State Court of Claims.


Justice O'Connor Goes Home
LEAD: Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the Supreme Court was released from Georgetown University hospital today, five days after undergoing surgery for breast cancer, a Court spokeswoman said.
The spokeswoman, Kathy Arberg, said Justice O'Connor, 58 years old, returned home after being discharged.


New Lithuania Cardinal Part of Nationalist Surge
LEAD: It was perfectly still in the small study except for the ticking of a large wooden clock as Vincentas Sladkevicius, the first Lithuanian Cardinal in 300 years, searched his memory, then a dictionary, for the right English word to describe the suppression of religion in the Soviet Union.


AMP Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMP Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
632,628,000
572,736,000
Net inc
72,371,000
62,782,000
Share earns
.67
.58
9mo sales
1,974,264,000
1,684,460,000
Net inc
234,013,000
179,432,000
Share earns
2.17
1.66


New Poll Shows Critical Groups On Bush's Side
LEAD: Vice President Bush led Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis 52 percent to 44 percent in the latest ABC News/Washington Post Poll, released yesterday.


Reviews/Music; 30 Years After a Debut
LEAD: Zenon Fishbein observed the 30th anniversary of his New York debut by repeating his original program at Merkin Concert Hall Sunday night.
It was a difficult collection of piano pieces -one to strain the resources of the debutant Mr.
Fishbein once was and the experienced player and teacher he is today.


Applied Biosystems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Biosystems (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
36,359,000
26,478,000
Net inc
4,415,000
2,963,000
Share earns
.32
.22


Prime Computer Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Computer Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 3
1988
1987
Revenue
391,374,000
236,183,000
Net inc
11,718,000
15,903,000
Share earns
.24
.32
Shares outst
48,478,000
49,461,000
9mo rev
1,163,472,000
693,942,000
Net inc
33,430,000
43,469,000
Share earns
.69
.88
Shares outst
48,387,000
49,143,000


Tenneco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tenneco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,025,000,000
2,775,000,000
Net inc
b7,000,000
c117,000,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
9,634,000,000
8,705,000,000
Net inc
b224,000,000
c42,000,000
Share earns
1.39
-





St Paul Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St Paul Cos (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
898,761,000
859,680,000
Net inc
b103,399,000
c97,413,000
Share earns
2.14
2.03
9mo rev
2,646,963,000
2,520,985,000
Net inc
b270,996,000
c293,716,000
Share earns
5.63
6.12


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Daimler-Benz A.G., Stuttgart, West Germany, has abandoned plans to produce light commercial vehicles with the Mitsubishi Motors Corp., Tokyo, in Europe.


Courts Expand the Rights of Unmarried Fathers
LEAD: The courts, which have been granting more parental rights to fathers, are expanding their definition of paternity to include unmarried fathers who have traditionally been locked out of their children's upbringing.


Modest Drug Proposal
LEAD: To the Editor:


ROSARIO REGISTERS SWIFT KNOCKOUT
LEAD: Edwin Rosario, smarting from a head butt in the fourth round against Juan Minaya, reacted swiftly.
Ten seconds later, he threw a right to the head of Minaya that left Minaya on the canvas for several minutes.


For Soviets, High Drama
LEAD: For the past several days in the Soviet Union, ''Save the Whales'' has been more than just a slogan.


Books of The Times; The Effect of English on the English
LEAD:  England, Their England  Commentaries on English Language and Literature  By Denis Donoghue  365 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Rap at the Amazon


Nalco Chemical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nalco Chemical Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
248,795,000
216,940,000
Net inc
26,857,000
20,321,000
Share earns
.69
.51
9mo sales
732,199,000
611,187,000
Net inc
77,877,000
58,208,000
Share earns
1.98
1.47


Saga of a Waste Cleanup: 12 Years and Counting
LEAD: For 12 years, the Environmental Protection Agency tried first to persuade and then to force the owners to clean up a chemical production plant that the agency rates as one of the most dangerous hazardous waste sites in the country.


Bridge
LEAD: The funniest deal in the World Team Olympiad, which ended Oct. 22 in Venice, was perhaps the one shown in the accompanying diagram.
It was played in the quarterfinal match between India and Greece, and everyone was amused except the Greeks.


Placer Dome Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Placer Dome Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
186,200,000
204,400,000
Net inc
b137,900,000
84,900,000
Share earns
.61
.39
Shares outst
230,800,000
219,200,000
9mo sales
591,000,000
603,100,000
Net inc
b215,000,000
184,600,000
Share earns
.96
.85
Shares outst
223,800,000
217,400,000


Sports People; Comings and Goings
LEAD: Jon Morris, the rookie center, was demoted by the Devils to their Utica farm team in the American Hockey League.
The Devils also announced that Steve Rooney, a left wing, would be out indefinitely with a strained left shoulder. . . .
John Treacy, the 1984 Olympic silver medalist in the marathon, will compete in the New York City Marathon on Nov.


Dukakis Staff Faulted as Too Insular
LEAD: Every campaign has a personality, and it often reflects the candidate's in one way or another.
So the Presidential campaign of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, like the man, has tended to be lawyerly, organization-minded, policy-oriented and very much a creature of Boston.


Mets Reward Johnson With a 3-Year Deal
LEAD: The Mets ended a year of suspense and speculation yesterday by announcing they had signed Dave Johnson as manager for three more years with an option for a fourth year, and saying, ''His record speaks for itself.''


Review/Film; Tea and Tragedy In Japan
LEAD: Don't be put off by the title. ''Gonza the Spearman'' is not an Eastern western.
Masahiro Shinoda's stately work, which opens the Public Theater's Autumn in Japan series today, has few duels and only a gout or two of blood.
Instead, it is filled with historical imagination, social comment and restrained passion, along with scene after elegantly composed scene of a culture that seems to have been paralyzed in a spare beauty.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a report by the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith on neo-Nazi youths misstated the length of a conference the league held on hate crimes.
It was one day, not five days.


Data General Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data General Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
341,500,000
332,300,000
Net loss
49,800,000
b24,600,000
Yr rev
1,364,700,000
1,274,300,000
Net loss
15,500,000
c123,700,000
Prior year includes a restructuring charge of $53,800,000.


Dukakis Nearly Cuts Lead in Half in Poll By NBC and Journal
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts has gained ground on Vice President Bush, according to the latest NBC News/Wall Street Journal Poll, but Mr.
Bush still leads his Democratic rival for the Presidency by 51 percent to 42 percent.


Angry Farmers Camp in New Delhi's Stately Core
LEAD: They began arriving Monday on tractors and hay wagons and buses garlanded with marigolds and flags: thousands, then tens of thousands, and finally several hundred thousand protesting farmers from breadbasket states close enough to the capital to feel the urban-rural gap widening.


American Precision Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Precision Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
12,696,000
9,078,000
Net inc
1,024,000
483,000
Share earns
.17
.08
9mo sales
37,522,000
26,871,000
Net inc
2,515,000
1,071,000
Share earns
.43
.18


Washington Talk: Administration Policy; As the Election Nears, Talk About Noriega Fades
LEAD: Last spring, in the aftermath of the Federal indictments accusing Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega of drug trafficking, the Reagan Administration vowed that the Panamanian military leader had to go.
But the American effort to topple him by applying intense diplomatic and economic pressures didn't work.


Federated Offering Is Being Revised
LEAD: Faced with disgruntled potential investors, the Campeau Corporation and its main investment banker, the First Boston Corporation, acknowledged that a $1.15 billion high-yield bond financing for Federated Department Stores, a Campeau subsidiary, is being restructured.


Riding Shotgun on Gorbachev's Glasnost Express: Aleksandr N. Yakovlev
LEAD: One day in 1959 a Russian exchange student named Aleksandr N. Yakovlev popped into a store on lower Broadway in New York to buy a briefcase.


Health Care Is Lacking in New York Schools That Need It Most
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A picture on Oct. 13, with an article about a Texas professor's attempt to make violins as great as those of the Italian masters, was published in error.
It showed Gaspard Duiffoprugcar, a 16th-century Bavarian viol maker, not the violin maker Antonio Stradivari.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Temporary Help Wanted
LEAD: In a departure from longstanding practice, the Office of Personnel Management wants to revise Federal hiring regulations so that Government agencies may call in temporary help in peak periods and emergencies.


Canadian Occidental Petroeum Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Occidental Petroeum Ltd
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
280,300,000
155,000,000
Net inc
b20,000,000
17,000,000
Share earns
.30
.26
9mo rev
595,100,000
447,600,000
Net inc
b50,400,000
43,100,000
Share earns
.76
.65


College Football Notebook; Garrett Signs Guide Princeton
LEAD: When Princeton lines up for its first offensive play at Palmer Stadium tomorrow, the destiny of the game and the Ivy League championship will seem to be in the hands of No. 17, Jason Garrett, quarterback and captain.


Addenda
LEAD: *
Sports Illustrated will raise its ad rates by 6.5 percent with its Jan. 9 issue, while circulation will stay at three million.


Chemical Issue Yields 10.235%
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation is offering $150 million of 10 1/8 percent subordinated notes due in 2000 at a price of 99.25 to yield 10.235 percent through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


Lacrosse Club Shifting to L.I.
LEAD: The Major Indoor Lacrosse League announced yesterday that the New York Saints, a team that played its league games during the 1987 and 1988 seasons at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., would move to Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, L.I., for the 1989 season.
Two expansion teams, the


Leakage Closes Nuclear Plant
LEAD: The Rancho Seco nuclear reactor plant, which supplies power for nearly a million people, shut down Tuesday because contaminated water was leaking from its cooling system.
No radioactive material was leaking to the outside, and the leakage was not dangerous, said Ron Scott, a spokesman for the Sacramento Municipal Utility District.


Boxing; Tyson and King Become Partners
LEAD: Mike Tyson has become Don King's promotional partner.


Shirley Temple: Celebrity or Generic Term?
LEAD: For more than 50 years the sweet pink Shirley Temple ''cocktail'' of lemon-lime soda and grenadine syrup topped with a maraschino cherry has been served in restaurants as a nonalcoholic treat for children.
It was invented in the 1930's at the Brown Derby restaurant in Hollywood and named in honor of the child star.


Court Allows Testing of Hair For Cocaine
LEAD: A New York State appeals court, in a split decision, has ruled that a Scarsdale woman seeking custody of her children in a divorce case must provide samples of her hair to determine whether she has stopped using cocaine, as she says she has.


Even the East Reflects The Western Heritage
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ciatti's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ciatti's Inc
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Sales
2,408,797
1,934,418
Net inc
80,317
b20,128
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Banta, George Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banta, George Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
152,458,000
76,850,000
Net inc
6,781,000
4,459,000
Share earns
.53
.38
Shares outst
12,704,985
11,753,565
9mo sales
377,644,000
229,738,000
Net inc
18,193,000
13,430,000
Share earns
1.47
1.15
Shares outst
12,341,389
11,728,244


Backers of Whistleblower Bill Upset
LEAD: Congressional leaders of both parties sharply attacked President Reagan and the Justice Department today over the President's decision to pocket veto legislation to protect Federal workers who expose fraud and corruption in Government.


Westinghouse Agrees to a Sale
LEAD: The Westinghouse Electric Corporation signed an agreement to sell its elevator and escalator business to Schindler Holding A.G. of Switzerland.
The deal, for which terms were not disclosed, must be approved by the Federal Trade Commission.


Executive Succession Completed at Crossland
LEAD: Maurice L. Reissman started his banking career in the subway and worked his way up to become president and chief executive of Crossland Savings, the nation's 11th-largest savings institution, and yesterday, he was named to the additional post of chairman.


After-Midnight Excursions for Night Owls
LEAD: FOR New York night owls, the hours after midnight are not a somnolent period between dusk and daybreak.
Instead, this borderline between days represents the gateway to an exotic landscape filled with smoky jazz clubs and brash discotheques, stylish restaurants and quirky all-night haunts.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  EUROPEAN MEMORIES


First Western Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Western Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,805,000
2,538,000
Share earns
.29
.40
9mo net inc
6,284,000
b3,754,000
Share earns
.99
.59
b-After a charge of $146,000 from an FHLB advance prepayment penalty.


Weicker Still Confident, Despite Poll


Esselte Business Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Esselte Business Systems Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
319,937,000
289,529,000
Net inc
10,116,000
b11,198,000
Share earns
.49
.54
9mo sales
1,022,963,000
879,606,000
Net inc
40,453,000
b38,724,000
Share earns
1.97
1.88


Consolidated-Bathurst Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated-Bathurst Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
595,500,000
557,500,000
Net inc
61,600,000
b74,400,000
Share earns
.59
.69
9mo sales
1,790,000,000
1,660,000,000
Net inc
174,600,000
b150,800,000
Share earns
1.64
1.36


Bonn Arrests 13 Palestinians
LEAD: The authorities have arrested 13 Palestinians suspected of preparing a terrorist attack, a prosecutor said today.


China Explains Policy Shift Retightening Economic Grip
LEAD: Zhao Ziyang, China's Communist Party chief, has issued a long and vigorous explanation of the Government's economic retrenchment policy, revealing the alarm with which China's leaders view the country's apparent economic disorder.


Dining Before Dawn: Bistro Fare and Pasta
LEAD: The city that never sleeps is also the city that never stops munching.
Yet finding a good place to dine - not just to snack - after midnight takes some research.
Most restaurant kitchens close between 11 and midnight.
To my mind, nothing ruins a meal more than seeing waiters flip chairs onto tables and cleaning crews mopping up.


A Justice Holds Hearing on Issue Of Jews on Jury
LEAD: In an unusual proceeding, a Queens prosecutor accused by a judge of excluding prospective jurors with Jewish surnames was called back to court yesterday by the judge to explain himself.


Commercial Federal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial Federal Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,003,000
2,555,000
Share earns
.43
.41


People
LEAD: *
Edward S. Littleford and Colleen Butler Gowl have been promoted to senior executive vice president, executive creative director, and executive vice president, group management director, respectively, at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York.


International Flavors &amp; Frarances Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Flavors &amp; Frarances Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
200,064,000
187,749,000
Net inc
30,716,000
27,139,000
Share earns
.81
.72
9mo sales
658,271,000
566,571,000
Net inc
105,442,000
85,703,000
Share earns
2.78
2.27


Andover Controls Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 18
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andover Controls Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 18
1988
1987
Sales
5,775,793
5,007,698
Net inc
729,787
619,282
Share earns
.21
.17


Adia Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adia Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
132,600,000
102,600,000
Net inc
5,000,000
3,400,000
Share earns
.41
.30
Shares outst
12,212,000
11,196,000
9mo rev
369,800,000
281,200,000
Net inc
13,700,000
8,400,000
Share earns
1.19
.84
Shares outst
11,555,000
9,964,000


Reagan Calls Vote Against Democrats Good Negative Campaigning
LEAD: President Reagan, using a final swing through the Midwest and the Far West to implore voters to turn out on Election Day, asserted today that ''the right kind of negative campaigning'' is a vote cast against the Democratic ticket.


Airtran Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airtran Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,488,000
7,411,000
Net inc
601,000
501,000
Share earns
.19
.16
6mo rev
16,420,000
14,580,000
Net inc
1,148,000
1,045,000
Share earns
.37
.34


Words of a Gorbachev Aide: 'We Make Mistakes' and 'We Correct Them'
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an interview on Wednesday with Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, Mikhail S. Gorbachev's closest Kremlin associate, as translated by The New York Times.
The interviewer's questions are included in some instances.
Stalinism


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-14


Hecla Mining Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hecla Mining Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
29,789,000
30,098,000
Net inc
3,370,000
9,612,000
Share earns
.12
.35
9mo rev
78,844,000
63,894,000
Net inc
11,336,000
5,733,000
Share earns
.42
.21


Under All That Mud in New Jersey
LEAD: The race between Frank Lautenberg and Pete Dawkins has frequently looked more like mud-wrestling than a contest for the U.S.
Senate from New Jersey.
Wipe away the mud and neither candidate is as hideous as his opponent suggests.
Mr.
Dawkins is a man of charm and impressive accomplishments - almost a Jack Armstrong come to life.


Mcorp's Chief Talks of Bankruptcy
LEAD: In a daring challenge to bank regulators, the chief executive of Mcorp has said that his company, the second-largest banking organization in Texas, runs a ''high probability'' of entering bankruptcy next month.


Universal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
692,016,000
536,272,000
Net inc
14,012,000
b13,519,000
Share earns
.83
.79
b-Included a $2.4 million non-recurring gain from the sale of land.


Watching Weicker, Ever Confident, on the Stump
LEAD: The rock-and-roll radio station marked the eighth stop of a nine-stop day.
Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr. taped an interview and chatted his way around the studios.
Advance men wrapped up a touch football game on the pavement behind the building.
The campaign bus, a long white Winnebago-like beast nicknamed Grapefruit


Campaign Trail; TV as the Wheel Of Dukakis Fortunes
LEAD: H-e-e-e-e-e-r-e's . . . Michael.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  Second Helpings


Leggett &amp; Platt Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leggett &amp; Platt Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
217,374,000
175,374,000
Net inc
8,119,000
9,995,000
Share earns
.47
.58
9mo sales
598,586,000
508,166,000
Net inc
28,400,000
29,526,000
Share earns
1.66
1.71


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M.


Dukakis Attacks Bush on Worker Safety, Taxes and Campaign Ads
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis, scornfully described by the Republicans as ''the iceman,'' is turning up the heat.


Valero Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valero Energy Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
180,800,000
168,500,000
Net inc
7,500,000
b36,600,000
Share earns
.13
-
9mo net inc
20,700,000
c32,800,000
Share earns
.32
1.01
b-Net loss and after a loss of $13.1 million from discontinued operations and an extraordinary loss of $11.6 million.


Air Force Contract To McDonnell Unit
LEAD: A unit of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation has been awarded a $421 million Air Force contract to train air crews for its new C-17 plane.
The 15-year contract was awarded to McDonnell Douglas Training Systems Inc. of Bedford, Tex.


American Science &amp; Engineerng Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Science &amp; Engineerng Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 28
1988
1987
Revenue
6,074,000
4,170,000
Net inc
b94,000
c709,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
11,485,000
8,752,000
Net inc
b198,000
c894,000
Share earns
.05
-


Soccer; 14 Players Sign With U.S. Federation
LEAD: The United States Soccer Federation, the national governing body for the sport, took the first step yesterday toward getting the best players in the country to make the United States national team their first priority.


Man Arrested in Drug Officer's Death
LEAD: The man suspected of firing the shots that killed an undercover New York City narcotics officer last week was arrested yesterday in a shopping mall in San Juan, P. R., after a nine-day manhunt, the police and the F.B.I. announced.


Jets Take a Course From an Ex-Steeler
LEAD: The Jets' long-winded professor, Robin Cole, was teaching today, not only giving classes in X's and O's, but also lecturing on how to avoid the Pittsburgh Steelers' trap plays.


Indictment Is Elusive in a 1986 Slaying
LEAD: One afternoon last April, a headless body turned up on the banks of the Hudson River at the northern tip of Manhattan.
Four months later, medical examiners identified it as that of Rita Fioretti, a 35-year-old mother of two who mysteriously disappeared in the summer of 1986 from her home on City Island.


Beazer Expects Higher Earnings
LEAD: Beazer P.L.C., the British home builder that acquired the Koppers Company in June, said it expected this year's pretax earnings to rise 20 percent.
Brian C. Beazer, who was in New York to meet with securities analysts, said the company's internal projections indicated a pretax profit in the 1989 fiscal year of about $220 million, compared with a pretax profit of $180.5 million a year ago.


Losing Feeling


Horse Racing Notebook; Signs of Settlement In Jockeys' Strike
LEAD: You can't help feeling that a labor dispute is nearing its end when the strikers start passing around their picket signs like high school yearbooks, asking one another for autographs.


Let Soviet Bloc Into the Western Alliances
LEAD: To the Editor:


Export Funding In Note Offering
LEAD: The Private Export Funding Corporation is offering $100 million of 9.10 percent secured notes due in 1998 at a price of 99.966 to yield 9.105 percent through underwriters led by Citibank.


Delta Air Lines Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delta Air Lines Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,881,593,000
1,631,843,000
Net inc
99,951,000
59,106,000
Share earns
2.03
1.22
9mo rev
5,465,000,000
4,651,000,000
Net inc
259,353,000
144,303,000
Share earns
5.30
2.97


Corroon &amp; Black Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corroon &amp; Black Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
111,671,000
105,346,000
Net inc
12,569,000
14,982,000
Share earns
.75
.77
Shares outst
16,862,000
19,427,000
9mo rev
318,265,000
301,504,000
Net inc
b107,900,000
c38,134,000
Share earns
6.29
1.98
Shares outst
17,145,000
19,259,000


Delphi Information Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delphi Information Systems Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,659,000
4,895,000
Net inc
711,000
b102,000
Share earns
.16
-
6mo rev
10,006,000
10,111,000
Net inc
409,000
b81,000
Share earns
.09
-


Bankers Defend Buyout Loans but Investors Fret; Lenders Calculate Chance of Recession
LEAD: Banking experts said yesterday that fears about excessive bank lending to companies undertaking leveraged buyouts were overblown.
Lenders have not only built recession assumptions into their loan decisions but have also avoided over-concentration by distributing their loans widely through the industry, the bankers and industry analysts maintained.


Iraq, to Spur Talks, Says It May Develop New Port
LEAD: A senior Iraqi official says his Government will develop a new port on the Persian Gulf if Iran continues to reject its proposals for reopening a blocked waterway when gulf peace talks resume in Geneva next week.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Beau Geste


Italy Discounting a Lebanese as Link to Hostages
LEAD: Police investigators said today that they were convinced that photographs and letters that a Lebanese woman tried to bring furtively into Italy last week had nothing do with a genuine attempt to free Americans held hostage in Lebanon.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Common Stock


Sports People; Leonard a Free Agent
LEAD: Jeffrey Leonard of Milwaukee filed for free agency yesterday.
This year Leonard, an outfielder, had 10 home runs and a batting average of .242.
He just completed a four-year contract that brought him $3,775,000.
Other players filing yesterday were Cecilio Guante of Texas, Tim Laudner of Minnesota, Willie Upshaw and Terry Francona of Cleveland, Ron Oester of Cincinnati and Jim Acker of Atlanta.


Pennzoil Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennzoil Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
616,904,000
449,669,000
Net inc
39,348,000
4,656,000
Share earns
.93
.02
Shares outst
38,054,000
41,545,000
9mo rev
1,649,089,000
1,337,629,000
Net inc
b1,439,364,000
26,374,000
Share earns
36.07
.35
Shares outst
39,581,000
41,508,000


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  G.M. reported a 5.8 percent rise in profits for the third quarter, from the comparable period a year earlier, while Chrysler reported a 54 percent drop in earnings for the period.
G.M.'s gain is far more striking than it appears, because last year's figure was inflated by an accounting change.


2 Freed After Being Held Hostage in Newark Prison


AMCA International Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMCA International Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
394,656,000
290,171,000
Net inc
10,119,000
4,959,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
1,030,000,000
800,457,000
Net inc
8,702,000
b9,390,000
b-Net loss


Bic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bic Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
73,252,000
74,404,000
Net inc
6,415,000
7,018,000
Share earns
.53
.58
9mo sales
235,670,000
230,308,000
Net inc
b26,372,000
22,297,000
Share earns
2.18
1.84


Review/Film; Art Blakey's Pep Talk, With Music
LEAD: ''The bandstand is the only place I got to go in this world,'' says the drummer Art Blakey. ''If I don't get there, I'm dead.'' He's giving a new band of Jazz Messengers a pep talk, alternately fatherly and hard-nosed, in one of the most telling sequences of ''Art Blakey: The Jazz Messenger,'' a documentary that has its New York premiere tonight and tomorrow at Film Forum 2 as part of its Jazz Film


National Healthcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Healthcorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
28,194,000
28,685,000
Net inc
2,853,000
2,460,000
Share earns
.41
.36
9mo rev
84,797,000
81,927,000
Net inc
8,883,000
7,782,000
Share earns
1.29
1.14


Sports People; Canseco Weds
LEAD: Jose Canseco of the Oakland Athletics, who had an uncharacteristically quiet World Series offensively, was wed quietly in Coral Gables, Fla., Tuesday afternoon.
Canseco and Esther Haddad of Miami were married in a brief civil ceremony on the second floor of the Coral Gables police station, said Louis Tomeo, the clerk who performed the ceremony.


Reports of Illegal Construction Have Doubled
LEAD: Reports of illegal construction have doubled in the three days since a building in midtown Manhattan collapsed in a hail of concrete and glass, the New York City Buildings Commissioner said yesterday.


Sara Lee Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sara Lee Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Sales
2,750,100,000
2,398,900,000
Net inc
75,600,000
61,900,000
Share earns
.65
.54


2 Islanders Are Injured in a Costly Loss
LEAD: The Islanders didn't want to share the blame tonight after suffering through a 5-2 browbeating by the Flyers; each wanted to claim it for his own.


Economic Scene; Debt in Buyouts Causing Anxiety
LEAD: THE multibillion-dollar bids to take over RJR Nabisco, Kraft, Pillsbury and other companies have raised anxieties that the heavily debt-financed takeover wave could endanger the solvency of American corporations and the stability of the economy. ''The whole business and financial system is highly leveraged,'' said James J.


CVN Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CVN Cos (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Net loss
2,914,000
b2,793,000
Share earns
-
.15
Yr net inc
11,416,000
c1,121,000
Share earns
.65
-
b-Net income  c-Net loss  Year-ago quarter and year results include an investment gain of $1.3 million, or 7 cents a share.


Sports People; Shoemaker to Retire
LEAD: Bill Shoemaker, thoroughbred racing's most successful jockey, says he will retire at the end of 1989. ''It's time,'' said Shoemaker, who is 57 years old and in his 40th year of riding. ''One more year is enough.
I don't want to be a hanger-on.'' Shoemaker told the Los Angeles Daily News on Wednesday that he was laying the groundwork for a series of appearances at tracks around the world in his final year.


Our Towns; What Next? Linus Hauled Off In Handcuffs?
LEAD: Now hear this.
Now hear this, all juveniles 18 years old and younger in this pleasant North Shore village.
On Halloween eve and Halloween, Oct. 30th and Oct. 31st, between the hours of 7 P.M. and 6 A.M., you will be outlawed from all public places and private property in the village, except your own house or a friend's, unless you are accompanied by your mom or dad, or have a permission slip signed by your mom or dad.


Premark International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premark International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
565,200,000
531,000,000
Net inc
19,000,000
13,600,000
Share earns
.55
.40
9mo sales
1,745,800,000
1,575,400,000
Net inc
b73,400,000
44,900,000
Share earns
2.12
1.31


Sonat Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonat Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
267,899,000
249,978,000
Net inc
18,048,000
c10,463,000
Share earns
.44
.26
9mo rev
1,029,077,000
1,071,658,000
Net inc
b86,137,000
c84,653,000
Share earns
2.12
2.09


Candidates 'Press the Flesh'    While Mr. Bush says he is still concentrating on the election, his staff is talking about possible Cabinet members.   Some Democrats say Mr. Dukakis's campaign suffers for its insularity; many aides are from Massachusetts.    Articles, D24 and D25. (NYT/Jim Wilson; Paul Hosefros)


McDonnell Douglas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonnell Douglas Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,719,600,000
3,226,000,000
Net inc
83,500,000
80,300,000
Share earns
2.18
1.98
9mo rev
10,440,900,000
9,795,500,000
Net inc
205,100,000
220,400,000
Share earns
5.34
5.43


Eugene Rosenfeld, Administrator, 71
LEAD: Dr.
Eugene D. Rosenfeld, a former executive director of Long Island Jewish Hospital, died of a heart attack Tuesday at the University of Arizona Medical Center in Tucson.
He was 71 years old and had lived in Manhattan and Montauk, L.I., before retiring to Green Valley, Ariz., in 1985.


Morrell Fine Is Expected
LEAD: The Occupational Safety and Health Administration is expected to impose a substantial fine today on John Morrell &amp; Company, the Cincinnati-based meatpacking concern.


Vista Chemical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vista Chemical Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
197,631,000
166,561,000
Net inc
b25,412,000
c39,224,000
Share earns
1.53
-
Yr sales
781,351,000
608,887,000
Net inc
b113,111,000
c3,696,000
Share earns
6.48
-


Bronx Leukemia Complaints Are Described as Unfounded
LEAD: Health Commissioner Stephen C. Joseph said yesterday that a study had failed to find an unusual incidence of childhood leukemia in the northeastern Bronx, despite the concerns of a group of residents.


UAL Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UAL Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,409,049,000
2,262,868,000
Net inc
402,407,000
c82,332,000
Share earns
18.68
1.41
Shares outst
21,540,000
58,362,000
9mo rev
6,751,641,000
6,191,847,000
Net inc
b1,103,431,000
c125,174,000
Share earns
34.35
2.26
Shares outst
32,117,000
55,319,000


Utility Default Trial
LEAD: Attorneys in the Washington Public Power Supply System securities fraud trial are negotiating a possible settlement of $200 million or more that could involve the 15 remaining utility defendants, several people in the case said today.
United States District Court District Judge William Browning recessed the trial in Tucson, Ariz., until next Wednesday, saying lawyers who had requested the break ''may be productive in shortening the trial.


Campaign Trail; The No. 2 Man Gets A Great Big Hand
LEAD: The normally taciturn Lloyd Bentsen grinned with delight and spoke with exuberance.
The Secret Service was nervous.
The Bentsen entourage was amazed.


On Stage
LEAD:  Pop to Stage


Alloy Computer Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alloy Computer Products (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,689,000
11,019,000
Net inc
b457,000
490,000
Share earns
.10
.09
9mo sales
30,242,000
33,908,000
Net loss
2,464,000
c2,092,000
Share earns
-
.44
Shares outst
4,704,000
4,742,000


Income Up At Delta And UAL
LEAD: The parent companies of United Airlines and Delta Air Lines reported sharply higher third-quarter earnings yesterday, mainly because of higher traffic and the higher fares that the industry has been able to put into effect in the past year.


INSIDE
LEAD:  South African Vote Results  The ruling party kept control of most major cities but lost to the far right elsewhere in the first nationwide local elections for all races.
Page A6.
Mets Reward Johnson  Dave Johnson, whose status as manager beyond 1988 was in question all season, signed a three-year contract with the Mets.


Campaign Trail; The Way We Were Is The Way It Is
LEAD: Is the Bush campaign afraid of Barbra Streisand?


Harley-Davidson Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harley-Davidson Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
181,515,000
170,473,000
Net inc
b5,030,000
c4,112,000
Share earns
.58
.60
Shares outst
8,635,000
6,910,000
9mo sales
559,823,000
518,331,000
Net inc
b19,123,000
d16,334,000
Share earns
2.48
2.57
Shares outst
7,712,000
6,349,000


Reagan Decides to Raze New Moscow Embassy
LEAD: President Reagan said today that the United States had no option but to raze the new American Embassy office building in Moscow, which has been riddled with Soviet eavesdropping devices, and to put up a new building in its place.


Kemper Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kemper Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b45,348,000
c57,945,000
Share earns
.78
.94
9mo net inc
b154,316,000
c206,651,000
Share earns
2.63
3.34
b-Includes realized investment gains of $4,524,000 and $9,343,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Shawmut National Corp., Hartford, a bank holding company with a $13 million account, to Ketchum/Hicks &amp; Greist, a subsidiary of Ketchum Communications.


Review/Ballet; The Joffrey, In a 'Lost' Balanchine
LEAD: The Joffrey Ballet opened a three-week repertory season Wednesday night on a new note and with a revival of ''Cotillon,'' a so-called lost ballet by George Balanchine.


Acxiom Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acxiom Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
18,043,000
14,837,000
Net inc
1,298,000
806,000
Share earns
.27
.19
6mo rev
34,194,000
26,265,000
Net inc
2,405,000
1,589,000
Share earns
.51
.38


BUSH IS CRITICAL OF A DUKAKIS AD
LEAD: Vice President Bush accused Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis today of ''trying to scare the American people by putting Japanese flags'' in his television commercials.
He said the right way to gain world markets for United States exports is to open them, not shrink from competition.


Enron Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enron Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,193,000,000
1,461,000,000
Net loss
b16,800,000
c98,100,000
9mo rev
4,247,000,000
4,473,000,000
Net inc
b85,800,000
cd32,500,000
Share earns
1.20
-
b-After extraordinary charges of $3.2 million for the quarter and $18.5 million for the 9 months.


Comptek Research reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comptek Research (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
12,203,000
10,542,000
Net inc
232,000
373,000
Share earns
.10
.17
6mo sales
24,237,000
20,597,000
Net inc
507,000
b783,000
Share earns
.23
.36


Holder Sues Lotus On Product Delay
LEAD: The Lotus Development Corporation is being sued on charges of securities fraud involving delays in an upgraded version of its Lotus 1-2-3 speadsheet program.
The suit contends that Lotus and two directors ''disseminated false and misleading information'' about the delivery of the Release 3 product.


Maker Says Pressures Could Revive Abortion Pill
LEAD: Officials from the French company that suspended distribution of a new drug that induces abortion early in pregnancy said today that they might reverse that decision if the pressures against the drug die down.


Review/Film; How a Star Was Born And What Produced Her
LEAD: The moment of triumph depicted at the end of Kon Ichikawa's ''Film Actress,'' which opens today at the Carnegie Screening Room, isn't the sort of pinnacle Western audiences might expect.
Though the film outlines the career of a legendary screen star, it involves no joyous acceptance speechs, no paper-thin displays of humility and no tributes from adoring fans.


Central Pennsylvania Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Pennsylvania Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,203,000
b1,060,000
Share earns
.72
.63
6mo net inc
2,111,000
b2,147,000
Share earns
1.27
1.28
b-Includes tax credits of $87,000 for the quarter and $167,000 for the 6 months.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Exports: 'No Exceptions'
LEAD: Despite recent improvements in East-West relations, senior Reagan Administration officials say they are not about to ease controls on strategic exports to the Soviet Union.


Dining Guide: Neighborhood
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
Anatolia


Mahfouz Says Illness Will Bar Nobel Trip
LEAD: Naguib Mahfouz, winner of the 1988 Nobel Prize in Literature, said today that he was not well enough to travel to Stockholm to receive his $390,000 award on Dec. 10.


Fischer &amp; Porter Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fischer &amp; Porter Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
49,273,000
51,610,000
Net loss
547,000
b1,254,000
Share earns
-
.25
9mo sales
151,420,000
141,189,000
Net loss
479,000
b24,000
b-Net income


Board Backs Prison Barge Near Pier 40
LEAD: The Board of Estimate early today approved a plan to moor a 386-bed prison barge in the Hudson River at Pier 40 in Greenwich Village, overriding the strong objections of community groups and elected officials who called the barge idea ludicrous and dangerous.


Millions Across China Said to Face Starvation
LEAD: About 20 million people are facing starvation in China because of droughts and floods across the country this year, China Daily reported today.


Australian Group Lifts Lonrho Stake
LEAD: The Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd. of Australia said it had acquired 24 million more shares of the London-based Lonrho P.L.C., raising its stake to 90.8 million shares, or about 20 percent.
A statement issued through the London Stock Exchange did not elaborate on the stake, which had stood at 14.9 percent.


Copper Drops Then Rallies On News About Peru Strike
LEAD: Copper futures prices hit the lows of the week before rallying today at the New York Commodity Exchange, where the major concerns continued to be a strike in Peru and tight demand.


In Paris Showings, the Long and the Short Peacefully Coexist
LEAD: Ankle-grazing skirts were presented so confidently in the first days of the spring and summer ready-to-wear showings that ended yesterday, that it seemed likely that fashionable hemlines would drop a yard or so.
The strong alternative was wide ankle-length trousers, endorsed by pace-setting designers like Christian Lacroix, Karl Lagerfeld, both in his KL collection and in his clothes for Chanel, and by Claude


Judge Delays Hearing for Marcos, Not Wife
LEAD: A Federal judge today delayed indefinitely the arraignment of Ferdinand E. Marcos on racketeering charges, but ordered the wife of the deposed Philippine President to appear in New York on Monday.


Campaign Trail; Mrs. Quayle Charges Bias by the Press
LEAD: Dan Quayle has called a detente with the press - ''The more I get to know you, the more I really like you'' - but his wife, Marilyn, is not quite endorsing any rapprochement.
She says he has been treated roughly by the press because there is an East Coast and West Coast bias against Midwesterners.


American General Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American General Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b95,929,000
c162,223,000
Share earns
.75
1.11
Shares outst
132,503,722
145,562,562
9mo net inc
b332,239,000
c454,922,000
Share earns
2.56
3.07
Shares outst
135,186,048
148,640,333


Circle Journal; Farm Town Uproar: The Doctor Vanishes
LEAD: The townspeople knew it would not be easy to attract a doctor to a remote community of 600 people in the high plains of eastern Montana.


Transtechnology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transtechnology Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
52,782,000
46,057,000
Net inc
1,576,000
2,423,000
Share earns
.31
.45
6mo rev
102,714,000
90,061,000
Net inc
2,653,000
b5,129,000
Share earns
.52
.95


For Children
LEAD:  Halloween Activities  HALLOWEEN AT OLD WESTBURY GARDENS, with hayrides, pumpkin painting and shows by Magic Al, noon to 5 P.M.
Sunday.
Children must be dressed in Halloween costumes and accompanied by an adult.
At the gardens, Old Westbury Road, between the Long Island Expressway and Jericho Turnpike.


Jewish Book Festival at 7th Regiment Armory
LEAD: Soft covers, hard covers and undercovers will pop up in profusion as the Jewish Heritage Book Festival speaks volumes Sunday and Monday at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 67th Street.


10 Writers Win $25,000 From Whiting Foundation
LEAD: Ten writers whose works have appeared in a variety of small literary magazines were named recipients of the fourth annual Whiting Writers' Awards yesterday.
Each is to receive $25,000.


Sports of The Times; Rozelle And Fool's Gold
LEAD: THE commissioner is the last to know.
The commissioner is often so busy making television network deals and fighting an irreticent owner in court and making sure that his limousine is greased that on occasion a matter slips through the cracks.


Sukhreet Gabel Admits Her 'Deep Resentment'
LEAD: Sukhreet Gabel yesterday acknowledged telling prosecutors that she had a ''deep resentment'' toward her mother and ''a true love-hate relationship'' with Bess Myerson.


Botha's Party Loses Ground In Segregated Local Voting
LEAD: The governing National Party retained control of most of South Africa's major cities Wednesday but lost heavily to the far right in rural and industrial areas in nationwide local elections, the first to be held simultaneously for all races.
The elections were shunned by the majority of blacks.


Instituform Southeast reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Instituform Southeast (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,996,785
2,133,573
Net inc
192,928
b95,718
Share earns
.05
-
6mo rev
7,049,549
4,969,263
Net inc
582,906
170,848
Share earns
.15
.04


Abortion, Intimidation and Death
LEAD: By capitulating to activists who regard abortion as immoral, a French company called Groupe Roussel Uclaf may be committing a larger immorality, ordaining the death of tens of thousands of women around the world.
That's the judgment of people who should know - doctors attending the current World Congress of Gynecology and Obstetrics in Rio de


Aaron Rents Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aaron Rents Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
37,508,000
30,796,000
Net inc
1,153,000
1,082,000
Share earns
.24
.22
6mo rev
74,996,000
61,304,000
Net inc
2,485,000
2,138,000
Share earns
.52
.43


Bankers Defend Buyout Loans but Investors Fret; Merger Stocks Drop As Gains Are Taken
LEAD: The stocks of companies subject to takeover bids fell sharply yesterday after the Federal Reserve Board chairman, Alan Greenspan, advised Congress to consider action that would limit the borrowing needed to complete the corporate takeovers.


Jury Is Told Joel Steinberg 'Acted Cold and Uncaring'
LEAD: Joel B. Steinberg, on trial in the murder of Lisa Steinberg, seemed remarkably remote and unconcerned when told that the child he had raised was near death, prosecution witnesses testified yesterday.


Altai Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altai Inc
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,277,000
3,022,000
Net inc
10,000
185,000
Share earns
.01
.08
Yr rev
13,412,000
9,465,000
Net inc
501,000
337,000
Share earns
.22
.15


Notes and Bonds Post Big Gains
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds posted strong gains in fairly light trading yesterday, as investors were hit with a barrage of developments that made Treasury issues appear more attractive - and safer - than other forms of financial assets.


F.A.A. TO REQUIRE FUSELAGE REPAIRS IN OLDER 737 JETS
LEAD: In a far-reaching action resulting from the ripping away of a large section of a Boeing 737's fuselage in April over Hawaii, the Federal Aviation Administration yesterday proposed a rule that would require extensive strengthening of the structure of the older 737's.


Topics of The Times; Citizens, Too, Have Eyes
LEAD: Working without a permit from the Department of Buildings, a contractor fatally weakened a load-bearing wall in a six-story building on 31st Street in Manhattan last Monday.
All six floors collapsed, killing the owner and grievously injuring a courageous woman who lay unseen beneath the debris for hours.


Interface Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interface Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
90,810,000
68,288,000
Net inc
4,782,000
3,675,000
Share earns
.28
.22
9mo sales
246,420,000
191,841,000
Net inc
14,150,000
9,422,000
Share earns
.83
.62
Shares outst
17,105,000
15,302,000


Review/Art; Carol Hepper, in Wood: A Supple Synthesis
LEAD: Sculptors, curators and critics have been aware of Carol Hepper for a while.
Her taut and supple wood constructions, drawn with branches and holding the memory of the South Dakota Indian reservation on which she was raised, have been appearing in New York group shows for several years.
The works were intelligent and distinct, but they also seemed unfinished, and there was a question whether this sculptor was actually going to emerge.


10 Are Rescued As Boat Capsizes
LEAD: All 10 crew members of the racing yacht Blue Arrow, owned by Peter de Savery of England, were rescued today after the boat capsized, authorities said.


Lagos Journal; A Gleeful David Faces the Goliath That Is Nigeria
LEAD: ''Read this,'' Gani Fawehinmi commanded a visitor to his law chambers recently, waving a newspaper clipping as if it were evidence in a private court of corruption.


Galaxy Cheese Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galaxy Cheese Co
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
3,769,443
2,572,870
Net inc
30,959
b433,805
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
7,629,440
6,167,044
Net loss
461,172
587,840
b-Net loss


Prices of Imports Decline by 1.1%
LEAD: Prices of imported goods dropped by 1.1 percent in the third quarter, the first decline in more than two years, the Government said today.


No Time for Generalities
LEAD: At last, the Democratic Presidential campaign is facing the most important national security problem that will confront the next President and is giving the country some interesting analysis and reasonable prescriptions.


Energen Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energen Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
51,708,000
47,518,000
Net loss
1,897,000
2,505,000
Yr rev
363,439,000
328,014,000
Net inc
12,769,000
9,160,000
Share earns
2.51
2.11
Shares outst
5,086,779
4,335,732


TW Services Holders To Get Coniston Bid
LEAD: Coniston Partners L.P., eager to repair its image as a serious contender for takeovers, said yesterday that it would take a $29-a-share offer to the shareholders of TW Services Inc.


TV Weekend; Drug Runner's Mother
LEAD: This week's television mystery: What does CBS think it is accomplishing with ''Dadah Is Death,'' a four-hour mini-series being broadcast at 9 P.M.
Sunday and Monday?
Based on a true story, the film revolves around the efforts of an Australian woman to save her drug-smuggling son from a mandatory death penalty in Malayasia.


50 Held in Prague Crackdown
LEAD: Czechoslovakia's Communist authorities cracked down on dissent today, detaining more than 50 people and rejecting dialogue with dissidents on the 70th anniversary of national independence.


The Brands With Billion-Dollar Names
LEAD: In the supermarket, everyday products like Velveeta and Oreos sell for a few dollars or less.
In the frantic market where companies are bought and sold, those products are worth billions.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.24
6.76
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.39
7.41
5.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.48
7.52
5.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.59
8.67
8.64
30-YR.


Dukakis's Great Denial
LEAD: Many failings have contributed to Michael Dukakis's lagging campaign for President but one seems to be at the heart of the problem - the candidate's long, lame and basically unbelievable effort to deny that he and his party represent the great liberal tradition of the last half-century.


Layoffs Seen at Dean Witter
LEAD: Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. is expected to announce large layoffs soon in its fixed-income department, people inside the firm said yesterday.


Next Dollar Policy Unclear, But a Signal Is Likely Soon
LEAD: With less attention than might have been expected, the dollar has fallen sharply in the last three weeks, erasing the gains of the summer rally and suddenly putting the United States and its economic allies on the spot in the currency markets.


General Motors Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Motors Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
25,041,300,000
22,606,900,000
Net inc
859,200,000
812,300,000
Share earns
2.46
2.28
9mo rev
81,378,600,000
75,403,600,000
Net inc
3,458,000,000
2,715,100,000
Share earns
10.09
7.70


Bally Manufacturing Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bally Manufacturing Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
523,652,000
483,680,000
Net inc
21,921,000
b15,131,000
Share earns
.70
.41
9mo rev
1,464,114,000
1,294,873,000
Net inc
45,149,000
b69,588,000
Share earns
1.43
1.99


WASTEFUL SUBSIDIES BLAMED
LEAD: The Soviet Finance Minister said today that the Soviet Union has been running large budget deficits for years and predicted that this year the deficit would amount to the official equivalent of $58 billion.
It was the first time that the Government had made public this indicator of its economic distress.


Noah C. Barnhart Jr., Executive, 80
LEAD: Noah Chisholm Barnhart Jr., a retired business executive, died Wednesday at the Winchester (Va.) Medical Center.
He was 80 years old and lived in Winchester.


Eldon Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldon Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
23,462,000
20,086,000
Net inc
1,737,000
1,485,000
Share earns
.25
.21
9mo sales
75,375,000
61,670,000
Net inc
5,596,000
4,469,000
Share earns
.80
.64


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bank Hapoalim, Tel Aviv, Israel's largest banking institution, named Alexander Yuhjtman executive vice president and regional manager of the bank's Western Hemisphere operations.
In addition, it named Joseph Kestenbaum senior vice president and manager of the New York branches.
He is succeeding Jacob Elinav who is returning to Israel.


Thompson Will Handle Account for 7-Eleven
LEAD: The Southland Corporation's 7-Eleven Stores yesterday awarded its account, reportedly worth more than $12 million in annual billings, to J. Walter Thompson, Chicago.
Hill Holliday Connors Cosmopulos, New York, had been the agency of record until late July.


Teachers' Exam, Often Criticized, To Be Replaced
LEAD: In a move that will substantially alter the way new teachers are certified, the Educational Testing Service said yesterday that it would replace its much-criticized National Teachers Examinations with more sophisticated tests.


Creating a Brand Image For Eggs
LEAD: IN advertising, there's no question that the chicken came before the egg.


Dukakis Favors Weapons Policies That Work; Freeze Isn't Unilateral
LEAD: To the Editor:


S.B. Fuller, Door-to-Door Entrepreneur, Dies at 83
LEAD: S. B. Fuller, an entrepreneur who became the first black member of the National Association of Manufacturers, died of kidney failure Monday at St.
Francis Hospital in Blue Island, a suburb of Chicago.
He was 83 years old.


Comics and a 50's Hop in the Wee Hours
LEAD: One of the last sounds to disappear in the wee hours of the morning on a New York weekend is the sound of laughter.
Here is a list of some of the late-night comedy shows, and one post-show participatory event, that are scheduled this weekend.
Political Jokes Randy Credico, Brett Butler and Noo Yawk Talk, Top of the Village Gate (160 Bleecker Street).


In Sharpeville Vote, The Underdog Wins
LEAD: With a voter turnout of less than 20 percent, the underdog won an overwhelming victory Wednesday in the black township of Sharpeville in the nationwide municipal elections.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about New York City Police Department statistics on murder and manslaughter misstated the total for cases reported in July.
The combined total of murders and cases of non-negligent manslaughter was 189.
The combined monthly total last year was 148.


U.S. May Yield Health Data On Nuclear Weapon Workers
LEAD: The Department of Energy said today that it was reconsidering a policy that bars independent researchers from reviewing the health records of the 300,000 workers who have been exposed to at least some radiation at American nuclear weapon plants since the early 1940's.


Reluctant Whales Coaxed Closer to Sea
LEAD: Like two houseguests who would not leave, two whales who have been shown the door to the open sea today showed little inclination to go.


Bid by Banner Unit
LEAD: Rexnord Holdings U.K.
P.L.C., a British unit of Banner Industries Inc., has offered to buy Avdel P.L.C., which makes assembly-line systems, for $:102 million, or about $178.5 million.
Banner, based in Cleveland, supplies components to the aviation and aerospace markets.
A merger would create a leading force in the industry, with combined sales exceeding $250 million, Rexnord said.


At Least 12 Deaths In Hospital in Bronx Linked to Poor Care
LEAD: The New York State Health Department charged yesterday that mismanagement, overcrowding and crucial staff shortages - all symptoms of a widening health crisis in New York City - contributed to the deaths of at least 12 people this year at Lincoln Hospital, a city-run hospital in the Bronx.


Emerald Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emerald Homes (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
29,143,000
34,733,000
Net inc
2,595,000
2,291,000
Share earns
.49
.43
9mo rev
78,752,000
58,756,000
Net inc
9,329,000
3,373,000
Share earns
1.77
.64


Chemed Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemed Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
146,660,000
101,423,000
Net inc
b6,584,000
6,053,000
Share earns
.70
.68
9mo sales
354,466,000
291,351,000
Net inc
b18,876,000
15,629,000
Share earns
2.05
1.74


Galveston-Houston Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galveston-Houston Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
13,926,000
11,625,000
Net inc
b741,000
c105,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
40,429,000
34,322,000
Net inc
b2,289,000
c4,123,000
Share earns
.10
.45


Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,800,000,000
4,590,000,000
Net inc
350,000,000
316,000,000
Share earns
2.06
1.88
9mo sales
14,710,000,000
14,000,000,000
Net inc
1,068,000,000
980,000,000
Share earns
6.30
5.88


Stocks Prices Tumble With Dow Off 24.35
LEAD: The stock market fell sharply yesterday, pulled down in part by takeover stocks that were sold off amid concerns about buyout financing.


TGI Friday's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TGI Friday's Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
110,299,000
97,936,000
Net inc
3,819,000
2,534,000
Share earns
.22
.14
9mo rev
307,159,000
285,893,000
Net inc
9,410,000
7,509,000
Share earns
.53
.42


Norton Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norton Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
340,700,000
300,400,000
Net inc
b22,000,000
c17,000,000
Share earns
1.03
.81
9mo rev
1,058,400,000
917,500,000
Net inc
b77,200,000
c49,300,000
Share earns
3.68
2.37


Woman Is Among Eight Elected to Ayer Board
LEAD: N. W. Ayer on Wednesday elected eight executives from its New York office to its board and promoted all of them to the position of executive vice president.
One of them, Marcella Rosen, 54 years old, is the first woman to become a board member in the agency's 119-year history.


Quayle Takes Republican Campaign to Jersey


Review/Art; Edgar Franceschi, in Many Media
LEAD: The eight-year retrospective of paintings, sculptures, mixed-media objects and a complete stage set by Edgar Franceschi at the Museo del Barrio, 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, is an event that honors both the artist and the museum.
More than one museum to the south of 104th Street could learn from the lucid, calm and spacious installation.


4 Film Series With an International Flavor
LEAD: A month of subtitled cinema offerings begins this weekend, covering international movie making from 1930's Italy to present-day Japan.


Review/Theater; Comedy With a Subversive Punch
LEAD: In ''Eastern Standard,'' his new play at the Manhattan Theater Club, Richard Greenberg captures the romantic sophistication of the most sublime comedies ever made in this country: those produced by Hollywood from the middle of the Depression until the waning days of World War II.


Offer Extended By Grand Met
LEAD: Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., the British conglomerate that is offering $5.23 billion for the Pillsbury Company, today extended its offer by a week, to Nov. 8.


Cuomo Presses For Bond Issue On Long Island
LEAD: Governor Cuomo, campaigning for a $3.1 billion transportation bond issue, warned today that the New York budget deficit next year might be worse than the $1.8 billion shortfall he inherited from Gov.
Hugh L. Carey in 1983.


Sports People; Muncie Pleads Innocent
LEAD: Chuck Muncie, a former San Diego Chargers running back, pleaded innocent yesterday to three counts of selling cocaine and one count of intent to sell cocaine to undercover drug agents.
United States Magistrate Roger C. McKee allowed Muncie, 35, to remain free on $20,000 bond and set a hearing for Monday.(


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1988
From '87
Bally Manufacturing Corp.
$ 21,900,000
+
45.0
Chrysler Corp.
112,500,000
-
54.3
Data General Corp.
(49,800,000)
-
Delta Air Lines Inc.
100,000,000
+
69.2
Enron Corp.
(16,800,000)
-
General Motors Corp.


Salomon to Join Shearson in Nabisco Battle
LEAD: In a sign that the largest corporate bidding battle in history is about to start, F. Ross Johnson, chief executive of RJR Nabisco Inc., said yesterday that Salomon Brothers would join Shearson Lehman Hutton in making an offer for the huge food and tobacco company.


Gorbachev Associate Rejects Baltic Independence Moves
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev's closest Kremlin associate says the Soviet republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania will not be allowed to print their own currency, conduct their own diplomacy or expect to take any other major steps toward independence.


Ogden Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ogden Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
274,302,000
227,670,000
Net inc
16,463,000
13,851,000
Share earns
.41
.34
9mo rev
746,958,000
636,605,000
Net inc
46,410,000
38,560,000
Share earns
1.16
.96


Tiger International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tiger International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
346,968,000
317,344,000
Net inc
23,796,000
23,128,000
Share earns
.60
.62
Shares outst
37,153,000
33,803,000
9mo rev
986,776,000
878,739,000
Net inc
56,634,000
45,215,000
Share earns
1.52
1.22
Shares outst
34,918,000
33,025,000


Quantum Chemical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Chemical Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
812,400,000
617,200,000
Net inc
99,800,000
27,600,000
Share earns
3.92
.84
Shares outst
25,417,099
32,959,447
9mo sales
2,379,800,000
1,824,500,000
Net inc
285,400,000
b191,400,000
Share earns
10.51
5.79
Shares outst
27,145,722
32,478,940


Benjamin Felson, 75, Interpreter of X-Rays
LEAD: Dr.
Benjamin Felson, an expert in interpreting X-rays who also taught and wrote about the use of radiology in diagnosing and treating diseases, died of a heart attack Saturday at his home in Cincinnati.
He was 75 years old.


Pepperell Creates A Severance Plan
LEAD: West Point-Pepperell Inc., the textile giant resisting a $1.3 billion tender offer by Farley Inc., has created a cushion for more than 14 percent of its employees who might lose their jobs under a new owner.
But Pepperell, based in West Point, Ga., said the severance package did not result from the Farley bid.


Chrysler Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chrysler Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
7,010,000,000
6,170,000,000
Net inc
112,500,000
246,000,000
Share earns
.50
1.12
9mo sales
23,174,500,000
18,610,100,000
Net inc
616,600,000
939,500,000
Share earns
2.77
4.33


Cornelius Vanderbilt 3d Is Stabbed to Death
LEAD: Cornelius Vanderbilt 3d, a descendant of Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt, was found stabbed to death in his home on Staten Island yesterday morning, the police said.


Boston Edison Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Edison Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
367,310,000
349,631,000
Net inc
54,571,000
44,442,000
Share earns
1.36
1.10
9mo rev
923,342,000
881,052,000
Net inc
67,501,000
b89,721,000
Share earns
1.53
2.14


For Senators Weicker and Lautenberg; Behind All That Heat in Connecticut
LEAD: Connecticut has two well-qualified candidates in a hot contest for U.S. senator.
Lowell Weicker, the unconventional Republican incumbent, is challenged by Joseph Lieberman, the popular Democratic Attorney General.
Each would be an asset in Washington.
Mr.
Weicker, with his strong record, has our support for a fourth term.


Cache Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cache Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,310,000
4,707,000
Net inc
171,000
b739,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
17,565,000
11,320,000
Net inc
325,000
b2,837,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Alza Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alza Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
21,587,000
18,610,000
Net inc
4,323,000
3,709,000
Share earns
.13
.11
9mo rev
62,052,000
51,544,000
Net inc
12,623,000
9,947,000
Share earns
.38
.30


Former Nixon Aide Serving As Bush Campaign Adviser
LEAD: Dwight L. Chapin, a former White House aide under President Nixon who was imprisoned in the Watergate scandals, is serving as an unpaid staff adviser to George Bush's Presidential campaign, The San Jose Mercury News reported today.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Trade Move Is Expected
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is likely to announce more tough trade action today against South Korea.


On the Jersey City Docks, Wall St. West
LEAD: Around Wall Street, Bankers Trust seemed more like a bunch of gamblers than a band of conservative financiers when officials decided three years ago to start moving parts of the bank's operations to the desolate Jersey City docks.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher On Rumors of Intervention
LEAD: The dollar ended mostly higher yesterday after a seesaw session, influenced largely by rumors of central bank support.


National Pizza Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Pizza Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
35,612,000
30,905,000
Net inc
2,417,000
1,754,000
Share earns
.18
.14
9mo sales
68,280,000
58,920,000
Net inc
5,067,000
4,239,000
Share earns
.37
.33


G.M. Recalling 750,000 Cars
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation has begun recalling nearly 750,000 1984-model cars and trucks bearing Chevrolet, Pontiac and G.M.C. nameplates to replace a defective switch in the pollution control system, the Environmental Protection Agency said today.
A defective switch can cause excessive emissions of carbon monoxide and unburned gasoline.


Cobb Resources Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cobb Resources Corp (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,130,000
2,380,000
Net inc
b237,000
c245,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-After an extraordinary gain of $350,000.
c-Net loss


Review/Art; The Real World and Edward Hopper
LEAD: Natural light and architecture are two of the leading characters in the drama of Edward Hopper's art, and they currently hold center stage at the Hirschl &amp; Adler Galleries.
The exhibition on view there, ''Edward Hopper: Light Years,'' downplays the artist's involvement with the figure and virtually ignores his broad range of urban subjects to concentrate on Hopper in more natural settings, usually on or around Cape


N.F.L. Matchups; Saints Bracing for Showdown As Rams Invade Superdome
LEAD: No need to tell Jim Mora the importance of the game Sunday in the Louisiana Superdome between the New Orleans Saints and the Los Angeles Rams.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Golf  Lohr Sets Mark: Bob Lohr shot a five-under-par 67 yesterday for a 36-hole tournament record of 129 and a three-shot lead at the halfway point in the $700,000 Walt Disney World Classic in Lake Buena Vista, Fla.
Robert Wrenn missed three birdie putts of 6 feet or less but still shot his second 66 and was alone in second.


Topics of The Times; NBC's Obscene Masquerade
LEAD: NBC gave two prime time hours Tuesday night to what purported to be a serious exploration of Satanism by the talk show host Geraldo Rivera.
In fact, the program was a piece of pornography masquerading as journalism.


Review/Theater; Dark Tale in Few Words
LEAD: In Alberto Felix Alberto's dark, fantastic and virtually wordless play, ''Tango Varsoviano'' (Warsaw Tango), illusion and reality become so indistinguishable that every move its four characters make takes on the shadow of menace.
The performance of this piece of intrigue - by the Teatro del Sur of Buenos Aires - at the Brooklyn Academy of Music as part of the Next


Review/Opera; 'Barbiere di Siviglia'
LEAD: Rossini's ''Barbiere di Siviglia'' is one of a handful of nearly perfect operas.
Not that it is surefire or indestructible.
Anything but.
Few operas are easier to destroy with slapstick comedy, for instance.
Rossini's wittiest effects grow directly out of his score and need to be treated as musical jokes in the best sense, not vaudeville turns applied to the surface of the work.


Cray Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cray Research Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
145,212,000
184,640,000
Net inc
22,612,000
36,114,000
Share earns
.73
1.14
9mo rev
425,421,000
523,726,000
Net inc
68,103,000
112,993,000
Share earns
2.19
3.57


U.S. RELIEF EFFORT BLOCKED IN SUDAN
LEAD: After two weeks of trying, the United States has been blocked from delivering food to a famine-stricken town in the southern Sudan where more than 8,000 people are reported to have died of starvation.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is not a problem that has cropped up all of a sudden.
It is a result of an unbalanced economy, of excessive subsidies, of huge losses caused by extensive management methods, parasitic attitudes and passive financial policy.''  - Finance Minister Boris I. Gostev on the Soviet budget deficit.


Dart Drug Account To Earle Palmer Brown
LEAD: The Earle Palmer Brown Companies, Bethesda, Md., has won the account of Dart Drug Stores Inc. over three agencies.
The budget is $7.5 million.


2 Arts Groups to Use Old Ferry House
LEAD: Two experimental arts groups were named yesterday as the future occupants of a mini-cultural center to be created in a landmark turn-of-the-century ferry dock in Battery Park.
The cultural center, to be called the South Ferry Arts Center, is to be part of the $400 million South Ferry Plaza redevelopment project.


Aide to Reagan Praises Peace Moves by Soviet
LEAD: President Reagan's national security adviser praised the Soviet Union today for playing a ''constructive role'' recently in settling regional conflicts.
But he said the United States could encourage the trend only if it exerted continuing pressure in areas like Central America where military conflicts continue.


Dionex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dionex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
18,364,000
16,019,000
Net inc
3,314,000
2,669,000
Share earns
.34
.28


Hannaford Brothers Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hannaford Brothers Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
329,058,000
267,248,000
Net inc
8,095,000
6,831,000
Share earns
.85
.74
9mo sales
907,844,000
763,321,000
Net inc
22,177,000
18,750,000
Share earns
2.36
2.03


Solidarity Sees Talks as Canceled
LEAD: Solidarity leaders appeared increasingly convinced today that a plan for full-scale negotiations with the Government was dead and that the authorities were seeking a graceful way out.


French Trade Rebound
LEAD: France today announced a sharp improvement in its trade figures.
The trade balance rebounded from a deficit of 9 billion francs, or $1.48 billion, in August to a surplus of 400 million francs, or $66 million, in September, the Government said.
Earlier this week, the Government reported the biggest monthly drop in French unemployment in a decade.


At the Bar
LEAD: There has been a brisk trade in Finley Kumble desks and chairs, although Finley Kumble matchbooks and Finley Kumble neckties aren't in such demand.
As for the Finley Kumble art collection, the results are mixed.
The bucolic English sporting scenes have sold well; not so the portraits of Hugh L. Carey, Robert F.


G.M. Posts Surprising Profit Gain
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation reported a surprisingly strong performance in its third-quarter earnings today.


U.N. Chief Urges Namibia Independence Steps
LEAD: Declaring that Namibia's independence is ''long overdue,'' Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar said today that he was moving to carry out the United Nations plan to end South African rule in the territory.


Raychem Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raychem Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
235,325,000
226,053,000
Net inc
5,816,000
16,605,000
Share earns
.17
.49
Raychem said its Raynet subsidiary had a pre-tax loss in the latest first quarter of $10.7 million assuming Raychem's effective tax rate, compared with Raynet's pre-tax income of $4.4 million, or 9 cents a share, for the year-ago period.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 453 money market mutual funds increased $1.73 billion, to $270.52 billion, in the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 128 institutional funds grew $909 million, to $70.51 billion.
The 223 general purpose funds grew $296.70 million, to $85.63 billion.


Czechs Seize 5 Fleeing Poles
LEAD: Five Poles who hid in a makeshift shelter beneath a foot-thick layer of coal dust on a freight train were discovered by Czechoslovak border guards before the train crossed the border into Austria, the official press reported today.
Thursday.
The men were detained at the Breclav train station, near the Austrian border, where the train's 25 carloads of coal were inspected before crossing into Austria, the agency said, providing no other details.


Timken Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Timken Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
373,500,000
304,955,000
Net inc
8,689,000
734,000
Share earns
.31
.03
9mo sales
1,145,001,000
896,134,000
Net inc
41,079,000
2,290,000
Share earns
1.46
.09


DOCTORS PROTEST COMPANY'S ACTION ON ABORTION PILL
LEAD: A French company's decision to suspend distribution of an abortion-inducing drug caused a furor here today at a congress of the main international body of gynecologists and obstetricians.


Marilyn Monroe Goes to Philatelic Glory
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Gala Tribute Amid the Sweaters
LEAD: There are, among others, the roses of Picardy, the rose that's a rose that's a rose and the last rose of summer.
But for the past dozen years, when autumn rolls around and there is a nip in the New York air and tweedy clothes in shop windows, the VIP of roses has been Lord &amp; Taylor's Rose Award.
Actually not a real rose, the award is a crystal prism etched with the flower and presented by the store to a celebrity deemed worthy of the honor.


Arx Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arx Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
21,450,000
11,732,000
Net inc
483,000
b649,000
Share earns
.06
.09
b-After a charge of $298,000 from the early redemption of debt.


Citicorp Offering 9% Notes at Par
LEAD: Citicorp is offering $250 million of 9 percent notes due in 1991 at a price of par through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Sports People; Deputy Commissioner
LEAD: When A. Bartlett Giamatti officially becomes the commissioner of baseball next April 1, a former Hollywood executive will join him as deputy commissioner and chief operating officer.
Francis T. (Fay) Vincent Jr., the former chairman and chief executive officer of Columbia Pictures Industries, will take office the same day that Giamatti, now the president of the National League, replaces Peter Ueberroth as commissioner.


American City Business Jourals Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American City Business Jourals Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
12,728,000
18,044,000
Net inc
1,012,000
b3,923,000
Share earns
.10
-
9mo rev
45,317,000
52,599,000
Net inc
18,935,000
b12,057,000
Share earns
4.22
-


Officer Resigns At Bank Leu
LEAD: Seven months after a management shake-up that followed two insider trading scandals, Switzerland's oldest bank, Bank Leu, has again lost its chief executive - this time over a personality clash.


Consolidated Edison Co of NY reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Edison Co of NY (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,469,182,000
1,493,761,000
Net inc
266,330,000
235,677,000
Share earns
2.25
1.96
9mo rev
3,897,360,000
3,903,217,000
Net inc
505,054,000
489,007,000
Share earns
4.18
3.95


Auctions
LEAD:  Cameraless Photos


Restaurants
LEAD:  Le Laurier


Israelis Appear Immune To Comments by Arabs
LEAD: No single event could better illustrate the polarized nature of Israeli society today than the extraordinary near-endorsements that Shimon Peres, the Labor Party leader, has been getting from leaders of the Arab world, including Yasir Arafat of the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Halloween Revels for Grown-Ups
LEAD: Halloween in New York is, for better or worse, predominantly a grown-up affair, with parties that bring out a latent looniness in all but the most buttoned-down reveler.


Transamerica Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transamerica Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
102,431,000
b137,859,000
Share earns
1.31
1.76
9mo net inc
268,475,000
b354,835,000
Share earns
3.43
4.56
b-After gains from discontinued operations of $45,065,000 for the quarter and $79,045,000 for the 9 months.


Metro-North Police Captain Charged in Tapping of Phone
LEAD: A Metro-North police captain, a central figure in a sweeping state investigation of corruption in the railroad's police operations, was charged yesterday with illegally monitoring and recording a phone call by a subordinate.


Incomes Rise by O.5%; Spending Is Unchanged
LEAD: In reports that offered fresh evidence that economic growth is slowing, the Government said today that Americans' personal incomes rose a moderate five-tenths of 1 percent in September while consumer spending turned in its weakest performance in almost a year.


Japan's Sensitivity on Rice Issue
LEAD: When Emperor Hirohito awoke from his sickbed one morning a few weeks ago and asked whether this year's rice harvest was good, the Japanese rice lobby seized on the comments to buttress its argument that rice still carries mystical significance to the Japanese people.


New England Critical Care Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Critical Care Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
13,260,000
8,149,000
Net inc
1,514,000
945,000
Share earns
.26
.18
9mo rev
33,616,000
21,204,000
Net inc
3,786,000
2,333,000
Share earns
.65
.48


Dukakis Favors Weapons Policies That Work
LEAD: To the Editor:


Betz Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Betz Laboratories Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
114,746,847
100,067,894
Net inc
12,784,143
10,759,992
Share earns
.83
.68
9mo sales
332,430,698
286,135,429
Net inc
36,017,113
30,593,236
Share earns
2.34
1.94


Johnson's Record With the Mets
LEAD:
Division
Year
W-L
Pct.
Finish
1984 90-72 556 2 1985 98-64 605 2 1986 108-54 667 1 1987 92-70 568 2 1988 100-60 625 1 Totals 488-320 604


Sports People; Piniella's Choices
LEAD: Lou Piniella was at home in Allendale, N.J., yesterday pondering his managerial future but saying his situation would be ''cleared up within a week.'' ''I've talked to both Houston and Seattle and I'll have to make a decision,'' he said. ''I just don't know what that decision's going to be at this point.


Giants Are Aiming To Tighten Defense
LEAD: For years, the Giants have been known for their defense.
Two seasons ago, defense was largely responsible for getting them to the Super Bowl and for winning there.
But this season, it has been struggling.


Tonka Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tonka Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
267,500,000
76,200,000
Net inc
4,900,000
1,500,000
Share earns
.62
.20
9mo rev
634,300,000
174,700,000
Net loss
13,200,000
b4,700,000
Share earns
-
.61


Interlake Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interlake Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
214,497,000
201,620,000
Net inc
8,225,000
9,210,000
Share earns
.79
.79
Shares outst
10,656,855
11,655,991
9mo sales
647,001,000
600,761,000
Net inc
26,921,000
30,874,000
Share earns
2.53
2.65


G.O.P. Already Speculating About Top Positions in a Bush Administration
LEAD: With the final days before the Presidential election ticking away, the confident campaign of Vice President Bush is busy with jockeying and guessing over who will fill the top slots in the Bush Administration.


American Toxic Control reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Toxic Control
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,013,000
3,347,000
Net inc
52,000
b370,000
6mo sales
8,986,000
7,530,000
Net loss
377,000
466,000
b-Net loss


Judith Epstein, Hadassah Official, 92
LEAD: Judith Epstein, a former national president of Hadassah, the Women's Zionist Organization of America, died of a heart attack yesterday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
She was 92 years old and lived in Manhattan.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Jazz Abstraction


Dataflex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataflex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
10,326,996
5,059,489
Net inc
346,747
164,752
Share earns
.16
.08
6mo rev
19,028,694
9,578,117
Net inc
642,023
297,477
Share earns
.29
.14


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Market Place; A Price Mystery In Manville Stock
LEAD: THE world of $2 stocks does not often get much attention on Wall Street, where it is assumed that respectable companies trade for much more.
But there is growing attention, and incredulity, being focused on one such stock: the Manville Corporation's.


Donnelley, R R &amp; Sons Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donnelley, R R &amp; Sons Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
701,700,000
624,551,000
Net inc
58,971,000
89,379,000
Share earns
.76
1.15
9mo sales
1,998,090,000
1,709,803,000
Net inc
140,804,000
160,988,000
Share earns
1.81
2.07


Inter-Regional Financial Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inter-Regional Financial Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
60,605,000
74,372,000
Net loss
b2,634,000
c3,338,000
Share earns
-
.43
9mo rev
187,200,000
218,785,000
Net loss
b2,495,000
c9,996,000
Share earns
-
1.29


Nipsco Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nipsco Industries Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
317,963,000
324,585,000
Net inc
22,345,000
7,759,000
Share earns
.30
.11
9mo rev
1,098,640,000
1,058,978,000
Net inc
67,773,000
31,113,000
Share earns
.92
.42


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article on Oct. 13 about the famine in the Sudan misstated the situation of relief organizations there.
Four such groups, not all, were expelled by the Government nine months ago.


Metro Magazine to Close
LEAD: Metro Magazine, a monthly that focused on New York, will cease publication with its 13th issue next month, the publisher, Jonathan Himoff, said Thursday. ''It's a very tough market,'' he said, adding that he had been selling about 8,000 copies a month.
Mr.
Himoff founded the tabloid-size magazine in February 1986 with Andrew Kaskel, the associate publisher.


J.V. Mangano, 83, Brooklyn Politician, Dies
LEAD: James V. Mangano, a longtime Democratic leader in the 52d Assembly District of Brooklyn and the last person to hold the office of Kings County Sheriff, died of cancer yesterday at Long Island College Hospital.
He was 83 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Clark Equipment Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clark Equipment Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
324,865,000
240,841,000
Net inc
b12,278,000
c7,375,000
Share earns
.72
-
9mo sales
932,707,000
761,725,000
Net inc
b34,094,000
c11,405,000
Share earns
2.00
-


C-Cor Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C-Cor Electronics Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
12,219,000
7,457,000
Net inc
1,066,000
b284,000
Share earns
.51
.14
b-After a $166,000 loss from discontinued operations.


Kitchen Gadgets (or Are They Rabbits?)
LEAD: There's a new kitchen gadget coming your way.





U.S. May Allow Anti-Ulcer Drug Tied to Abortion
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration is expected to approve a drug developed to prevent ulcers in arthritis patients that can also induce abortion, industry analysts and the company that developed the drug said yesterday.


Castle, A M &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Castle, A M &amp; Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
127,122,000
92,950,000
Net inc
3,520,000
1,867,000
Share earns
.73
.39
9mo sales
374,400,000
274,223,000
Net inc
11,836,000
4,861,000
Share earns
2.47
1.02


International Recovery Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Recovery Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
14,343,000
10,259,000
Net inc
545,000
211,000
Share earns
.15
.06
6mo rev
27,822,000
17,817,000
Net inc
1,058,000
545,000
Share earns
.30
.16


First Federal Savings Bank of Elizaethtown, Ky reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank of Elizaethtown, Ky
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
699,690
737,059
Per share
.66
.64
The bank converted to stock form on July 19, 1987.


Metro Datelines; Held in Scuffle At 'Outrage' Hearing
LEAD: Sixteen people, including William Kunstler, the Rev.
Al Sharpton and C. Vernon Mason, were arrested on charges of obstructing government administration and first-degree riot yesterday when they grappled with court officers after a hearing, the police said.


Reagan Signs Radon Bill
LEAD: President Reagan signed legislation today calling for a three-year, $15.5 million program to deal with radon contamination in schools and Federal buildings.
The bill provides for $10 million for grants to state and local governments, $3 million for seminars and information activities, $1.5 million for rating the proficiency of radon abatement programs and $1 million for development of eradication centers.


CMI Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CMI Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
20,868,000
41,498,000
Net inc
b1,167,000
c1,940,000
Share earns
.08
.14
9mo sales
74,109,000
115,925,000
Net inc
b10,089,000
c1,130,000
Share earns
.72
.06


Allis-Chalmers Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allis-Chalmers Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
93,192,000
101,863,000
Net loss
2,813,000
b5,753,000
9mo sales
290,008,000
300,677,000
Net loss
11,570,000
b14,068,000
b-Includes income from discontinued operations of $3,018,000 for the quarter and $6,980,000 for the 9 months.


RJR Nabisco Will Give Kohlberg, Kravis Data
LEAD: The board of RJR Nabisco has agreed to provide Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, which has made a $20.3 billion buyout offer for the foods and tobacco company, with confidential financial data about RJR Nabisco's operations.


American Monitor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Monitor Corp
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,919,000
6,500,000
Net loss
2,122,000
4,751,000
Yr rev
28,660,000
30,158,000
Net loss
4,944,000
7,753,000


Citadel Holding Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citadel Holding Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,298,000
8,849,000
Share earns
1.61
2.55
9mo net inc
19,200,000
19,410,000
Share earns
5.84
5.60
Shares outst
3,290,250
3,466,784


Metro Datelines; Aluminum Thieves Steal Guard Rails
LEAD: A rise in aluminum prices has been followed by thefts of highway guard rails and signs, the state police said yesterday.
Troopers said they were checking with scrap metal dealers.


Safety Commission Bans The Sale of Lawn Darts
LEAD: Lawn darts could be removed from stores before Christmas under a ban approved today by the Consumer Product Safety Commission.


The World Can See Proof of Armenian Genocide
LEAD: To the Editor:


Seacoast Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seacoast Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
249,000
213,000
Per share
.20
.17


Army Contract
LEAD: The Army has selected a contractor team to develop the engine that will power its next generation of helicopters.
The service said it was awarding the engine contract to the Light Helicopter Turbine Engine Company, a partnership formed by the Allison gas turbine division of the General Motors Corporation and the Garrett engine division of the Allied-Signal Aerospace Company.


Wesbanco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wesbanco Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,915,080
1,602,349
Per share
.87
.73
9mo net inc
5,509,860
4,682,489
Per share
2.52
2.09


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
9.25
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.27
6.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.38
7.39
5.26
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.49
7.48
5.92
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.56
8.59
8.65
30-YR.


Surgery for Tudor
LEAD: John Tudor, the Los Angeles Dodger left-hander who suffered a torn ligament in his pitching elbow after only one and a third innings in the World Series, underwent reconstructive elbow surgery Thursday.
Dr.
Frank Jobe, the team physician, said the surgery should enable Tudor to return by the middle of next season.


IFR Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IFR Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
10,114,000
9,045,000
Net inc
1,555,000
1,506,000
Share earns
.25
.24


Roy F. Weston Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roy F. Weston Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
49,610,778
35,445,269
Net inc
1,646,786
1,183,048
Share earns
.20
.18
Shares outst
8,314,578
6,496,538
9mo rev
140,989,169
96,541,164
Net inc
4,465,142
b3,596,059
Share earns
.59
.56
Shares outst
7,624,834
6,422,923


Scott's Liquid Gold Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott's Liquid Gold Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,960,500
4,321,600
Net inc
409,900
b545,800
Share earns
.05
.06
9mo rev
16,364,500
12,506,900
Net inc
640,100
b1,624,400
Share earns
.07
.19


Copper Prices Rise Sharply As Precious Metals Rally
LEAD: The price of copper futures jumped yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York, with the contract for December delivery rising more than 7 cents a pound in a technical move that analysts said portends even higher prices.


Reviews/Film; Women at F.B.I. School
LEAD: ''Feds,'' a comedy starring Mary Gross and Rebecca De Mornay as two F.B.I. agents in training, opened yesterday at the Criterion Center and other theaters.
The Criterion was not the best place to see it, however.


Price/Stern/Sloan Publishers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Price/Stern/Sloan Publishers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
21,426,000
19,752,000
Net inc
1,816,000
2,083,000
Share earns
.44
.51
9mo sales
43,109,000
31,358,000
Net inc
788,000
1,734,000
Share earns
.21
.44


Hon Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hon Industries Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
144,745,000
141,880,000
Net inc
7,090,000
7,365,000
Share earns
.38
.37
9mo sales
426,527,000
410,990,000
Net inc
16,431,000
17,746,000
Share earns
.88
.88
Shares outst
18,733,940
20,104,127


Selectronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Selectronics Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,188,000
2,416,000
Net inc
1,037,000
444,000
Share earns
.05
.02
6mo rev
11,587,000
5,106,000
Net inc
1,266,000
596,000
Share earns
.10
.05


Poughkeepsie Savings Bank F S B reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Poughkeepsie Savings Bank F S B (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,755,000
2,358,000
Per share
.77
.60
9mo net inc
9,507,000
6,785,000
Per share
2.66
1.73
The latest third quarter included a pre-tax one-time gain of $3.5 million from a reversion of an over-funded employee benefit plan.


Geodyne Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geodyne Resources (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,551,763
3,548,214
Net inc
1,960,724
1,138,071
Share earns
.11
.06
6mo rev
9,495,024
4,534,878
Net inc
4,131,614
808,804
Share earns
.24
.04


Choice Drug Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Choice Drug Systems
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,887,515
1,010,845
Net loss
79,857
b14,012
6mo sales
7,593,900
2,042,606
Net loss
174,561
b33,749
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Chynoweth's Eye Is Injured in Fight
LEAD: The fallout from the Islanders' 5-2 loss to the Flyers in Philadelphia Thursday night wrought some havoc on both teams yesterday.
The Islanders learned that Dean Chynoweth, whose left eye was gouged in a fight with Rick Tocchet, had suffered bleeding within the eye and bruises above, beside and below it.


Review/Dance; Structure Informs Kudelka Work
LEAD: The Joffrey Ballet's dancers are in superb shape at the start of what is being called the Robert Joffrey Memorial season.
This standard of high performance is as much a tribute to the dancers themselves as to their late founding director and it was felt keenly in the company's second program.


A Half Step Toward Free Speech
LEAD: Americans who wish to exchange ideas with foreign visitors often find the barriers of time and distance less daunting than the McCarran-Walter Act.
Passed in 1952, during the McCarthy era, the law remains an offensive obstacle to free speech.


Piccadilly Cafeterias Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Piccadilly Cafeterias Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
64,204,000
57,261,000
Net inc
2,778,000
b5,541,000
Share earns
.30
.59
b-Includes an accounting-change gain of $2,551,000.


Dreyfus Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dreyfus Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
60,590,000
66,172,000
Net inc
21,247,000
24,313,000
Share earns
.52
.58
9mo rev
193,078,000
204,273,000
Net inc
b71,067,000
71,762,000
Share earns
1.72
1.70
Shares outst
41,231,000
42,254,000


Alliance Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alliance Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
b41,518,000
-
9mo net loss
b76,540,000
-
b-Included a $33.3 million charge against earnings to increase the reserve for loan losses.
Comparative year-ago figures are not applicable; the bank was recapitalized with FDIC assistance in January.


Washington Gas Light Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Gas Light Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
71,537,000
74,263,000
Net loss
13,637,000
10,644,000
9mo rev
466,209,000
486,080,000
Net inc
22,923,000
18,172,000
Share earns
1.34
1.08


Crown Central Petroleum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Central Petroleum Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
301,897,000
301,935,000
Net inc
15,317,000
b3,088,000
Share earns
1.97
-
9mo rev
868,833,000
797,957,000
Net inc
22,932,000
b20,968,000
Share earns
2.71
-


Jersey Focuses On Tight Race For Congress
LEAD: The race between two experienced officeholders to succeed the late James J. Howard as representative from the 3d Congressional District along New Jersey's northern shore is shaping up as the closest of the state's 14 House contests.


Computer Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Communications (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,719,000
2,142,000
Net inc
b203,000
b55,000
Share earns
.02
.01
b-Includes tax credits of $67,000 for the latest quarter and $17,000 for the year-earlier period.


Texas American Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas American Bancshares Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
216,454,000
14,161,000
9mo net loss
369,503,000
20,290,000


Oregon Metallurgical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oregon Metallurgical Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
18,300,000
12,729,000
Net inc
1,391,000
248,000
Share earns
.15
.01
9mo sales
57,176,000
35,005,000
Net inc
3,597,000
332,000
Share earns
.39
.02


Fuqua Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fuqua Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
246,653,000
168,133,000
Net inc
bc11,412,000
d15,561,000
Share earns
.53
.72
9mo sales
710,293,000
511,162,000
Net inc
b102,469,000
d50,332,000
Share earns
4.74
2.33


POSTAL YULETIDE
LEAD:
It's not a moment too soon to start thinking about airmailing Christmas gifts and cards abroad.
For packages, fill out customs forms and make sure the contents, however innocent they seem, are legally acceptable at the destination.
Insure gifts only for what they are worth.
Keep the receipt; the Postal Service does not.


Suffolk Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suffolk Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,489,000
1,204,000
Per share
.45
.37
9mo net inc
4,119,000
3,685,000
Per share
1.26
1.25


U.S. PLANS A BANK FOR MEDICAL DATA
LEAD: In a plan to enable researchers to identify the most effective medical practices, the Department of Health and Human Services announced today that it would establish a center to gather information on the treatment of millions of Medicare patients.


General Public Utilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Public Utilities Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
781,729,000
702,623,000
Net inc
85,155,000
72,088,000
Share earns
1.45
1.14
Shares outst
58,805,000
62,864,000
9mo rev
2,161,169,000
2,043,609,000
Net inc
248,774,000
210,890,000
Share earns
4.13
3.35
Shares outst
60,227,000
62,864,000


Southwest National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest National Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,354,000
1,151,000
Per share
.49
.42
9mo net inc
3,541,000
3,326,000
Per share
1.29
1.22


Church &amp; Dwight Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Church &amp; Dwight Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
88,602,774
85,894,555
Net inc
4,720,394
5,244,345
Share earns
.21
.24
Shares outst
22,098,608
21,986,571
9mo sales
255,993,558
230,945,469
Net inc
13,559,310
9,448,837
Share earns
.61
.43
Shares outst
22,135,267
21,966,894


Pope, Evans &amp; Robbins Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pope, Evans &amp; Robbins Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
18,000,000
9,857,000
Net loss
b8,035,000
c8,529,000
Yr sales
126,262,000
57,200,000
Net loss
b30,846,000
c12,871,000
b-Includes pretax provisions of $2,700,000 for loss on store closings for both periods; $1,000,000 and $12,900,000 for loss on note receivable for the quarter and year, respectively; and the year also includes a $7,013,000 writeoff of good will attributed to the Derotchild Apparel subsidiary's integration into Pat


Anchor Savings Bank F S B reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anchor Savings Bank F S B (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b3,900,000
b6,600,000
Per share
.02
.18
b-After extraordinary gains of $2.6 million for the latest first quarter and $2.1 million for the year-ago period- -representing the tax effect from utilization of net operating loss carryforwards.


OCTOBERFEST ON 42d ST.
LEAD: More than three hours of free outdoor performances will be featured at an Octoberfest tomorrow on 42d Street near the Avenue of the Americas.
The entertainment, which begins at 1 P.M., is sponsored by the 42d Street Theater Row and features prductions from the area.
Preceding the entertainment will be a sale of food and crafts that begins at 11 A.M.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 12.


TeleConcepts Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TeleConcepts Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
3,420,998
4,715,846
Net loss
295,774
b502,251
Share earns
-
.14
9mo sales
7,893,671
12,164,160
Net loss
1,200,529
b637,305
Share earns
-
.19


Chicago Rivet &amp; Machine Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chicago Rivet &amp; Machine Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,129,259
4,266,207
Net inc
221,845
b112,001
Share earns
-
.15
9mo sales
13,208,634
13,888,961
Net inc
1,007,966
b629,894
Share earns
1.40
.86


Col. Marcus Ray, 84, Expert on Black G.I.'s
LEAD: Marcus H. Ray, a retired Army colonel who served as a civilian aide to Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson, died of a stroke Wednesday at his home in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 84 years old.


Israeli Arrest of Arab Journalists Reported
LEAD: Arabs reported today that the Israeli police and army had arrested more than 30 Palestinian trade unionists and journalists in the occupied West Bank and in Arab East Jerusalem early this morning.


Despite Vow to be 'Gentler,' Bush Stays on Attack
LEAD: Vice President Bush closed out a week of campaigning on a theme of continued economic prosperity today, hinting of a ''gentler and kinder'' George Bush but not showing one at several campaign stops.


Dart Drug Stores Inc reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dart Drug Stores Inc (OTC)
Year to July 31
1988
1987
Sales
218,165,000
265,642,000
Net loss
24,497,000
1,801,000


Companies
LEAD:  OSHA announced $4.3 million in fines against John Morrell &amp; Company, saying the meatpacker ignored workplace hazards and allowed 880 South Dakota employees to suffer serious injuries.
OSHA called the violations ''egregious'' and ''willful.'' Morrell accused the agency of bowing to election-year pressure.


British Steel Stock Set for Public Sale
LEAD: The Conservative Government announced today that shares in Britain's state steel industry would go on sale to the public next month, in the latest of a series of sales of Government-owned assets.


AMC Entertainment Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMC Entertainment Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
135,248,000
127,068,000
Net loss
3,290,000
b2,192,000
Share earns
-
.14
6mo rev
244,911,000
220,259,000
Net loss
10,926,000
1,760,000
b-Net income


Disputed Show Gets Democratic Ad
LEAD: The Dukakis-Bentsen Presidential campaign has bought five minutes of commercial time at the end of an NBC mini-series whose scandalous central character some people have likened to Senator Dan Quayle, the Republican Vice-Presidential nominee.


The National Joins the Royal Ranks
LEAD: A capacity audience, sprinkled with actors, directors, playwrights and royalty, gathered last night to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the National Theater and toast the company's new name, the Royal National Theater.


Avnet Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avnet Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
491,500,000
441,100,000
Net inc
11,700,000
12,200,000
Share earns
.33
.34
Shares outst
35,700,000
35,800,000


New Suitors Disclosed By Pillsbury
LEAD: The Pillsbury Company, which has rejected a $60-a-share, $5.2 billion takeover offer from Britain's Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., disclosed today that it had received a second offer.


Centrust Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centrust Savings Bank (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
2,714,000
b4,350,000
Yr net inc
50,059,000
61,506,000
Per share
3.32
4.70
b-Net income  Preferred dividend requirements exceeded net income in the year-ago quarter.


Modular Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Modular Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
11,885,016
9,568,750
Net inc
630,150
b688,963
Share earns
.16
.17
b-After a tax credit of $215,000.


Bank of East Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of East Tennessee
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
386,739
b62,581
Per share
-
.04
9mo net loss
990,002
b131,777
Per share
-
.10
b-Net income


Soviet Call to West: Money for Rebuilding
LEAD: Prodded by mounting public irritation with long lines and shoddy goods, the Soviet Union seems to have crossed an important threshold in its willingness to seek capitalist help in repairing its economy.


Anybody Under There?
LEAD: Answering the mail:


WPL Holdings Inc reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* WPL Holdings Inc (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
586,641,000
557,078,000
Net inc
61,659,000
57,039,000
Share earns
2.33
2.15


Police Attack Protesters at Prague Demonstration
LEAD: About 5,000 people defied the authorities by rallying in Wenceslas Square today to demand political change and greater freedom on the 70th anniversary of Czechoslovak independence.
They shouted ''Shame!'' and ''Gestapo!'' at police officers who dispersed them with clubs and water cannons.


5 1/2 Tons of Cocaine Seized
LEAD: Army troops on a training mission discovered nearly five and a half tons of cocaine in a cave in the Sierra Madre, a military official said today.
The official said the troops found the cocaine on Thursday near Buenaventura, 120 miles north of Chihuahua, the capital of this northern state, which borders on the United States.


Qmax Technology Group reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Qmax Technology Group (OTC)
Year to June 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,891,305
4,038,262
Net loss
1,237,454
b316,155
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income


MNX Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MNX Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
21,456,672
18,847,387
Net inc
204,335
1,286,743
Share earns
.05
.29
9mo rev
63,650,795
51,570,311
Net inc
1,879,101
b3,487,754
Share earns
.43
.83
b-After a gain of $485,000 from a change in accounting principles.


Antitrust Official Foresees Little Change in U.S. Policy
LEAD: A Justice Department official today rejected suggestions that the Federal Government would challenge a large number of corporate mergers under the next Administration.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ARCO Chemical Co., Philadelphia, announced that it had repurchased 3.2 million shares of its common stock for about $100.4 million as of Oct. 25.


N.A.A.C.P. Official Retracts 2 Endorsements Under Fire
LEAD: The president of the local chapter of the National Associationn for the Advancement of Colored People has retracted her day-old endorsement of Vice President Bush and Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum after being threatened with suspension by the national headquarters.


California Vintners in a Bind
LEAD: Erratic spring weather and two years of drought dramatically reduced this year's crop of northern California's premium grapes, putting the state's vintners in an economic bind.
With grape prices tripling in the past year and a half, the vintners can either raise wine prices and risk losing market share to imports, or hold prices down and lose profit margins.


Reviews/Film; Plot Twists, Into a Lake
LEAD: ''I saw Jimmy,'' says Wade, the cute young handyman at snowy Wolf Lodge. ''He's in the lake.
He's frozen and dead.'' Yes, he's frozen and dead, says the none-too-bright Wade, with all the excitement of someone who has just found his misplaced car keys instead of the previous cute young handyman. ''Into the Fire'' tries to heat up ''The Postman Always Rings Twice'' - a truly perverse idea -with quadruple plot twists about who's murdering whom for the insurance money.


Midfed Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midfed Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
209,000
608,000
Per share
.30
.87


Horizon Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Industries Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Sales
77,861,000
69,210,000
Net inc
2,285,000
1,491,000
Share earns
.55
.36
Yr sales
274,044,000
256,548,000
Net inc
5,086,000
3,471,000
Share earns
1.22
.84


Aetna Life &amp; Casualty Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aetna Life &amp; Casualty Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,674,600,000
5,780,000,000
Net inc
b235,400,000
c254,000,000
Share earns
2.07
2.21
9mo rev
17,973,900,000
16,441,700,000
Net inc
b503,000,000
c723,100,000
Share earns
4.40
6.24


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Bobby Cox, the general manager of the Atlanta Braves, has been admitted to Piedmont Hospital in Atlanta with a bleeding ulcer and placed in the intensive care unit. . . .
Chuck Muncie, a former running back with the San Diego Chargers and the New Orleans Saints, pleaded not guilty to four cocaine charges before a United States magistrate in San Diego Thursday.


Information Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Information Resources Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
33,666,000
26,077,000
Net inc
509,000
b2,471,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
91,598,000
80,312,000
Net loss
878,000
c121,000
Share earns
-
.01


Lautenberg: An Outsider on the Inside
LEAD: For nearly six years, Frank R. Lautenberg has been a new kid in this town.


Advest Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advest Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
49,175,000
57,424,000
Net inc
583,000
2,903,000
Share earns
.06
.28
Yr rev
204,926,000
229,084,000
Net inc
3,235,000
13,902,000
Share earns
.32
1.34


Quipp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quipp Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
3,112,742
3,428,313
Net inc
300,975
366,088
Share earns
.19
.23
9mo sales
10,814,784
8,305,814
Net inc
1,023,421
788,436
Share earns
.66
.50


Dave Johnson Gets What He Deserves
LEAD: It is easy to make comparisons, especially when the management styles of the men who run the Mets and the Yankees are so radically different.
In 1980, for example, the Yankees won 103 games and the Eastern Division title under Dick Howser, but unexpectedly lost to the Kansas City Royals in the American League championship series.


Rollins Environmental Servces Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rollins Environmental Servces Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
52,774,000
49,156,000
Net inc
4,646,000
8,345,000
Share earns
.07
.14
Yr rev
206,285,000
173,619,000
Net inc
33,331,000
28,393,000
Share earns
.55
.48


Patents; A Japanese Design For Levitated Railway
LEAD: A Japanese research organization won an American patent this week for a futuristic magnetically levitated railway that would be simpler than previous designs and use less energy.


Melamine Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Melamine Chemicals (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,293,000
7,892,000
Net inc
1,599,000
1,472,000
Share earns
.29
.30
Shares outst
5,450,000
4,866,304


Wisconsin Energy Corp reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wisconsin Energy Corp (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,495,362,000
1,365,527,000
Net inc
202,562,000
166,293,000
Share earns
3.03
2.50


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''From the moment Government approval for the drug was granted, RU 486 became the moral property of women, not just the property of the drug company.''  - Claude Evin,France's Minister of Health.  [ 1:6. ]


New Zealand Inquiry
LEAD: New Zealand's Justice Minister, Geoffrey Palmer, said today that he had appointed a panel to investigate whether there were sufficient controls on the New Zealand stock market.


Micha Reisser, Israeli Legislator, 42
LEAD: Micha Reisser, a member of Parliament and a top candidate for the right-wing Likud party in next week's elections, died Thursday of injuries sustained in a car accident a day earlier, hospital officials said.
He was 42 years old.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 3-5, 30


Detection Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detection Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,759,000
4,166,000
Net inc
319,000
333,000
Share earns
.12
.13
6mo sales
9,209,000
8,213,000
Net inc
562,000
639,000
Share earns
.22
.26


Israeli Draft: Sore Subject for Strict Orthodox
LEAD: Most men in the rigorously Orthodox neighborhood of Mea Shearim say they know nothing about the duty that many secular Israelis accuse them of shirking.


Stanhome Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanhome Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
105,517,000
95,639,000
Net inc
7,639,000
6,361,000
Share earns
.37
.31
9mo sales
338,322,000
301,238,000
Net inc
24,652,000
19,514,000
Share earns
1.19
.94


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Soviet Government budgets described a prediction of a $58 billion deficit incorrectly.
The prediction was for next year's budget, not this year's.


Couple to Get Hearing On Parentage of Girl
LEAD: A Pennsylvania couple who want genetic testing of a girl they believe is their daughter will get a chance to present their case next Friday.


Sauve's Mastery of Whalers Continues
LEAD: With Bob Sauve shining in goal, the Devils played inspired hockey and defeated the Hartford Whalers, 5-3.


F.A.A. Contract Award To I.B.M. Is Supported
LEAD: A Government appeals board yesterday denied the protest that led to the suspension of a $3.6 billion contract awarded to the International Business Machines Corporation for a major element in the program to modernize the nation's air-traffic-control system.


Florida City Settles Rights Suit
LEAD: A couple accepted a $220,000 settlement Wednesday, ending a four-year, $7 million suit charging that New Port Richey officials harassed them and tried to run them out of town.


Instron Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Instron Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
24,678,000
20,463,000
Net inc
176,000
15,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo sales
79,476,000
65,111,000
Net inc
1,910,000
1,488,000
Share earns
.31
.24


Noble Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noble Drilling (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
11,276,000
7,896,000
Net loss
1,881,000
2,190,000
9mo rev
31,457,000
18,461,000
Net loss
6,180,000
8,364,000


Irwin Magnetic Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Irwin Magnetic Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 25
1988
1987
Sales
14,277,000
11,166,000
Net inc
329,000
474,000
Share earns
.06
.09


Eagle Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
150,000
414,000
Per share
.09
.26
6mo net inc
498,000
747,000
Per share
.30
.46


Corrections
LEAD: A page 1 article on Thursday about Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward misstated the increase in the percentage of New York City officers of Hispanic descent in the last decade.
The percentage has increased 7.8 points, not 3.4.
The 1978 percentage was 3.4.


Bridge
LEAD: In the World Team Olympiad, which ended in Venice last week, the Canadian women's team gave its best performance in the 28 years of the event.
It lost narrowly in the semifinal to the strong British team after being almost even four deals from the end.


About New York; Offering $10,000 To Help Uphold A Social Contract
LEAD: This Thursday afternoon found Edward F. Arrigoni, a successful and respected man of commerce, relaxing at Viviano's restaurant in the Bronx's Eastchester section.
He sat at the big table in front - the best in the house - sipping Beck's beers and slowly devouring an exquisite hunk of filet mignon.


The Brawley Case and New Yorkers' Conflicting Perceptions
LEAD: Following are excerpts from each of five groups of New Yorkers who met to discuss the Tawana Brawley case at the invitation of The New York Times:  'In a Bind'  A discussion among nine young white professionals - including a psychologist, an actor and a magazine editor.


West Point-Pepperell Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Point-Pepperell Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1988
1987
Sales
677,465,000
481,159,000
Net inc
24,293,000
c22,847,000
Share earns
.83
.73
Yr sales
2,151,075,000
1,703,531,000
Net inc
b84,360,000
c71,586,000
Share earns
2.82
2.38


BNH Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BNH Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
742,000
787,000
Per share
.24
.26
9mo net inc
2,143,000
2,132,000
Per share
.71
.71


Magma Copper Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magma Copper Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
141,212,000
103,587,000
Net inc
12,344,000
b5,067,000
Share earns
.32
-
9mo rev
417,816,000
300,736,000
Net inc
40,868,000
b3,383,000
Share earns
.65
-


U.S. Rejects Action on Japan's Rice Imports
LEAD: Averting a trade conflict with Japan in the heat of an American political campaign, the United States trade representative, Clayton K. Yeutter, rejected a petition today from domestic rice growers seeking immediate access to the $35 billion-a-year Japanese rice market.


Review/Music; The Philharmonic, With Leppard as Guest
LEAD: The latest in this season's guest conductors at the New York Philharmonic is Raymond Leppard, the British conductor who has moved much of his activity to this country and who is now music director at the Indianapolis Symphony.


Bush Distorts Economic Facts. . .
LEAD: ''Practical politics'' wrote the historian Henry Adams some 80 years ago ''consists in ignoring the facts.'' George Bush is some practical politician.
When he's not railing about flags and furloughs he's playing fast and loose with the facts.
He unabashedly informs us that the national economy has prospered almost miraculously under the Reagan-Bush Administration while Massachusetts has stagnated under Gov.


3 Retailing Chains Expect Strong Holiday Sales
LEAD: The heads of three of American retailing's largest chains, the K Mart Corporation, the Dayton Hudson Corporation and Toys 'R' Us Inc., said yesterday that they expected strong sales this Christmas season and a healthy gain in fourth-quarter profits over 1987.


Man Held in Escape After Police Slaying
LEAD: A 28-year-old Harlem man was arrested yesterday and charged with helping the suspected killer of a New York City police officer hide for several days last week before the suspect fled the country, the authorities said.


2 Parties Spend Heavily in States, With an Eye to 1991 Redistricting
LEAD: Both national political parties are pouring money and advice into state legislative races this year as they prepare for the redistricting battles that will follow the 1990 census.


Orson Welles's '38 Shocker Remade
LEAD: Here at Skywalker Ranch, where the film maker George Lucas has hatched many an otherworldly cinematic adventure, a group of actors gathered recently to re-create a radio program that shook the nation: Orson Welles's broadcast, a half century ago, of a dramatization of H. G. Wells's ''War of the Worlds.


Charles Hawtrey, 73, Of 'Carry On' Movies
LEAD: Charles Hawtrey, an actor who became a mainstay of the long-running ''Carry On'' series of film comedies, died Thursday in a nursing home in Walmer, in southeast England.
He was 73 years old.


Your Money; Software Eases Financial Tasks
LEAD: One way to take charge of personal finances is to put a computer to work.
And with software developments announced this week, first by Intuit Inc. and then by MECA Ventures and Best Programs, there are options for those who hope to make the task quick and easy, and for those who want complete and sophisticated financial planning.


Brooklyn Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brooklyn Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
280,000
309,000
Per share
.24
.27
9mo net inc
811,000
930,000
Per share
.70
-
The year-ago 9 months per share earnings is not available because the bank went public in March 1987.


Lyphomed Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lyphomed Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
26,835,000
43,891,000
Net loss
3,495,000
b5,436,000
Share earns
-
.18
9mo sales
94,981,000
123,559,000
Net loss
15,326,000
b15,320,000
Share earns
-
.51


New Teamster Head Talks Tough to Union Chiefs
LEAD: William J. McCarthy, the new president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, gathered the union's leadership from around the country today to give what was billed as his inaugural address.


MEATPACKER FINED A RECORD AMOUNT ON PLANT INJURIES
LEAD: Imposing its heaviest penalty ever against a single employer, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration announced fines today totaling $4.3 million against John Morrell &amp; Company for hundreds of ''egregious'' and ''willful'' violations at the meatpacker's Sioux Falls, S.D., plant.


Mets' Farm Chief Quits
LEAD: Steve Schryver resigned yesterday after seven years as director of minor-league operations for the Mets.


Dukakis, in Fiery Michigan Rally, Demands Atom Plant Safeguards
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis today assailed safety lapses at the Department of Energy's nuclear production plants, and aides asserted that his new aggressiveness was building momentum for his underdog campaign.


Sun States Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun States Savings &amp; Loan (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
248,000
b1,600,000
Share earns
-
.28
9mo net loss
2,647,000
b4,788,000
Share earns
-
.82
b-Net income


Bonn's Useful Business in Moscow
LEAD: Western leaders never feel comfortable about a West German leader visiting Moscow.
They fear the Soviet Union's embrace will lure Bonn from its anchor in the West.
But Chancellor Helmut Kohl can claim success in his four-day stay: he demonstrated support for Mikhail Gorbachev's moving his country along more moderate and hopeful lines, and he did so without breaking faith with the


COPING: With Car Pools; A happy commuter is one with compatible companions. Here's how to find them.
LEAD: As roads have become increasingly clogged with commuters driving to work, car pools have become a fact of life.
According to the Census Bureau, 22 percent of all commuters, some 18 million people, share rides to work.


Dollar Falls in Thin Trading While Gold Is Up on Rumor
LEAD: The dollar fell yesterday in light trading amid continuing bearish sentiment and overseas rumors.


George Wallace's Mother
LEAD: Mozelle Wallace, mother of former Gov.
George C. Wallace of Alabama, died at her home in Montgomery Thursday after an extended illness.
She was 90 years old.
Mrs.
Wallace, a former county health worker, is survived by the former Governor and three other children, Gerald Wallace, Jack Wallace and Mary Ann Dauphin.


REAGAN CRITICIZES SOVIETS ON RADAR
LEAD: President Reagan said today that the United States was ''listening'' to Soviet proposals to settle a dispute over a radar installation that the United States says violates the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty.


Rauch Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rauch Industries Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
16,827,325
12,064,199
Net inc
1,588,154
645,845
Share earns
.97
.39
9mo sales
19,460,044
14,249,888
Net inc
1,195,858
243,770
Share earns
.73
.15


Williams Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Williams Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
292,000,000
336,500,000
Net loss
b12,300,000
4,900,000
Share earns
-
.14
9mo rev
1,223,400,000
1,199,000,000
Net inc
b114,100,000
c72,800,000
Share earns
3.00
2.10


MidConn Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MidConn Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
532,770
503,969
Per share
.29
.27
Yr net inc
1,876,893
2,067,326
Per share
1.01
1.12
The bank said that the net for fiscal 1987 included securities gains equal to 10 cents per share.


Altus Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altus Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
108,000
d401,000
Per share
.02
.08
9mo net loss
b21,594,000
cd7,498,000
Per share
-
1.54
b-Included an increase of $8,157,000 in provisions for loan losses.


Doskocil Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Doskocil Cos (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
44,826,000
55,678,000
Net inc
b440,000
c506,000
Share earns
.08
.09
9mo sales
144,767,000
160,901,000
Net inc
b2,609,000
c3,186,000
Share earns
.51
.55


A Bach Organ Mass
LEAD: The organist Anthony Newman is to play Johann Sebastian Bach's German Organ Mass at Holy Trinity Church, 316 East 88th Street, at 5 P.M. tomorrow.
The concert is the first of two programs devoted to all the surviving organ music Bach wrote during his years in Leipzig, from 1723 until his death in 1750.


Reliability Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reliability Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
13,177,000
6,089,000
Net inc
1,113,000
b227,000
Share earns
.26
-
9mo rev
30,716,000
20,529,000
Net inc
258,000
691,000
Share earns
.06
.16


Wheelabrator Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wheelabrator Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
311,600,000
243,400,000
Net inc
11,500,000
6,300,000
Share earns
.28
.22
Shares outst
41,600,000
29,000,000
9mo rev
807,200,000
743,200,000
Net inc
29,900,000
18,500,000
Share earns
.79
.64
Shares outst
37,700,000
28,700,000


Gendex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gendex Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,889,000
4,003,000
Net inc
476,000
242,000
Share earns
.16
.09
6mo sales
9,036,000
7,554,000
Net inc
779,000
414,000
Share earns
.26
.17


Mapplethorpe Ends Lawsuit
LEAD: Robert Mapplethorpe has withdrawn a lawsuit against the New-York Historical Society after receiving from the society a collection of American silver that was the subject of dispute between the photographer and the museum.


Midland Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midland Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
37,124,000
32,616,000
Net inc
3,028,000
2,853,000
Share earns
.90
.83
9mo rev
109,314,000
93,520,000
Net inc
10,399,000
8,171,000
Share earns
3.10
2.38


Rio Alcom Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rio Alcom Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
474,100,000
352,100,000
Net inc
b30,000,000
15,100,000
Share earns
.68
.34
9mo rev
1,449,976,000
1,111,017,000
Net inc
b90,104,000
53,316,000
Share earns
2.03
1.20


Germania Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Germania Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
501,000
b225,000
Per share
.25
-
9mo net inc
950,000
1,100,000
Per share
.48
.57
b-Net loss


Flightsafety International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flightsafety International Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
44,124,000
35,224,000
Net inc
11,841,000
10,980,000
Share earns
.35
.33
Shares outst
33,836,237
33,645,874
9mo rev
126,215,000
99,523,000
Net inc
36,195,000
30,614,000
Share earns
1.07
.91
Shares outst
33,770,022
33,585,591


James Ellis, 89, Dies; Led a Scandal Inquiry
LEAD: James Theodore Ellis, an accountant and management consultant who conducted the financial investigation that led to the resignation of Mayor James J. Walker of New York City in 1932, died Tuesday at his home in Marathon, Fla., after a long illness.
He was 89 years old.


Merrimack Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrimack Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
1,204,000
838,000
Per share
.30
.18
9mo net inc
3,316,000
2,493,000
Per share
.82
.54
Shares outst
4,044,882
4,600,000


Empire District Electric reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empire District Electric (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
151,887,000
150,607,000
Net inc
16,837,000
18,262,000
Share earns
2.91
3.22


Marcor Development reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marcor Development
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
868,954
1,818,184
Net inc
310,154
c556,577
Share earns
.03
.06
6mo rev
1,763,552
2,511,900
Net inc
b735,267
c976,372
Share earns
.07
.10
b-After tax credits of $148,354.


Careplus Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Careplus Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,628,000
6,271,000
Net inc
b478,000
326,000
Share earns
.10
.07
9mo rev
21,626,000
16,663,000
Net inc
b1,244,000
c1,820,000
Share earns
.25
-


Show for Wildlife Carvings
LEAD: More than 800 wildlife carvings, from eagles, ducks and songbirds to bears and fish, will be shown and judged at the fourth annual New England Wildlife Exposition next Saturday and Sunday at Restland Farms in Northford, Conn.


Review/Opera; With the Immigrants In the World of Saroyan
LEAD: The Center for Contemporary Opera is offering a pleasant small-scaled operatic experience this week at the newly refurbished Kathryn Bache Miller Theater at Columbia University.
The opera is Jack Beeson's ''My Heart's in the Highlands,'' receiving its first full-length, staged performances during this run.


U.S. Says Soviets Have Deployed New Attack Jets in Afghanistan
LEAD: The Soviet Union has deployed about 30 advanced ground attack planes in Afghanistan that are meant for offensive operations, State Department officials said today.


NATO Prepares for a Debate On Nuclear Arms in Europe
LEAD: Sidestepping anti-missile concerns in member countries, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's nuclear planners prepared the ground today for a long-delayed debate on the future of nuclear weapons in Europe.
The debate could be in the spring.
The Nuclear Planning Group of the alliance, which meets every six months, ended its fall session with a noncommittal communique reaffirming the strategy of nuclear deterrence coupled with negotiations with the Soviet bloc on arms control.


Besicorp Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Besicorp Group
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
360,334
436,803
Net loss
38,880
198,930


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article yesterday reported on results of Wednesday's local elections in South Africa and on their implications for the ruling party.
The article noted that the elections were open to all races.
It also said President P. W. Botha and his National Party might be forced to seek the support of mixed-race and Indian voters in a future general election to compensate for the ruling party's loss of support among Afrikaner voters.


Mylan Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mylan Laboratories Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
21,094,000
25,120,000
Net inc
4,609,000
6,774,000
Share earns
.13
.19
6mo sales
44,125,000
46,606,000
Net inc
10,751,000
12,281,000
Share earns
.30
.34


Lawson Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lawson Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
42,694,835
38,708,836
Net inc
5,457,780
4,821,333
Share earns
.38
.33
9mo sales
122,597,931
108,589,699
Net inc
15,955,234
11,751,926
Share earns
1.10
.80


Atlantic Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Group Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,650,690
7,585,860
Net loss
53,439
b83,924
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


BancOklahoma Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancOklahoma Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
48,958,000
12,461,000
9mo net loss
74,530,000
31,561,000
The latest third quarter results included a $47 million provision for losses on loans and repossessed assets.


CSX Increases Share Repurchase
LEAD: The CSX Corporation increased the number of shares it will repurchase in a self-tender offer to 43.1 million, for a total of $1.4 billion, as part of its restructuring program.
CSX had initially planned to buy back 40 million common shares, or about 26 percent of shares outstanding.
The offer expired on Oct.


Budget Deficit Up in '88, Despite Forecast of Drop
LEAD: The Government today reported that the budget deficit for the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30 rose by $5.4 billion from the year before, reaching $155.1 billion.


CLOSING OPPOSED FOR BASES ABROAD
LEAD: Virtually all the hundreds of bases operated by the United States in foreign nations must remain open for the time being, the Pentagon says in a classified report to a special commission.


Universal Security Instrument Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Security Instrument Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,154,977
5,376,000
Net inc
95,767
102,204
Share earns
.03
.03
9mo sales
11,539,155
10,721,026
Net loss
148,035
69,973


Endorsements by 2 Papers
LEAD: The New York Post endorsed Vice President Bush for the Presidency yesterday, while The Philadelphia Daily News opted for Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis.
The Post said Mr.
Bush would ''lead the nation in the right direction,'' calling him ''a champion of peace through strength, a believer in lower taxes and a free-market economy.


Astronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astronics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,294,000
4,158,000
Net loss
84,000
b63,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
15,718,000
12,658,000
Net inc
20,000
c534,000
Share earns
.01
.14
b-Net income


Dfsoutheastern Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dfsoutheastern Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,713,000
1,207,000
9mo net inc
6,316,000
3,856,000
There are no common share earnings because late last month the company converted from a mutual thrift institution to a stock company.


American Held in Drug Case Will Be Sent Home by Spain
LEAD: An American freelance photographer who was convicted earlier this year in Spain on drug-trafficking charges will be returned to the United States in a prisoner exchange, the Justice Department said today.
The plight of the photographer, Conan Owen of Annandale, Va., had received extensive publicity in the United States, especially after former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d made a plea on Mr.


Motion for Mistrial Denied By Judge in Steinberg Case
LEAD: A defense motion for a mistrial in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg was dismissed yesterday after the judge reaffirmed the admissibility of testimony that portrayed the defendant as cold and unconcerned over the death of the 6-year-old girl he is accused of killing.


Ametek Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ametek Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
131,731,000
106,769,000
Net inc
b9,442,000
c9,794,000
Share earns
.21
.22
9mo sales
394,063,000
315,918,000
Net inc
b27,757,000
c30,577,000
Share earns
.63
.69


Nantucket Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nantucket Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 27
1988
1987
Sales
7,139,613
6,405,962
Net inc
b2,104,928
c41,096
Share earns
.80
.02
6mo sales
14,740,439
15,570,904
Net inc
b1,590,758
c14,298
Share earns
.60
.01


Review/Television; A 'Dirty Dancing' Series
LEAD: Just over a year ago, a little movie called ''Dirty Dancing'' turned into a big box-office hit as it caught the romantic fancy of teen-agers.
The film, set in a Catskills resort in 1963, told the story of a streetwise dance instructor and a blossoming middle-class young woman who found summer love while dancing the mambo.


Adirondack S.O.S.
LEAD: New York State's greatest environmental and recreational resource, the Adirondack Park, is in danger.
If Governor Cuomo wants to redeem his environmental record, now is the time to halt the park's steady slide into piecemeal suburbanization.


Suburban Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suburban Bankshares Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
109,000
117,000
Per share
.08
.09
9mo net inc
189,000
231,000
Per share
.12
.16


Drawing Time, Setting Back and Marching On
LEAD: At the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, in Manhattan, there is a giant clock with a milk-glass face set high on the south wall.
Twice a day its sugar pine hands sweep a circle of Roman numerals, moved by an elegant mechanism on display on the school's top floor.
In the evenings the landmark tower is lighted from within and the timepiece, which dates from 1859, glows like a great autumn moon, visible as far as the Brooklyn Bridge.


Medchem Products reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medchem Products (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,780,000
2,238,000
Net inc
1,021,000
560,000
Share earns
.25
.15
Shares outst
4,157,920
3,753,750
Yr sales
17,419,000
8,093,000
Net inc
2,871,000
2,026,000
Share earns
.72
.54
Shares outst
4,091,999
3,779,478


Jets Are Plugging Some Holes
LEAD: They had seemed charmed this season in avoiding injuries and keeping the same lineup.
But the Jets expect to place three new starters on the field tomorrow against the Steelers.


Settlement Hopes Fade In Walkout by Jockeys
LEAD: New York's horse owners refused yesterday to vote on a compromise, proposed by track management and supported by the jockeys, to end the 10-day jockeys' strike at Aqueduct Race Track.
After the owners' action, which dashed widespread hopes that the labor dispute was nearing an end, track officials predicted that New


Brewer Seeks Trade
LEAD: Six more players filed for free agency yesterday, increasing the total to 39, but Bill Schroeder, a Milwaukee catcher, became the first player to demand a trade.
Schroeder has five years in the major leagues and can make that demand.
If he doesn't withdraw it and isn't traded by March 15, he becomes a free agent.


Equion Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equion Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Sales
24,029,854
19,092,204
Net inc
1,293,343
c1,423,908
Share earns
.26
.28
Yr sales
88,803,523
74,687,258
Net inc
b4,165,984
c5,506,572
Share earns
.82
1.07


Penwest Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penwest Ltd
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Sales
37,820,000
34,972,000
Net inc
2,883,000
2,352,000
Share earns
.50
.40
Yr sales
141,682,000
135,990,000
Net inc
9,545,000
9,133,000
Share earns
1.67
1.59


Merry Land &amp; Investment Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merry Land &amp; Investment Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,417,000
7,326,000
Net inc
2,203,000
2,164,000
Share earns
.23
.23
9mo rev
23,724,000
20,513,000
Net inc
7,018,000
6,323,000
Share earns
.75
.72


Transactions Baseball
LEAD: Traded Walt Terrell, pitcher, to San Diego for Chris Brown and Keith Moreland, infielders.
Purchased the contracts of Phil Clark and Dan DiMascio, catchers; Milt Cuyler, outfielder, and Kevin Ritz and Randy Nosek, pitchers, from Toledo of the International League.


Programming &amp; Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Programming &amp; Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,738,980
3,616,310
Net inc
389,605
294,502
Share earns
.22
.16
6mo rev
12,038,463
7,917,985
Net inc
1,407,642
1,114,148
Share earns
.78
.62


Gulf States Utilities Co. reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gulf States Utilities Co. (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,489,900,000
1,434,791,000
Net inc
143,743,000
217,030,000
Share earns
.75
1.43


Judge Rebuffs Ex-Governor
LEAD: A Superior Court judge has rejected former Gov.
Edward J. King's request for a new trial in his unsuccessful libel suit against The Boston Globe.
The judge, James P. Lynch Jr., said he denied the motion Monday.


For Liberals, 15th District Is a Magnet
LEAD: In a year when most politicians are running hard to avoid a liberal label, the race in the 15th Congressional District in New York has strayed off track.


Ex-Officer in Sex-Bias Suit Held in Stabbing at Hearing
LEAD: A former New York City policewoman who has filed a sexual harassment suit against the city was arrested yesterday after she drew a knife from her purse and stabbed and slightly wounded a defendant in the case, the authorities said.


Adoption, Not Abortion, Is Formula for Disaster
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Hungary, Glasnost Remains a Foreign Idea
LEAD: To the Editor:


Texas Utilities Co reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Utilities Co (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,131,229,000
4,062,086,000
Net inc
674,486,000
683,680,000
Share earns
4.31
4.65
Shares outst
156,580,000
147,050,000


Unionfed Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unionfed Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
3,592,000
3,431,000
Share earns
.72
.68
Year-ago earnings are adjusted for application of SFAS 91.


Valero Natural Gas L P reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valero Natural Gas L P (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
328,000,000
260,400,000
Net inc
4,900,000
5,100,000
Share earns
.13
.14
9mo rev
915,100,000
855,200,000
Net inc
17,600,000
31,400,000
Share earns
.54
1.20


Seasonal Stock


Saturday News Quiz
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 52.


Sandata Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandata Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,136,673
2,294,821
Net inc
64,155
73,920
Share earns
.03
.03
Revenue in the first quarter of 1987 includes a one-time equipment sale of $385,000.


Review/Theater; Two in Search of Truth
LEAD: The contradiction between truth and illusion is given striking theatrical life at the Arena Stage with the pairing of Luigi Pirandello's ''Six Characters in Search of an Author'' and Jean Anouilh's ''Ring Round the Moon.'' Though the Pirandello is a work of genius and the Anouilh a caprice, seeing the two in tandem reinforces the thematic bonds between the innovator and his follower.


First Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Mississippi (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
81,931,000
79,059,000
Net inc
4,467,000
14,603,000
Share earns
.22
.72
The company said in the year-ago first quarter, there was a non-recurring gain of $8.5 million, or 42 cents a share, related to a public offering.


Dixie Yarns Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dixie Yarns Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
142,607,000
164,056,000
Net inc
3,939,000
6,805,000
Share earns
.33
.56
9mo sales
455,513,000
419,099,000
Net inc
16,519,000
b19,087,000
Share earns
1.36
1.85


Patents; Reducing the Potency Of Alcoholic Beverages
LEAD: Prompted in part by heightened concern about health, weight and drunken driving, Americans have reduced their consumption of hard liquor, like rum and whisky, by 17 percent in the last 10 years, the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States says.
But consumption of light beers and wine-juice coolers has surged.


Dukakis Is Questioning Bush On Letter to Arab-Americans
LEAD: The campaign of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis today called upon Vice President Bush to disavow a mailing sent to Arab-Americans charging that Mr.
Dukakis would be ''no more than Israel's errand boy.''


CoastAmerica Tie To American Hoist
LEAD: The CoastAmerica Corporation, a hardware retailer, agreed to be acquired by the American Hoist and Derrick Company in a $110 million deal.
The merger will create the fifth-largest United States hardware distribution business, with more than over $800 million in annual sales.


Mini Minor Revolutionized Auto Design
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviet Shift on Joint Ventures Studied
LEAD: Moscow's decision to permit foreign companies to gain majority control of joint ventures in the Soviet Union will have only a limited impact on American and other foreign businesses, executives and consultants said yesterday.


Reece Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reece Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
12,800,000
13,730,000
Net inc
224,000
199,000
Share earns
.09
.08
9mo rev
43,648,000
41,301,000
Net inc
1,126,000
980,000
Share earns
.44
.38


Soviet Space Shuttle Readied for Unmanned Flight


GABEL RELATES AMBIVALENCE FOR MYERSON
LEAD: Sukhreet Gabel asserted yesterday that she admires both her mother and Bess Myerson and wishes them no harm, but acknowledged having mixed feelings toward both.


Welfare Denied To Many of Poor Over Paperwork
LEAD: A new study has found that hundreds of thousands of people who are eligible for welfare or Medicaid benefits fail to get help because of problems with their applications.


Lam Research Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lam Research Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 2
1988
1987
Sales
26,392,000
15,114,000
Net inc
1,708,000
b289,000
Share earns
.16
.03
b-After a tax credit of $52,000.
The year-ago figures have been restated to include the results of Gemini Research as a result of the merger with Gemini which took place in February.


One Price Clothing Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Price Clothing Stores (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
15,409,941
9,604,981
Net inc
b747,246
522,594
Share earns
.11
.08
9mo sales
41,905,984
24,995,961
Net inc
b2,105,766
1,448,350
Share earns
.32
.22


Hewlett Restructuring
LEAD: In an effort to simplify its organization and tighten its distribution system, the Hewlett-Packard Company said yesterday it has restructured portions of its computer business.The company, based in Palo Alto, Calif., said it had reduced its three principal computer-product groups to two, while a fourth sector devoted to computer marketing and sales and support remained largely unchanged.


MOUNTAINEERS RIDING HIGH
LEAD: A Florida State defensive back, Deion Sanders, recently scorned the West Virginia team when the undefeated Mountaineers were ranked ahead of the once-beaten Seminoles in one of the two news-agency polls.


Marines Believe a Collision Caused Fatal Copter Crash
LEAD: Two Marine helicopters that crashed Tuesday night, killing nine marines and an Air Force officer, apparently collided less than 200 feet above the Arizona desert, officials said today.


Health Concepts IV reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Concepts IV
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,373,627
1,466,925
Net inc
266,460
92,709
Share earns
.10
.04
Shares outst
2,692,000
2,393,478
9mo rev
8,227,294
4,150,058
Net inc
625,766
280,075
Share earns
.23
.13
Shares outst
2,692,000
2,187,540


Capital Holding Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Holding Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
40,160,000
30,415,000
Share earns
.85
.60
9mo net inc
126,452,000
163,235,000
Share earns
2.64
3.18
The company said it adopted new accounting rules in the latest second quarter which made net income the primary earnings measure.


U.S. Bonds Rise Despite Negative Factors
LEAD: Demand for Treasury issues remained strong yesterday, despite a the presence of a host of factors that would ordinarily depress the credit markets, including a lower dollar and higher prices for oil, gold and stocks.


Diversified Energies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Energies Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
102,800,000
93,600,000
Net loss
3,000,000
3,900,000
9mo rev
556,100,000
471,900,000
Net inc
25,000,000
17,600,000
Share earns
1.57
1.10


Kellogg Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kellogg Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,140,300,000
1,008,900,000
Net inc
145,700,000
119,300,000
Share earns
1.18
.96
9mo sales
3,256,800,000
2,828,000,000
Net inc
379,500,000
313,600,000
Share earns
3.08
2.53


N.F.L. Owners Ask for Ruling
LEAD: A Federal appeals court should rule whether the National Football League players' dispute with team owners regarding free agency is a collective-bargaining question or an antitrust issue, a lawyer for the owners told a judge today.


Review/Opera; June Anderson Fireworks
LEAD: Find a niche and fill it is a recipe for success in any field.
June Anderson, who appeared in a concert version of Bellini's ''Beatrice di Tenda'' at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday evening, has done just that.
The former New York City Opera artist has built a European career in recent years by taking on bel canto roles that other sopranos don't want to sing, mainly because they can't.


First N H Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First N H Banks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,925,000
6,183,000
Per share
.39
.52
9mo net inc
13,303,000
b17,152,000
Per share
1.08
1.45
b-After a gain of $1.9 million from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Raymond James Financial Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raymond James Financial Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
54,364,000
41,961,000
Net inc
b3,521,000
1,674,000
Share earns
.64
.30
Yr rev
179,880,000
152,393,000
Net inc
b5,882,000
9,582,000
Share earns
1.06
1.73


Fuqua and Triton In Stock Pact
LEAD: Fuqua Industries' chairman and chief executive, J. B. Fuqua, and members of his family have granted to the Triton Group Ltd. options to buy more than 1.3 million Fuqua shares at $36 a share in January, the two companies said.
Mr.
Fuqua, who is 70 years old, said he granted the option to aid his estate planning.


Dow Gains 9.06 but Is Off for Week
LEAD: The stock market managed a slight rebound yesterday as several takeover-related issues, which were hard hit on Thursday, gained ground.


Lomas &amp; Nettleton Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lomas &amp; Nettleton Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
b8,054,000
3,492,000
Share earns
.19
.06
b-Included an extraordinary after- tax gain of $2.6 million, or 7 cents per share, related to the redemption of the company's 7 percent convertible subordinated debentures at a discount.


More Taxes? Hub Merchants Say Yes!
LEAD: There is no Hearn's, or Sachs Quality, or Ludwig-Baumann's.
Those once-busy stores are now nothing more than names from the past.
But crowds still come to the Hub, a five-block shopping area in the heart of the South Bronx.


Steel Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Steel Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
29,738,000
23,721,000
Net inc
1,863,000
1,321,000
Share earns
.27
.19
Yr sales
107,602,000
86,001,000
Net inc
7,502,000
4,997,000
Share earns
1.07
.71


Acme Steel Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme Steel Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
104,547,000
83,885,000
Net inc
5,790,000
c1,913,000
Share earns
.98
.33
9mo sales
304,421,000
243,534,000
Net inc
b15,616,000
c9,591,000
Share earns
2.64
1.64


National Bancshares Corp of Texas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Bancshares Corp of Texas
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
36,898,000
17,117,000
9mo net loss
155,835,000
30,112,000


Polaroid Battle With Shamrock
LEAD: Polaroid, which is fighting a $2.4 billion takeover offer from Shamrock Holdings, contended in documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission that Shamrock had failed to advise investors adequately of its plans.
The camera company cited memorandums prepared in January 1988 by Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, one of Shamrock's financial advisers.





Manila Journal; 20th-Century Lawsuit Asserts Stone-Age Identity
LEAD: Members of a primitive tribe claiming a jungle cave for its home took a giant step into the 20th century this week by filing a lawsuit against two anthropologists who say they are a hoax.


Enlarging the Fine Print on Loans
LEAD: The terms were simple.
Yvonne and Stanley Hoehn needed only their house to secure an $18,000 line of credit from a local mortgage company.
They agreed to a 120-month payment plan at 15 percent annual interest.


State by State; Political Experts Offer 3 Views of '88 Election
LEAD: Martin Wattenberg wasn't surprised when Vice President Bush surged ahead of his Democratic rival, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, immediately after the Republican convention, opening a sizable lead that he has maintained ever since, Mr.
Wattenberg had been expecting something like that all along.


Key Centurion Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Key Centurion Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,176,000
5,127,000
Per share
.28
.27
9mo net inc
17,410,000
14,671,000
Per share
.92
.82
The results reflected a 100 percent stock dividend paid in July and the mergers of two banks.


Dahlberg Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dahlberg Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
15,895,000
13,959,000
Net inc
328,000
352,000
Share earns
.10
.12
9mo rev
46,405,000
39,827,000
Net inc
810,000
1,161,000
Share earns
.25
.40


Commercial Bancorp-Coloado reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial Bancorp-Coloado
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
268,000
383,000
Per share
.18
.25
9mo net inc
980,000
78,000
Per share
.64
.05


Bancorp New Jersey reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp New Jersey
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
909,000
937,000
Per share
.33
-
9mo net inc
2,507,000
2,441,000
Per share
.93
-
The year-ago per share earnings not applicable; the bank converted from mutual to stock ownership on Aug.


Unification Bout Is Reunion
LEAD: Julio Cesar Chavez, the World Boxing Association lightweight champion, and Jose Luis Ramirez, the World Boxing Council lightweight champion, will not be strangers to each other when they fight Saturday night at the Las Vegas Hilton in a 12-round unification match.


Colorocs Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colorocs Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
19,000
135,000
Net inc
b1,746,000
c505,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
12,318,762
9,363,016
9mo rev
216,000
361,000
Net inc
593,000
c432,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
10,595,057
8,773,692


F.A.A. Reports Small Cracks Found on Three Older DC-9's
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration said yesterday that a series of small cracks were discovered earlier this month on three older McDonnell Douglas DC-9 airliners.


Albert Edwards, 92, Retired Social Worker
LEAD: Albert Asbury Edwards, a former educator and social worker, died last Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 92 years old.


White Student Reports Blacks Beat Him on Bus
LEAD: The New York City police and the Transit Authority are investigating an attack on a 15-year-old white youth by a group of black youths on a city bus in Queens Thursday afternoon, the authorities said yesterday.


Now for Soviets, a Few Votes of Dissent
LEAD: The Soviet Union took a small but symbolically important step toward increased democracy today when a handful of members of the Supreme Soviet, or nominal parliament, cast the first no votes in more than half a century.


Hussein Bows Out
LEAD: Ibrahim Hussein, winner of the New York City Marathon last year, will not be able to defend his title in the race Nov. 6.
Fred Lebow, the race director, said that Hussein decided he was not in shape to compete after dropping out of the Olympic marathon Oct. 2 in Seoul, South Korea.
Also withdrawing was Pat Petersen, who has been the top American finisher three times.


Reid Sidelined
LEAD: J. R. Reid, the all-America junior forward at the University of North Carolina, had a pin inserted in his left foot yesterday as part of surgery to repair a stress fracture of the fifth metatarsal bone that he aggravated during the Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea.
He is expected to be sidelined for about eight weeks, said Dr.


Scicom Data Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scicom Data Services
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,511,313
3,752,641
Net inc
277,701
249,920
Share earns
.25
.23


Allen Organ Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allen Organ Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,750,124
6,424,586
Net inc
1,122,113
1,108,839
Share earns
.75
.74
9mo sales
16,936,167
17,822,556
Net inc
3,112,746
2,905,676
Share earns
2.07
1.93


A-Bombing of Japan Was Unnecessary
LEAD: To the Editor:


Metro Datelines; Parolee Gets 12 Years In Robbery of Agent
LEAD: A parolee who pleaded guilty to robbing an undercover agent of $40 after selling him a $10 crack vial was sentenced to 12 years in jail yesterday.
William Diaz, 34 years old, was sentenced to finish two years on an old robbery sentence and then to serve at least six more before he reapplies for parole.


In World of Make-Believe, A $115 Billion Bid for I.B.M.
LEAD: A leveraged buyout of I.B.M.?


Dravo Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dravo Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
75,960,000
70,530,000
Net inc
b5,150,000
c17,201,000
Share earns
.35
-
9mo rev
205,616,000
191,464,000
Net inc
b8,340,000
c54,073,000
Share earns
.56
-


Margo Nursery Farms reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Margo Nursery Farms
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,519,000
1,212,000
Net inc
94,000
46,000
Share earns
.06
.03
9mo sales
5,004,000
3,493,000
Net inc
359,000
137,000
Share earns
.21
.09


ERC International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ERC International (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
37,589,000
31,894,000
Net inc
1,352,000
1,345,000
Share earns
.23
.31
Shares outst
5,604,000
4,310,000
9mo rev
108,475,000
89,310,000
Net inc
4,395,000
3,890,000
Share earns
.87
.91
Shares outst
4,959,000
4,262,000


GOTTLIEB RESIGNS AS EDITOR OF VILLAGE VOICE
LEAD: The editor of the Village Voice, Martin Gottlieb, resigned yesterday, citing ''significant disagreements'' with the publisher over long-term goals.


Tri-State Motor Transit Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tri-State Motor Transit Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
24,928,000
29,291,000
Net inc
1,582,000
b1,392,000
Share earns
1.29
-
9mo rev
76,969,000
88,571,000
Net inc
1,020,000
b1,983,000
Share earns
.83
-


2 Whales Apparently Escape to Sea; Rescue Effort Called Success
LEAD: Two young California gray whales trapped by ice for three weeks disappeared this morning and apparently escaped to the open sea, leaving behind a trail in slushy water.


Informix Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Informix Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
23,691,000
17,683,000
Net inc
b98,000
2,730,000
Share earns
.01
.22
9mo rev
75,588,000
45,789,000
Net inc
b4,071,000
c6,744,000
Share earns
.33
.57
Shares outst
12,522,000
11,822,000


Noranda Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noranda Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,240,000,000
1,930,000,000
Net inc
139,000,000
89,000,000
Share earns
.72
.55
9mo rev
6,580,000,000
5,480,000,000
Net inc
b453,000,000
222,000,000
Share earns
2.36
1.35


Kent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kent Electronics (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 1
1988
1987
Sales
9,157,000
6,328,000
Net inc
499,000
348,000
Share earns
.18
.14
Shares outst
2,746,400
2,558,400
6mo sales
16,567,000
12,009,000
Net inc
894,000
640,000
Share earns
.33
.29
Shares outst
2,720,000
2,226,600


Community Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bancshares Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
537,000
369,000
Per share
.20
.24
9mo net inc
2,076,500
804,900
Per share
.99
.53
The company said it had 2,630,921 common shares outstanding as of Sept.


Coniston Outlook On TW's Units
LEAD: Coniston Partners, which Thursday began a $457 million tender offer for TW Services Inc., said it might sell the food operator's health-care service unit if it acquires control of the company.
TW also owns the 1,200-restaurant Denny's chain and operates more than 400 Hardee's restaurants across the country.


Hershiser Likes the Dodgers But He Might Say Sayonara
LEAD: Orel Hershiser's outstanding performance in 1988 earned him a spot alongside Don Drysdale and Sandy Koufax as one of the finest pitchers in Dodger history.


Publicker Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Publicker Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
19,868,000
5,540,000
Net inc
91,000
bc1,835,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
61,918,000
12,391,000
Net loss
48,000
c3,600,000
b-Net loss


Brawley Case: Public's Conflicting Views
LEAD: An informal sounding of attitudes about the Tawana Brawley case reveals confusion, poignant emotions and discernible differences between blacks and whites over the findings of the New York State grand jury that investigated the affair.


Venturian Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Venturian Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
8,242,000
6,964,000
Net loss
114,000
235,000
9mo sales
23,181,000
22,878,000
Net loss
125,000
b721,000
Share earns
-
.71
b-Net income


Hilb, Rogal &amp; Hamilton reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hilb, Rogal &amp; Hamilton
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
10,760,000
8,973,000
Net inc
b1,015,000
771,000
Share earns
.30
.23
9mo rev
32,147,000
27,341,000
Net inc
3,500,000
2,577,000
Share earns
1.04
.87


Times Co. Plans to Sell Cable System
LEAD: The New York Times Company has decided to sell its cable television system, NYT Cable TV, and has retained the First Boston Corporation as its adviser on the transaction.


ABQ Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ABQ Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
2,655,000
b1,568,000
Share earns
-
.49
b-Net income


The Race for Congress; 2 Proud Names Clash in Minnesota
LEAD: In recent weeks, Hubert H. Humphrey 3d has accused Senator Dave Durenberger, his Republican opponent in the Nov. 8 Senate election, of being an embarrassment to the state.


Death of Admiral's Son Explained by Coroner
LEAD: Richard E. Byrd Jr., son of the polar explorer, died of malnutrition and dehydration brought on by Alzheimer's disease, the state medical examiner said Thursday.


Books of The Times; An Outcry Against Men From Inside the Asylum
LEAD:  The Heart of the Country  By Fay Weldon  201 pages. Viking. $17.95.


Terrell Traded
LEAD: The Detroit Tigers traded the pitcher Walt Terrell to the San Diego Padres for the infielders Chris Brown and Keith Moreland yesterday and announced that they would not offer a contract to Darrell Evans for next season.


English Spoken Here, but Unofficially
LEAD: Three states will soon vote on proposals to make English their official language.
It's a popular, bad idea.
Few Americans dispute the importance of a common tongue; an open society thrives on open communication, and economic opportunity in America depends on knowing English.
But to require it smacks of discrimination.


Hong Kong Debates a Celebration
LEAD: While Hong Kong anxiously debates what life will be like when Britain returns the colony to China on July 1, 1997, a group of business executives here has decided that whatever the future holds, there is money to be made from that historic moment.


Campeau Sells Unit to Kohl's
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation said today it had reached a definitive agreement to sell Main Street Retail Stores Inc. to Kohl's Department Stores for a sum in excess of $90 million, of which more than $85 million would be in cash and the rest in real estate.


Canrad Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canrad Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
13,508,000
11,471,200
Net inc
242,300
144,400
Share earns
.20
.12
9mo sales
40,365,000
31,817,000
Net inc
849,100
745,500
Share earns
.71
.63
Results for the latest 9-month include the effects of the acquisition of certain assets and the business of the measurement systems division of Page-Wilson Corp., effective March 29, 1987.


Wellman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wellman Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
74,600,000
63,000,000
Net inc
b8,900,000
5,700,000
Share earns
.61
.39
9mo sales
230,600,000
189,800,000
Net inc
27,500,000
c6,100,000
Share earns
1.90
.49


FRANCE ORDERING COMPANY TO SELL ITS ABORTION DRUG
LEAD: Saying it was acting in the interests of public health, the French Government today ordered a French company to resume distribution of a new abortion-inducing drug two days after the company took it off the market because of pressure from anti-abortion groups.


Parade on Monday
LEAD: The Halloween parade will begin at 7 P.M.
Monday on West Street between Houston and Christopher Streets, travel east on Houston Street to the Avenue of the Americas, north to 14th Street and east to Union Square.


Gibson Greetings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gibson Greetings Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
114,786,000
106,654,000
Net inc
12,317,000
7,816,000
Share earns
.79
.50
9mo rev
237,391,000
214,202,000
Net inc
20,653,000
12,821,000
Share earns
1.33
.81


Minntech Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minntech Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,187,000
2,673,000
Net inc
b12,000
c432,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
7,964,000
5,374,000
Net inc
b203,000
c666,000
Share earns
.13
-
b-Included tax credits of $4,000 for the quarter and $69,000 for the 6 months.


Indiana Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Indiana Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net loss
343,000
b353,000
Per share
-
.69
9mo net inc
83,000
872,000
Per share
.16
2.20
b-Net income


Patriots Change Hands
LEAD: Victor Kiam, owner of the company that makes Remington shavers, became principal owner of the New England Patriots yesterday, ending more than four months of negotiations to buy the National Football League team from its founders, the Sullivan family.


Nevada Natl Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nevada Natl Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
341,202
206,000
9mo net inc
598,000
843,000
Preferred dividend requirements exceeded net income in both the third quarter and 9 months' periods.


U.S. Concedes Risks to Health At Atomic Plant
LEAD: The Government has acknowledged for the first time that even small amounts of radioactive material from the Fernald uranium processing plant here pose health risks to people who live nearby.


Patents; Controversial Motor to Get New Hearing
LEAD: Joseph W. Newman, who has been battling the Patent and Trademark Office for nine years in defense of what critics deride as a perpetual motion machine, takes his case to the nation's top patent court on Tuesday.


First Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Republic Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
115,000
200,000
Per share
.04
.08
Shares outst
3,239,072
2,439,182
9mo net inc
571,000
469,000
Per share
.18
.20
Shares outst
3,230,534
2,333,636


Komag Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Komag Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
24,376,000
12,684,000
Net inc
b2,543,000
c2,666,000
Share earns
.20
.21
9mo net inc
b8,318,000
c5,788,000
Share earns
.65
.54
b-After tax credits of $5,000 for the quarter and $1,137,000 for the 9 months.


National Intergroup Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Intergroup Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
731,100,000
652,200,000
Net loss
50,300,000
b2,800,000
Share earns
-
.06
6mo rev
1,400,000,000
1,800,000,000
Net loss
40,900,000
b6,300,000
Share earns
-
.16


Ruhollah Khatami, Religious Leader, 84
LEAD: Ayatollah Ruhollah Khatami, an Iranian religious leader who helped overthrow the Shah, died Thursday at Teheran Hospital.
He was 84 years old.
The official Iran press agency did not give the cause of death.


Modern Controls Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Modern Controls Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,241,000
1,859,000
Net inc
447,000
346,000
Share earns
.21
.16
9mo sales
6,255,000
5,246,000
Net inc
1,223,000
927,000
Share earns
.58
.43


Firstfed America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstfed America (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,514,000
2,853,000
Share earns
.66
.73
Yr net inc
11,045,000
10,462,000
Share earns
2.84
2.67


Along the Elbe With the Soviet Army
LEAD: The river at Sandau is eight feet deep, with a moderate current.
Soviet armored units practiced crossing the river under simulated fire from an imaginary enemy in Warsaw Pact military maneuvers here the other day.


Tennis
LEAD:  Hlasek Upsets McEnroe: John McEnroe was upset by Jakob Hlasek of Switzerland, 7-6, 2-6, 7-6, last night in the quarterfinals of the $1.1 million Paris Open.
McEnroe set off an uproar in the decisive third set, arguing that a serve by Hlasek tipped the net and persuading the tournament supervisor to overrule the chair umpire.


Bolar Pharmaceutical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bolar Pharmaceutical Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
32,843,731
24,622,521
Net inc
9,020,709
4,544,277
Share earns
.43
.23
9mo sales
90,667,054
54,885,618
Net inc
21,243,691
10,018,122
Share earns
1.05
.51


Citizens Bank N C reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Bank N C
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Net inc
148,000
85,000
Per share
.14
.09
9mo net inc
208,330
397,315
Per share
.20
.43


How to Calculate Cost Of Interest on the Debt
LEAD: To the Editor:


Metro Datelines; 2 Held in Bilking Of Swiss Hotelier
LEAD: The former president of a Queens savings and loan association and another man described as a convicted swindler were indicted yesterday on Federal charges that they bilked a Swiss hotel developer of nearly $750,000 when he sought longterm financing for his plans to renovate the former Gotham Hotel.


Standard Motor Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Motor Products Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
104,347,000
92,136,000
Net inc
2,665,000
4,556,000
Share earns
.20
.34
9mo sales
303,494,000
267,281,000
Net inc
6,589,000
13,016,000
Share earns
.50
.98


INSIDE
LEAD:  Tribe's Debunkers Sued  Members of a primitive tribe in the Philippines stepped into the 20th century by suing two anthropologists who say they are a hoax.
Page 4.
Big Contract for A.T.&amp;T.
A contract to supply minicomputers to the Air Force was awarded to A.T.&amp;T., which valued the package at $4.5 billion over eight years.


Shoemaker to Retire
LEAD: He has had fewer mounts this year, so Bill Shoemaker has decided to make next year the last one of the most successful career in riding history.
Shoemaker has more than 8,780 winners, whose purses were worth more than $121 million, since April 20, 1949, when he rode his first winner.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Calendar column of The Home Section on Thursday listed dates incorrectly for a crafts show at the Park Avenue Christian Church to benefit the Heartsease Home.
The show is to be held next Friday and Saturday; it did not open yesterday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''In most physics experiments the answer used to be just one number or a string of numbers.


I'm Looking Forward to More Visits From My Silent, Sloe-Eyed Guests
LEAD: I NEVER knew how the woods would work on me; I had loved the city so.
Growing up I never had longings for a house; apartments suited me just fine: nosey neighbors, noisy kids, radios blaring, cars screeching, people dropping by - people everywhere - I liked it.
But, because my husband worked in the suburbs


It's the Year's No. 2 Night to Howl
LEAD: At Abracadabra, a Manhattan store offering one-stop shopping for all your Halloween needs, including coffins for rent or sale, a suburban couple, Annette and Skip Marino, were laying in supplies for the holiday weekend. ''How about blood, hon?'' said Mr.
Marino, holding up a packet of fake blood.


'Favorite Son': Cynicism Spices Political Intrigue
LEAD: With little more than a week remaining before Election Day, NBC is presenting the country with a six-hour mini-series in which the hero, an embittered F.B.I. agent looking in disgust at the American political process, concedes that he ''hasn't voted since Truman went back to Independence.'' We can argue for years as to whether television shapes popular culture and ideas or merely reflects them.


The Voters' Race
LEAD: With the general election less than two weeks away, beleaguered employees of the Board of Elections were worried last week that their 14-hour days would not be enough to insure that all would-be voters in the county would have their registration applications approved by Nov. 8.


TV Mirrors a New Generation
LEAD: When the baby-boom generation was young, it saw the world through the eyes of Beaver Cleaver.
Now that huge population, born in the years following World War II, is 30-something, and prime-time television is beginning to see the world through their eyes.
As this strike-and-sports-delayed television season finally gets under way, programs for that postwar generation and, more notably, about it, are prominent in the network schedules.


Carlo Tresca's Enemies
LEAD: To the Editor:To the Editor:


Dazzle Remains For Former Stars
LEAD: Seldom is a 2-2 game described as satisfying, but for 20,731 soccer-hungry spectators at Giants Stadium, that word fit the Legends game, an exhibition featuring two dozen or so of the world's best players.


Platform Problem Aborts Launching of First Soviet Shuttle Mission
LEAD: The first launching of the Soviet space shuttle was aborted today, 51 seconds before the scheduled liftoff, when an emergency evacuation platform failed to separate from the rocket body and computer sensors shut down the launching, the official Soviet press agency Tass reported.


Fairy Tale Fringes
LEAD: To the Editor:


LAW SCHOOL V. REALITY
LEAD: As a graduate of Yale Law School and the recipient of an honorary Doctor of Laws degree at Harvard, I read Scott Turow's article, ''Law School v.
Reality,'' (Sept. 18) with interest.
He sees a wide gap between the teaching of law in law schools and the rough-and-tumble practice of law in later life.


THE MAKING OF A 'DUBLIN SMARTIE'
LEAD:  BERNARD SHAW  Volume One, 1856-1898: The Search for Love.
By Michael Holroyd.
Illustrated. 486 pp.
New York:  Random House. $24.95.


Protecting History Under Water
LEAD: WHEN the Confederate ironclad Georgia was added to the National Register of Historic Places in April 1987, some people wondered why.
She is under 30 feet of water in Savannah, Ga.


Indictments in Pentagon Case Are Expected After Election
LEAD: Federal prosecutors expect to bring the first indictments in the Pentagon fraud and bribery investigation shortly after the Presidential election, according to the Federal prosecutor in charge of the inquiry.


GLITTERING FINALES
LEAD: A truly festive dessert table deserves a touch of pure gold - or silver.
But in the setting pictured here, the sumptuous luster of precious metal isn't due just to polished platters and servers.
These desserts have been touched, as if by Midas, with decorations ranging from powdered gilt to golden sugar and silver dragees.


EMELIN'S 'GLASS MENAGERIE' HAS MAGIC MOMENTS
LEAD: PERHAPS ''The Glass Menagerie,'' like a fluttering bird, has to be let go before long.
With its gossamer texture and inimitable lyrical grace, one is set up for an ethereal tale.
But here's one about a family's all-too-tangible fears and domestic pressures, framed by the turbulence of the 30's - what the narrator, Tom, calls the play's ''social background.


FARMERS REMOVED FROM PARK IN INDIA
LEAD: Policemen wielding batons began rounding up thousands of defiant farmers who have been camped in a park and escorting them out of town on Saturday night.


Supercomputer Pictures Solve the Once Insoluble
LEAD: Describing how a tornado forms in a thunderstorm racing across a prairie is a most complex scientific problem, requiring dozens of separate mathematical equations.
Solving the equations would create an answer requiring millions or billions of numbers.
Today, researchers are using pictures and movies to dramatically simplify their answers and to give new insights into the formation of tornadoes.


Reviews/Dance; The Joffrey, in Tribute To Its Namesake
LEAD: The Joffrey Ballet presented the first of several performances of its rather solemnly-named Founders Program on Friday at the City Center Theater, 131 West 55th Street, where the company performs through Dec. 4.
The program of works by the late Robert Joffrey and Gerald Arpino, co-founders of the Joffrey, was well chosen, for it included a revealing excerpt from a ballet by Mr.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''It's an amazingly resilient business.
How many products can you buy for $1.20 that is an appetite suppressant, a stimulant or a relaxant, depending on the conditions - and is a legal product?''  Diana K. Temple, analyst at Salomon Brothers, on the tobacco business.


MISSION IMPOSSIBLE
LEAD: Want to guarantee that your mail is delivered - and promptly?
Camouflage your envelopes as bills and payments.
For decades I have received every invoice due and the vendor has received every check I've mailed.
JEROME AGEL  New York, N.Y.


Debuts; A Pianist Counters the Stereotypes
LEAD: Timothy Ehlen


Visit Bolsters West German's Gorbachev Ties
LEAD: As Chancellor Helmut Kohl moved through the carefully plotted paces of his Moscow summit meeting, nobody seemed better pleased than the stocky, dour Foreign Minister ever hovering near.


Missed Signs?
LEAD: To the Editor:


HALLOWEEN: TIME FOR CUSTOM AND FAMILY
LEAD: IN medieval times, Halloween was a Christian occasion observed on the eve of All Saints' Day, Nov. 1.
Eventually, it became a secular event, influenced by Celtic and Anglo-Saxon festivals to ward off evil spirits, protect the return journey of livestock from summer pastures and welcome the souls of the dead who were believed to revisit their homes in autumn.


These Days, Composing Can Be Fun
LEAD: The art of composing music gets easier all the time.
A week hardly goes by without the announcement of a new electronic device that promises to speed up the dreary business of putting one note after another on score paper.
Presumably the composer, burning with inspiration but overburdened by mundane details, will now be able to churn out more and better work.


Weekend Features Chamber Orchestras
LEAD: IN between the intimacy of chamber music and the full sonic spectrum of the symphony, lies the delectable middle ground of compositions for chamber orchestra.
Most of the great composers have contributed to this enticing repertory, but certainly compared to string quartets and symphony orchestras, there are all too few organizations dedicated to its care and cultural feeding.


The Unseasoned Palate
LEAD: Hold that jalapeno, chef.
Take it easy on the chili habanero.
And don't try to curry favor with me.
Some like it hot, but I do not.
To clear my nostrils, I prefer an inhalator, and I would rather burn my tongue on boiling coffee.


Officers Kill Suspect In Bronx Cab Robbery
LEAD: A 28-year-old man who the police said was robbing a gypsy cab in the Bronx died yesterday after he was shot in the head by officers.
A second gunman was arrested.


Correction
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the Pillsbury Company incorrectly described a disclosure by the company.
Pillsbury, which has rejected a takeover offer from Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., disclosed that other parties had expressed varying degrees of interest in buying the company, but it did not report that it had received another formal offer.


Reviews/Dance; Tour de Fuerza Explores Latin Diversities
LEAD: Two works presented Thursday night in the second program of the Tour de Fuerza series of events by Latin American choreographers at the Bessie Schonberg Theater were elaborate multimedia creations.
Another was a solo.
All three testified to the diversity of Latin American dance and performance art, but only the solo was truly compelling.


How to Get a Better Deal on Trade
LEAD: THE candidates have ignored it, but the trade deficit has not gone away.
Leaving aside the 30 percent increase in the trade gap in August and the 28 percent drop in July, the long-term trend is not encouraging.
Based on the first eight months of the year, the trade deficit for 1988 will probably approach $140 billion, a long way from being in balance.


About Men; Lost Among the Girls
LEAD: WHEN I WAS 13, my parents sent me to a girls' school.
Their intention was not to torture me.
They just weren't happy with the local public and parochial schools, and the only alternative in our town was a small, private day school then accepting boys for the first time in its 100-year history.


Jersey Nannies Organize for Status and Friendship
LEAD: Tracy Hughes is no baby sitter.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  MONDAY NIGHT MAYHEM: The Inside Story of ABC's Monday Night Football.
By Marc Gunther and Bill Carter. (Illustrated. Beech Tree/Morrow, $18.95.) Red Smith once calculated that in a football game the ball was actually in motion only 25 percent of the official playing time; the other 75 percent was used to pick up the ball and get set for the next play.


Frances Truscott Wed in England
LEAD: Frances Jill Truscott, the daughter of Gloria Truscott of Selsdon, Surrey, England, and Alan Truscott of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Charles Hewett Collins, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
John Hewett Collins of Royal Tunbridge Wells, Kent, England.
The Rev.
Norman Norgate performed the ceremony at St.


Courts Altering Criteria
LEAD: Landlords and tenants in New York City have long been aware that rent-regulated status for a tenant is based on the assumption that the tenant really lives in the apartment as a primary residence.


Mailbox; Horse Show Memories
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Conference to Focus on Issues of Children
LEAD: TO businesses they are the next work force.
To politicians they are future voters.
To educators they are today's responsibilities and tomorrow's teachers.
They are children, and many are not getting a good enough start in life to take over society, say organizers of ''Our Children, Our Future,'' a monthlong event in New Haven, to begin on


INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS/N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
LEAD:
% change from
% change from
Sep.
Aug.
Sep. 87
Rents
143.7
0.9
7.6
Homeowner's costs
147.3
0.8
8.9
Fuel and utilities
95.0
0.1
-1.5
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics  *Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.


League Is Changing, but Lakers Are Still on Top
LEAD: THE Los Angeles Lakers are stronger, the Boston Celtics older and the Detroit Pistons deeper.
But perhaps the most intriguing aspect of the 43d National Basketball Association season, which begins Friday night, is whether the Atlanta Hawks can prove that Dominique Wilkins, Moses Malone and Reggie Theus, with a combined salary of $4 million, can play with one $75 basketball.


Banks Using Personal Touch to Lure the Wealthy
LEAD: FOR people in Connecticut with an annual income of at least $100,000, a minimum net worth of a quarter of a million dollars and a checking account with a balance of $10,000 or more, going to the bank is becoming a thing of the past.


On the Broadening of Contacts and Knowledge
LEAD: ''DON'T join too many gangs. Join few if any.''


Lights! Camera! Action! Acting Tips for Interviews
LEAD: AFTER the job hunter's foot is in the door, what then?
Presenting a positive image - what used to be called making a good impression - has become so important that these days executives at even the highest level may seek out career coaching or enlist the aid of actors to help them play their roles better at an interview.


In Paris, Necklines Plunge
LEAD: LOW necklines are back in the news for spring and summer.
Teardrops and asymmetric cutouts have turned up at various fashion houses in Paris, but the sexiest necklines are on Emanuel Ungaro's clingy draped blouses with old-fashioned sweetheart cuts, shown above.
They are not meant just for evening; Ungaro's flowered daytime suits are frequently accompanied by low-cut blouses.


Unbeaten U.C.L.A. Is Upset
LEAD: The brief reign of U.C.L.A. as the No. 1 college team in the nation came to an end here today as the Washington State University Cougars upset the pass-happy Bruins, 34-30.


Martha Brody, a Violinist, To Marry Frederic Grevin
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Alan E. Brody of Bethesda, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Martha Ann Brody, to Frederic Jean Grevin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacques Grevin of Orinda, Calif.


In Secular France, Stirrings By an Angry Religious Right
LEAD: REVIVING old enmities, church and state have stumbled, almost reluctantly, into a clash over the emotional issue of abortion in France.
Although this is a highly secularized nation, a series of controversies this month has demonstrated the power and passion of committed Roman Catholics and has provoked an angry debate about both freedom of expression and a revolutionary new abortion pill.


Karen Stone of ABC Wed
LEAD: Karen Lee Stone, a correspondent in Washington for ABC News, and Bruce Edward Yannett, an associate counsel in the Office of the Independent Counsel: Iran-Contra in Washington, were married yesterday at Georgetown Lutheran Church in Washington by the Rev.
Robert R. Behnke.
The bride, a daughter of Leanore J.


VOTERS TO CHOOSE SEVEN JUDGES AT THREE JUDICIAL LEVELS
LEAD: WESTCHESTER voters will elect seven judges from a field of 16 candidates to fill vacancies at three judicial levels this year.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Riley W. Regan
LEAD: AS the director of the state's Division of Alcoholism, an arm of the Department of Health, Riley W. Regan of Imlaystown oversees a staff of 70 and a $17 million annual budget.
In 1976, he moved from Maryland, where he was alcoholism director for Montgomery County, to become the first director of New Jersey's Division of Alcoholism.


Touches of Wit and Whimsy
LEAD: PERHAPS it's the mood that Halloween brings.
Maybe it's something in the water supply.
Whatever the reason, a lot of fall outfits seem to have been taken over lately by a wonderful sense of whimsy.


A Temple To the Dreams of Flight
LEAD: The history of flight is a story of characters, most of them eccentric, who spent too much time in the garage, too little time on such necessities as sleep and usually died young in the air because of it.
Fortunately, many of the creations left behind by these pioneers are still intact, or have been lovingly restored, and have found a permanent home at Seattle's new Museum of


MR. NICE GUY
LEAD:  BOB KNIGHT  His Own Man.
By Joan Mellen.
Illustrated. 286 pp.
New York:  Donald I. Fine. $17.95.


Disturbing Prospect Of a Tax Increase
LEAD: It is most disturbing to read  [ ''Property Tax Vs.
Sales Tax: Debate Is On,'' Oct. 9 ]  that Nassau County officials are considering a property tax hike for 1989, fresh upon the heels of last year's hefty increase.


Unanimous Decision for Chavez in 11th
LEAD: Julio Cesar Chavez, the World Boxing Association lightweight champion, defeated Jose Luis Ramirez, the World Boxing Council lightweight champion, tonight on a unanimous technical decision at the Hilton Center here.


The Race for Congress; In Westchester, Harsh Exchanges Narrow Gap
LEAD: The race for the 20th Congressional District in Westchester County, one of the most expensive contests in the nation, has taken on a harsh tone, with sharply negative radio advertisements dominating the debate over issues.


STUDENTS LEARNING ABOUT CHILD'S PLAY
LEAD: HOW do you make a worm garden?
Fill an acquarium with layers of soil and plant some earthworms in it.
Then water the soil and watch the worms come up.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: THE Boston Red Sox, saying they had younger players in the farm system they wanted to promote, have released Larry Parrish, the 34-year-old first baseman-designated hitter who joined the team in July and helped power the Red Sox to the division title with a .259 batting average, 7 home runs and 26 runs batted in.


Variety in an Old Opera House
LEAD: REMEMBER those old movies in which an eager group of aspiring thespians gathers and someone says, ''Hey gang, let's put on our own show''?
That is the feeling one gets when visiting Greenwoods in Bethel, a restaurant that combines a youthful, inexperienced staff with some creative ideas, pleasing flair and a hefty helping of unbridled enthusiasm.


Beverly Johnston Wed To Richard Lee Ford
LEAD: Beverly Johnston, a daughter of Mrs.
John Gladstone Johnston of Boynton Beach, Fla., and North Hills, L.I., and the late Mr.
Johnston, was married yesterday to Richard Lee Ford, a son of Mrs.
William Lee Ford of Arlington, Va., and the late Mr.
Ford.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New


GIVING BUSINESSES AN OLYMPIC SPIRIT
LEAD: WHAT can a motivational specialist who once served the Soviet Olympic Team teach American businessmen?
Plenty, said Dr.
Grigori Raiport, a former Soviet psychologist who demonstrated his mental training techniques to the Advertising Club of Westchester at its October meeting.


Carlo Tresca's Enemies
LEAD: To the Editor:


West Va. Routs Penn State
LEAD: Years of frustration against archrival Penn State were forgotten by exuberant West Virginia players and fans today when the undefeated Mountaineers trounced the Nittany Lions, 51-30, with a record-high score before a record Mountaineer Field crowd of 66,811.
And it was all witnessed by a national television audience.


FISH STEWS WITH A MEDITERRANEAN HERITAGE
LEAD: MEDITERRANEAN seafood stews are particularly good for informal entertaining.
They are easy to assemble (the stock and sauces can be made in advance) and take only a short time to cook.
If you serve salad and cheese afterward, followed by a simple fruit dessert (something made with apples would be good), you have a dinner party menu that can be put together without a lot of fuss.


Contra Chief Faults Reagan Statements
LEAD: The chief representative of the Nicaraguan rebels in the United States said President Reagan had hurt their cause by using ''excessive rhetoric'' and comparing them to the Founding Fathers, and he said the next President should cooperate more closely with Congress in formulating policy toward Nicaragua.


New Tales of the Clown and the Juggler
LEAD: Wait - stop the election.
There happens to be a late entrant in the Presidential race: a clown, an authentic pratfalling professional.
He'll be tossing himself into the ring at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Tuesday night, only a week before Election Day.
His name is Bob Berky and he has a red ball for a nose and a duck call for a voice and there is a certain beat-up elegance to the tilt of his squashed top hat.


Lisa Ostergard, Executive, Weds
LEAD: Lisa Ann Ostergard, a daughter of Marie F. Ostergard of Moreland Hills, Ohio, and Ellsworth H. Ostergard of Chagrin Falls, Ohio, was married yesterday to Ted Allan Gardner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Gardner of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
D.
Larry Kline officiated at the Garfield Memorial Methodist Church in Pepper Pike,


Anger Over Weigh Station Plan
LEAD: A WEIGH STATION for trucks continues under attack in Greenwich.


Miss McPhilliamy Is Wed in Queens
LEAD: Anne Marie McPhilliamy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick McPhilliamy of Little Neck, Queens, and William Irving Cote Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cote of Tillson, N.Y., were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Anastasia in Douglaston, Queens.
Msgr.
Nicholas W. Sivillo performed the ceremony.


Parade Tomorrow
LEAD: The Halloween parade will begin at 7 P.M. tomorrow on West Street between Houston and Christopher Streets, travel east on Houston Street to the Avenue of the Americas, north to 14th Street and east to Union Square.


Richard Broomer Weds Miss Kelly
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund Joseph Kelly of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Anne Kelly to Richard Jeffrey Broomer, a son of Fay Broomer of Ossining, N.Y., and the late Cyril J. Broomer.
A January wedding is planned.


The Two Faces of Space
LEAD: For architects and city planners, space may be a shape; for city dwellers, it's a container.
This is from ''Placeways: A Theory of the Human Environment'' by Eugene Victor Walter (University of North Carolina).


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 63-year-old house was reshingled 11 years ago.
The shingles were coated with a good brand of gray shingle stain.
Two sides of the house have now started to mildew (south and west).
We have been told that this condition will not clear up even when the humid weather ends.
Can you advise us as to what we can do?


Killer of a Drug Agent Gets Long Prison Term
LEAD: A former Mexican policeman was sentenced Friday to 240 years plus life in prison for the 1985 torture-murder of a United States drug agent and his pilot.


A Civil War Cemetery Is Now a Battleground
LEAD: Of the 18 cemeteries in the Cypress Hills section of Brooklyn, none is more prominent than the Cypress Hills National Cemetery, one of 12 burial sites established for Civil War dead by President Abraham Lincoln and the only national cemetery in the city.


Born on the Baseline
LEAD: ANDRE AGASSI'S WORKOUT IS more like batting practice than a long rally.
Augusto Solano, a young Colombian player employed by the Nick Bollettieri Tennis Academy in Bradenton, Fla., hits the ball to the 18-year-old tennis player, and Agassi whales on it.
Solano feeds him one more, and Agassi takes another vicious cut.


Of Men and Women (Cont'd)
LEAD: Members of the Chilton Club, which was organized 78 years ago for women, have voted to accept men as members.
Without making the change Thursday, the club could have lost its food and liquor licenses as discriminatory.
The club had said it might seek an exemption from the rule.
On Tuesday, the all-male Tavern Club, which also had said it planned to seek exemption, announced it would begin accepting women as members.


Is Envy at the Root Of Anti-Blonde Bias?
LEAD: ''There Are Redeeming Qualities''  [ Opinion, Sept. 11 ]  evidently wasn't written by someone subscribing to the adage ''Gentlemen prefer blondes.'' Early on, he complains: ''Bubble-head blondes in red Firebirds cut you off at intersections.''


Social Events; History, Horses and Crafts
LEAD:  Historical Benefit  Oct. 31 - For the first time in its 184-year history, the New-York Historical Society will hold a fund-raising evening in its galleries on Central Park West at 77th Street.
Paul Volcker, former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, will be honored, and the more than 700 guests are expected to include Mayor Koch, former Secretary of State Henry A.


In England, Beat the Clock
LEAD: BONG!
It usually takes the clock in the Great Court of Trinity College at Cambridge University in England about 46 seconds to strike all 24 chimes that mark high noon.


Rangers Chase Down the Flyers
LEAD: The tighter the game got, the more tempted Ranger Coach Michel Bergeron was to put his checking line on the ice and leave it there.
Not only to check the Flyers into submission, but perhaps to sneak in a go-ahead goal of their own, which was precisely what they did.


Jules Labarthe Is Married To Sarah Rogers Marmor
LEAD: Sarah Rogers Marmor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Marmor of New Haven, was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Jules Judd Labarthe, the son of Dr.
Darwin R. Labarthe of Houston and Anne R. Carew of Deering, N.H.
Marvin Reed, Acting Mayor of Princeton Borough, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  No Escaping A Craving


Backstage at the Biggest Deal of All
LEAD: F. ROSS JOHNSON, the chief executive of RJR Nabisco Inc., began his morning Oct. 20 with a laugh.
An article about his company was prominently featured that day in the business section of The Atlanta Journal &amp; Constitution, his hometown newspaper.
The article, an analysis of the impact on the food industry of the recently announced bid by the Philip Morris Companies for Kraft Inc., carried the headline, ''Analysts Say RJR Isn't Likely to Be Involved in Any Merger.


HAPPY TO SING THE BLUES
LEAD:  OF SUCH SMALL DIFFERENCES  By Joanne Greenberg.  262 pp.
New York:  Henry Holt &amp; Company. $18.95.


Playing Ball Downwind of Rocky Flats
LEAD: To the Editor:


McFadden Happy To Be With Giants
LEAD: Paul McFadden has been the Giants' place-kicker for two of their eight games this season, and he will kick today when the Giants play the Detroit Lions in the Silverdome in Pontiac, Mich.
He could not be more grateful to the Giants for hiring him or to the Philadelphia Eagles for keeping him for four years before they discarded him.


Begonias Without Tears for Hobbyists
LEAD: IF you are among those gardeners who have tried and failed with begonias, give them one more chance.
But this time, be selective.
Do not fall for the first pretty leaf and stay away from finicky species and difficult, thin-leaved, mildew-prone hybrids.


NEW CHIEF: Ralph S. Larsen; Taking the Reins From a Legend
LEAD: FOLLOWING in the sootsteps of a legend can be intimidating - or comforting.
It depends on your point of view.


FISH STEWS WITH A MEDITERRANEAN HERITAGE
LEAD: MEDITERRANEAN seafood stews are particularly good for informal entertaining.
They are easy to assemble (the stock and sauces can be made in advance) and take only a short time to cook.
If you serve salad and cheese afterward, followed by a simple fruit dessert (something made with apples would be good), you have a dinner party menu that can be put together without a lot of fuss.


Sandra Rogowski Is Wed to Charles Lizza, Lawyer
LEAD: At the Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in Washington, Sandra Lynn Rogowski, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard R. Rogowski of Alexandria, Va., and Charles M. Lizza, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Charles C. Lizza of Jersey City, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Charles F. X. Dolan performed the ceremony.


Inside the Jocks' Room: A Rider's Life
LEAD: BEING a jockey is not just a glamorous life in the limelight.
In fact, 90 percent of the riders in this country are relatively unknown to the public.
Only a few get recognition while there are thousands of struggling riders all over the country working long hours just to keep their heads above water in a very competitive sport.


Hope P. Geier Plans to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Philip H. Geier Jr. of New York and New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Hope Philippa Geier to Theodore Briell Smith 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Smith Jr. of Mill Neck, L.I., and Point O'Woods, Fire Island, L.I.


BUSY AS AN APIS MELLIFERA
LEAD:  A BOOK OF BEES  . . .
And How to Keep Them.
By Sue Hubbell.
Illustrated by Sam Potthoff.  193 pp.
New York: Random House. $17.95.


HOWARD'S WAY
LEAD: If Richard Howard felt the novel's inner logic required that it begin with the word ''time,'' he should have translated longtemps not as ''time and again,'' but as ''time was'' - the phrase James Grieve favored (and which Mr. Howard himself described as a brilliant stroke).


Review/Music; British Ondine Group Interprets French Music
LEAD: The flute and harp constitute an understated repertory by composers seeking an obliqueness of speech, a sense of deflected passion, or else a pervasive, smoothing calm.
The Ondine Ensemble from Britain offers these instruments together with a violin, viola and cello.
It made its first New York appearance at the 92d Street Y on Wednesday night, and not surprisingly three-fifths of the program was French.


Who's 'Rich'?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Angolan Rebels Look to Life After South Africans
LEAD: As mortar shells thudded softly in the distance, Lieut.
Col.
Juliao Vilinga reported that his guerrillas were skirmishing with Government troops probing the savanna around what remains of the besieged town of Cuito Cuanavale.


Entering Elmsford: The Condo Creep
LEAD: It exists, but not for long: a community in the metropolitan area without condominiums.
Elmsford, N.Y., only one square mile between Tarrytown and White Plains, has remained a community of single-family homes - some, now, holding two families - and just a few rental apartment houses.
It has been, in fact, Elmsford's small size and central location that have prevented things from changing.


An All-Out Evening
LEAD: When Renee gives a party,'' said Victor McTeer, ''I go.'' All the way from Greenville, Miss.? ''All the way from Greenville to Chicago, Ill.
Her parties are famous,'' he said with a laugh.


Pietro Annigoni, 78, Dies in Italy; Noted for Portrait of Elizabeth II
LEAD: Pietro Annigoni, the Italian artist whose 1955 portrait of Queen Elizabeth II brought him international acclaim, died Friday in Florence, Italy.
He was 78 years old.


Oh, Oscar, You're Just an Old Softy
LEAD: Anyone who sees Shirley MacLaine in ''Madame Sousatzka'' is sure to feel sorry for her, because Ms.
MacLaine looks a fright.
Heavy makeup accentuates every line in her face, and the age spots on her hands look conspicuous and real.
She walks with a slight limp, weighed down by clattering jewelry, and her costumes give her a thick, ungainly silhouette.


Soviets Understate Deficit, U.S. Specialists Say
LEAD: American specialists on the Soviet economy say that Soviet officials probably understated the size of their budget deficit and the resulting problems when they announced this week that they expect to have a deficit of $58 billion next year.


Let's Not Reject Compulsory Voting Too Hastily; Doing a Better Job
LEAD: To the Editor:


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD: A SCARSDALE HALLOWEEN For three years the Church of Saint James the Less in Scarsdale has held a Halloween Walk through its graveyard - which, according to church officials, is the only churchyard burying ground in town.
The tour guides, who dress as Scarsdale residents of times past, relate a history of the people buried there and some of the village's lore.


Sack Time


Prize Winner, Accused Of Bias, Collects Award
LEAD: The Templeton Prize, the world's largest award in the field of religion, was finally presented in a quiet ceremony last month, after a four-month delay to investigate charges that the winner had promoted anti-Semitism.


Where to Get More Details
LEAD: ACT/Pace Line, 1 World Trade Center, Suite 8101, New York, N.Y. 10048 (212-775-1500; 800-227-8164 outside New York State).


The Campaign Has Real Issues In Spite of Itself
LEAD: The 1988 Presidential campaign seemed to reach its logical conclusion when the candidates started airing television commercials attacking the opposition's television commercials as being filled with falsehoods.
To the voters, America's continuing experiment in self-government, a heroic idea, suddenly seemed empty of content.


Indiana Eludes Iowa's 558 Passing Yards
LEAD: Anthony Thompson rushed for 168 yards and three touchdowns today as Indiana, surviving a devastating passing attack by Iowa's Chuck Hartlieb, held off a second-half rally and beat the Hawkeyes, 45-34, in a Big Ten Conference game.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Lohr Wins Playoff for First Victory: Bob Lohr, who birdied the 18th hole to force a playoff, won his first PGA Tour title by sinking a 5-foot par putt on the fifth extra hole yesterday to beat Chip Beck in the $700,000 Walt Disney World Classic in Lake Buena Vista, Fla.
Beck three-putted the final hole, missing an 8-footer for par before Lohr dropped his putt.


Jean Gibney Marries Peter Owen Scannell
LEAD: The wedding of Jean Marie Gibney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard X. Gibney of River Edge, N.J., to Peter Owen Scannell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond F. Scannell of Richmond and Virginia Beach, Va., took place yesterday at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York.
The Rev.
Henry A.


Wage Worries
LEAD: To the Editor:


East German Official Rejects Copying Changes by Moscow
LEAD: East Germany's chief ideologist today rejected the idea that East Germany should follow Moscow's restructuring programs, saying they were not transferable to other Communist countries.


THE VISIONARY OF BROHOBYCZ
LEAD:  LETTERS AND DRAWINGS OF BRUNO SCHULZ  With Selected Prose.
Edited by Jerzy Ficowski.
Translated by Walter Arndt with Victoria Nelson.
Preface by Adam Zagajewski.
Illustrated. 256 pp.
New York:  Harper &amp; Row. $25.


Marathoner Ailing
LEAD: WHEN he sent word last week that he would not be defending his title in the 1988 New York City Marathon next Sunday, Ibrahim Hussein, the Kenyan runner who lives in New Mexico, did not explain why.
Now his wife, Zainab, has cleared up the mystery.


In Math, the Language of Science, Americans Grow Even Weaker
LEAD: IN ''A Study in Scarlet,'' the first of the Sherlock Holmes stories, Watson is appalled to find his eccentric fellow lodger unaware that the earth orbits the sun.


Marines Believe a Collision Caused Fatal Copter Crash
LEAD: Two Marine helicopters that crashed Tuesday night, killing nine marines and an Air Force officer, apparently collided less than 200 feet above the Arizona desert, officials said Friday.


Next Week; What Do You Think About the Jockeys' Strike?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Mailbox; Mets Need More Dedication
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


A Case of ''the Slows'
LEAD:  GEORGE B. McCLELLAN  The Young Napoleon.
By Stephen W. Sears.
Illustrated. 482 pp.
New York:  Ticknor &amp; Fields. $24.95.


Q. ''How can I serve classic French cuisine when it takes so much time?''  A. ''Use your microwave.''
LEAD: What, you use a microwave for cooking?'' Almost with a sense of alarm, friends wander into my kitchen and wonder what a microwave has in common with classic French cuisine.
Actually, quite a bit, I've learned.
Last year, I added a microwave oven to my kitchen in Paris, where I put it to daily use making rich poultry stock and trying out a seemingly endless number of recipes I enjoy creating on my own, inspired by French cookbooks and magazines.


Kathleen A. Hadley Is Wed To James Alan Connors Jr.
LEAD: Kathleen Ann Hadley and James Alan Connors Jr. were married yesterday in the Holy Family Chapel at the College of St.
Elizabeth in Convent Station, N.J.
The Roman Catholic ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Giles P. Hayes.


A Playwright Holds a Light To Israel's Soul
LEAD: ''The tragic situation of Israel and Israelis today,'' says the Israeli playwright Joshua Sobol, ''is that we are starting to resemble certain of our own oppressors.''


Manalapan Journal; A Good Neighbor, Flea Market Offers Bargains, Too
LEAD: THE only thing that's not for sale at the Englishtown Flea Market is the market itself, and that makes just about everybody happy.


Westchester Opinion; SPEAKING PERSONALLY: JUST AS RETIREMENT WAS GETTING COZY, A NEW GRANDCHILD
LEAD: LOOK what's happening to me, two and a half years after my retirement, when I'm finally making peace with myself about the change.


'X-Day,' the Day Japan Will Decide to Stand Still
LEAD: In the back corners of coffee shops near Government offices, and in whispered conversations across the bureaucracy's rows of battleship-gray desks, it is known simply as ''X-day.''


VIEWS OF THE TURN-OF-THE CENTURY AT THE STAMFORD MUSEUM
LEAD: IN anticipation of this century's end, the Stamford Museum and Nature Center is celebrating the end of the last one. ''American Artists at the Turn of the Century,'' as it is called, focuses on the period 1880 to 1910 (give or take a few years) and it comes with a catalogue written by Dorothy Mayhall, the museum's director of art and the organizer of the show.


Renita M. Esayian Is Wed in London
LEAD: At the American Church in London, Renita Margaret Esayian, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Esayian of Huntingdon Valley, Pa., was married yesterday to Richard Dennis O'Connell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. O'Connell of Wellfleet, Mass.
The Rev.
Ron Allison, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony.


Mulroney vs. Turner: Prosperity, Independence
LEAD: In a heated debate in Ottawa last week, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and John Turner, the Liberal Party leader, clashed over the free-trade pact between Canada and the United States.
Mr.
Mulroney is an architect of the agreement.
Mr.
Turner opposes it.
Here are excerpts from the exchange.
John Turner.


Eilish Leene Married To Stewart Perry Neff
LEAD: Elizabeth Harris Leene, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Leene of Newark, N.Y., and Stewart Perry Neff, the son of Patricia A. Neff of Rockville, Md., and W. Perry Neff of Weston, Vt., were married yesterday in Biddeford, Me.
The Rev.
Richard C. Malo performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic


CANADA'S NATIONAL REFERENDUM ON ALL THINGS AMERICAN
LEAD: Living atop the 49th parallel has never been easy for Canadians.
When Robert Campeau won his takeover battle for Bloomingdale's and other parts of the United States-based Federated Stores chain earlier this year, the Canadian entrepreneur's victory was saluted across his homeland.
When Wayne Gretzky took his ice hockey talent south a few months later, from the Edmonton Oilers to the Los Angeles


Ada Gates, Art Dealer and Farrier, Wed
LEAD: Ada Gwendolyn Gates, a daughter of Mrs.
John M. Gates of New York and the late Mr.
Gates, was married in Pasadena, Calif., yesterday to Harry Holiday Patton, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Carl A. Patton of Long Beach, Calif.


More Aid for Firefighters' Families
LEAD: TUCKED deep in the 400-page anti-drug bill that was recently passed by Congress is a little help for the families of five firefighters killed in a July 1 blaze at an automobile dealership in Hackensack.


'Orthodoxy' Is Open to Wide Interpretation
LEAD: WHAT makes chess such an adventure is the enormous range of possibilities that appear even in the openings.


OUTDOOR SCULPTURE WITH CRITICAL NOTE
LEAD: ''DESIRE PATHS'' is a show of outdoor sculpture that criticizes shows of outdoor sculpture.
The idea comes from Helen Horowitz, a curator at the International Sculpture Center in Washington, and it is played out by the 13 sculptors she has chosen in the grounds of the Schulman Realty Group, at 707 Westchester


Westchester Residents, Citing Deceit, Oppose Group Home Plan
LEAD: Some residents of this Westchester village of 6,100 oppose plans of a private agency and New York State to place 12 severely retarded adults in a new group home, but they say it is not that they do not want the home placed in their backyard.
Rather, they say, they simply do not want it placed behind their backs.


YOU CAN'T BEAT THE CABAL
LEAD:  LIBERTY UNDER SIEGE  American Politics, 1976-1988.
By Walter Karp.  255 pp.
New York:  Henry Holt &amp; Company. $19.95.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 63-year-old house was reshingled 11 years ago.
The shingles were coated with a good brand of gray shingle stain.
Two sides of the house have now started to mildew (south and west).
We have been told that this condition will not clear up even when the humid weather ends.
Can you advise us as to what we can do?


Hospital Patient Arrested in Nurse's Murder
LEAD: A 33-year-old Connecticut man was arrested yesterday and charged with the murder of a Metropolitan Hospital nurse in her East Side apartment on Oct. 19, the police said.


Commercial Property: The Grand Central Area; Landlords Set Up a Special Tax to Upgrade District
LEAD: A firm believer in the convenience of working near Grand Central Terminal, Todd Selbert refused to stray far last month when he moved out of cramped offices in the Graybar Building on Lexington Avenue, adjacent to the train station.


Hundreds Arrested in Abortion Protests


Dukakis Said to Ignore Black Vote
LEAD: THE Democratic Party has shown a talent for getting specific groups of supporters to the voting booth in close elections in recent years, but the State Assembly minority leader and other Democrats say that they are worried about the widening lead that George Bush appears to be taking in Presidential election polls and that they fear Michael


Practical Traveler; When Teens Go Overboard
LEAD: Cruise lines' vigorous sales work promoting short cruises, especially to younger people, backfired last spring and summer.
An overpopulation of students on several cruises created conditions that one passenger, himself a parent of teen-agers, described as Fort Lauderdale at sea.
A passenger on another vessel, also a parent and therefore not out of touch, compared life on deck to life on the grounds of the


Resumes That Talk and Tell the Truth, Too
LEAD: A RESUME is no more than a marketing tool to get your foot in the door, career experts agree.
But with so many resumes flooding the market, how can a job hunter convince a potential employer to let his foot in the door, and not somebody else's?


CHUGGING AWAY
LEAD: Sometimes it's too much oak in the chardonnay; sometimes it's too much alcohol in the zinfandel.
California is a land of abundance, and the state's wine growers have often been troubled by too much of a good thing.
More and more, it's getting to be too many tourists in the valley.


Colombia Reportedly Regains Vital Banana-Growing Region
LEAD: The Interior Minister, Cesar Gaviria, said today that troops were regaining control in Uraba, a vital banana-growing region in the north, after a major rebel offensive.
Mr.
Gaviria said two battalions had been sent to Uraba, 250 miles northwest of Bogota.


A Modern-Art Museum To Rise in a Textile Mill
LEAD: A collaborative team of architects - including the firms of Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill; Frank O. Gehry &amp; Associates; Venturi, Rauch and Scott Brown Inc., and Bruner/Cott &amp; Associates - has been chosen to produce a plan for the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art, a complex of cultural and commercial buildings for North Adams,


In Search of the Right Place to Work
LEAD: NO one enjoys job hunting, a task that can be a full-time job in itself.
But every year, about 40 million Americans undergo a job or career change.
In the course of a typical career, people will either change jobs or change their assignments within the same company an average of 10 times, according to estimates by the outplacement firm of Drake Beam


They Bleed RAdiators, Don't They?
LEAD: I USED TO BE A HYPOCHONDRIAC OF SORTS.
I even wrote a book about it, giving medical advice to other worriers.
Myself, I don't think I was that bad.
I admit that I had a certain fondness for revealing, over lunch, the amount of carcinogenic aflatoxin in the average peanut butter sandwich.
And there were nights when my heart was skipping beats (this was a medical, not a romantic phenomenon) and I kept watch into the early morning, unwilling to leave my fate in the hands of my autonomic nervous system.


Ruling Upholds 'Moving' Radar
LEAD: ''Moving'' radar can be as reliable as stationary radar, and the evidence it produces against motorists can be used without expert testimony, New York State's top court ruled this week.


AND NOW, MR. LINCOLN, YOU HAVE 15 SECONDS
LEAD:  ELOQUENCE IN AN ELECTRONIC AGE  The Transformation of Political Speechmaking.
By Kathleen Hall Jamieson.
Illustrated. 301 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press. $24.95.


Dr. Bonnie Blackman Is Wed to Dr. Ira Siegel
LEAD: Dr.
Bonnie Eve Blackman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Blackman of Nanuet, N.Y., and Narragansett, R.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Ira Siegel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Siegel of New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Chaim Shapiro performed the ceremony at the Touro Synagogue in Newport, R.I.


If You're Thinking of Living in:; Flatiron District
LEAD: Lou Jawitz can remember when few people wanted to live in the area known as the Flatiron District. ''When I moved here in 1967, they were giving lofts away,'' he said. ''All I had to do to get my first loft was to get my hair cut and pay $275 a month.'' Without the haircut, he said, the landlord would have charged him $300.


7 Latin Chiefs Discuss Writing Off Some Debt
LEAD: Seven South American Presidents pledged today to devise a strategy to persuade creditors to write off part of their $339 billion debt.


For Senate Rivals, a Harsher Tone
LEAD: FOR months, Attorney General Joseph I. Lieberman, the Democrat challenging Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., had attacked his rival.
Mr.
Weicker is detached, he said, and regularly missed votes on bills.
The Senator's reputation as a maverick who is good for the state is a myth, he said, calling him ''an outsider in Washington.


Review/Theater; The Lives and Times Of Real Stand-Up Guys
LEAD: In the brutal vocabulary of professional comedians, ''killing'' is reducing an audience to helpless laughter and ''dying'' is being met with stone-faced indifference. ''Flop sweat'' is a symptom of dying, and ''toilets'' are the grubby out-of-the-way cellars in which young comics toil while elbowing some room in a cutthroat field.


Boy Admits Causing a Death
LEAD: A boy has confessed releasing the brakes on a freight car that ran over and killed a railroad worker Oct. 17, the police said Friday.
The authorities said the boy was under 10 years old and would not be charged.
The freight car rolled about a mile before it struck a Burlington Northern work truck, then killed the worker, Kevin Evenstad, 35 years old.


Blind Seating
LEAD: To the Editor:


MODERN SOOTHSAYERS PROPHESY THE PRESIDENCY
LEAD: THROUGHOUT history, predicting the future has been a preoccupation of a great many people.
The ancient Greek and Roman soothsayers and oracles read the entrails of animals or birds.
More recently, gypsy fortune-tellers gazed into a crystal ball, mediums consulted the departed, and astrologers followed the courses of the stars and planets.


American Opera Singers Can Look Homeward
LEAD: Every year, 30 or so singers make debuts at the New York City Opera.
They may stay on and become regulars, or be picked up (''stolen,'' as Beverly Sills sometimes puts it) by the Metropolitan, Chicago, San Francisco and the big European houses, or disappear from New York.
But the City Opera is by no means the first step in a performing career for most singers.


Bar Examinations For Practicing Lawyers
LEAD: Re: ''Debate Renewed on Barriers to Lawyers'':


REMEMBERING DROUANT
LEAD: It has been more than half a century since I first set foot inside the legendary Drouant, a sumptuous Parisian restaurant where, as a 14-year-old country boy from Burgundy, I spent five years as an apprentice and cook.


Lehigh Routs Columbia
LEAD: The quarterback, Jim Harris, threw for 340 yards and four touchdowns and ran for another score as Lehigh beat Columbia, 56-27, today.


Capital's Homicide Rate Is at a Record
LEAD: With two months left in the year, Washington has already matched the record of 287 homicides set in 1969, and the police say increased use of drugs, particularly crack, is more and more a cause.


Minnie Mouse's Favorite Soup
LEAD: Most of the Disney gang are vegetarians,'' said Minnie Mouse. ''I'm not quite sure why, but I suspect cartoon carnivores just weren't endearing enough for Mr.
Disney.''


No-Frills Play from Guerney
LEAD: FOR an actor or actress who wants to act with minimal constraints and commitments, and for theater managers who need to put on a show frugally and fast, A. R. Gurney has written what may well be the ultimate no-frills play. ''Love Letters,'' which began previews last Friday at Stage II of the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, requires literate male and female characters - one of each - and that's that.


Suddenly, the Race Is Close in Canada
LEAD: Despite widespread expectations that Canada's governing Progressive Conservatives would be easily returned to power in the Nov. 21 elections, the campaign appears to have tightened because of anxieties over the accord to promote freer trade between Canada and the United States.


Prince Attacks Modern Architects Once More
LEAD: Prince Charles attacked modern British architecture again Friday night with a television documentary of his own that left no one in any doubt about what he didn't like.


Griffith Films
LEAD: A double bill of silent films by D. W. Griffith will be shown today at the Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place, in St.
George.
The screening begins at 1:30 P.M. with the short film ''The Rocky Road'' (1910), followed by ''Isn't Life Wonderful?'' (1924).
This is the first in a three-part series of screenings of Griffith films; others will be shown on Nov.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last week about Halloween marketing misstated the number of catalogues issued annually by Lillian Vernon Inc.
It is 103 million.


MISSION IMPOSSIBLE
LEAD: In my 28 years as a letter carrier, I have seen nothing like the bizarre episodes described by John Judis.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  New Rochelle, N.Y.  $397,000
16 Tulip Lane
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old split level; fireplace, paneled den, playroom, 2-car garage; taxes $5,622.
Pound Ridge, N.Y.  $410,000
522 Indian Hill Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old colonial; fireplace, in-law apartment, 2.5 acres; taxes $5,379.


Did Gide Read Proust?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sri Lanka Peace Talks Break Down Yet Again
LEAD: Talks among the Government and opposition groups on ending political violence and holding elections appear to have reached a stalemate.


TV's Role in '88: The Medium Is the Election
LEAD: The next President will have been chosen in a campaign dominated as never before by television.


Crash Course
LEAD: To the Editor:


MISSION IMPOSSIBLE
LEAD: As one who is old enough to remember when mail was delivered twice a day, I am always baffled by the many articles which argue that the Postal Service needs to break even financially.
Why can't the Government subsidize mail delivery?
It's one of the few services the Government provides that is not only harmless but even quite pleasant.


SISTERHOOD IN THE SMALL ZONE
LEAD:  GREY IS THE COLOR OF HOPE  By Irina Ratushinskaya.
Translated by Alyona Kojevnikov.  357 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Struggle to Create U.S. Peace Garden
LEAD: THE five-year race to build a National Peace Garden in Washington enters its second year facing a formidable problem: money.


An Homage to O'Neill at Drew
LEAD: HOW curious that in the midst of a nationwide celebration of the Eugene O'Neill centennary, only one of the state's major professional theater companies is mounting a full-scale production of a full-length O'Neill play.


Baseball Notebook; Steinbrenner Silent on Mattingly Trade Status
LEAD: GIVEN an opportunity one day last week to dispel the idea that the Yankees are trying to trade Don Mattingly, George Steinbrenner declined.
He refused to answer questions and brushed past reporters who only wanted to try to understand what was going on in the inner sanctum of the owner's mind.


Correction
LEAD: A caption on page 38 of The Times Magazine today with an article about television for children misidentifies the woman in a studio photograph for the ''Lassie'' series (1954-71).
She is Bonita Granville Wrather, a producer of the series, not June Lockhart.
Mrs.
Wrather died this month.


NEW ENGLANDERS UNDERSTAND THE IMPORTANCE OF TREES
LEAD: YOU do not have to live in Connecticut to love trees.
I loved them long before I moved here as a child.
Even then I had certain trees that were special to me.


Bush Is Maintaining Lead Over His Rival, A New Survey Finds
LEAD: The Republican ticket of Vice President Bush and Senator Dan Quayle has maintained a steady lead over the Democrats since last month, according to the latest Time/Yankelovich Clancy Shulman poll, to be published by Time magazine tomorrow.


Leonard Nimoy at the Controls
LEAD: Leonard Nimoy tries to suffocate his joy, to stuff his happiness back into his chest as if it were a quilt being crammed into a bag too small to hold it.
It is unseemly that at the age of 57 he should be so happy.
And this exotic feeling, coming as it does after years of being dutiful and earnest and, above all, serious, is built on pain.


Hitler's Legacy
LEAD: To the Editor:


What Will Happen in The N.B.A. In '88-'89
LEAD: The Boston Celtics, bouncing the ball with their heads if necessary (that may be the only part of their anatomy not ailing by the playoffs), will be battling the Detroit Pistons for the opportunity to face the Los Angeles Lakers in the finals.
SHELLY CHIN  New York  The Lakers will send the Big Fella out in style by successfully answering the latest battle cry: ''THREE-PEAT!


Wide Receiver to Go
LEAD: HE retired after last season and was running a delicatessen in Camden, N.J., 15 minutes from Veterans Stadium in Philadelphia, when the call came from the Eagles for an experienced wide receiver to go.
So yesterday, Kenny Jackson signed a one-year contract to return to the team that made him the fourth draft choice in 1984 after he set 27 school records at Penn


DEE-FENSE!
LEAD:  TOUGH STUFF  The Man in the Middle.
By Sam Huff with Leonard Shapiro.
Introduction by Tom Landry.
Illustrated. 256 pp.
New York:  St.
Martin's Press. $18.95.


Planning Ahead; Wines for Now and Later
LEAD: Everyone can buy a bottle of wine, but not everyone knows how to make a suitable yet economical choice.


Cecelia McEvoy, a Nurse, Is Married to Tony Walter
LEAD: Cecelia Ellen McEvoy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas C. McEvoy of Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday to Winston John Walter Jr., a son of Mrs.
Anthony J. Sposato of Pelham, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Walter.
Msgr.
George T. Deas performed the ceremony at Our Lady of the Blessed Sacrament Roman Catholic Church in


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Coram  $172,000
18 Baron Court
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, new colonial; family room, c/a, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,500.
Garden City$302,000
63 Grove Street
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 21-year-old split level; center hall, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,800.


Auburn Stops Florida By 16-0
LEAD: Stacy Danley rushed for 131 yards and a touchdown, and Auburn limited Florida to 116 yards today for a 16-0 victory and a share of first place in the Southeastern Conference.


Notre Dame (8-0) Gets By Navy, 22-7
LEAD: Although unbeaten Notre Dame, rated second in the Associated Press writers' and broadcasters' poll and third in The New York Times's computer ranking, posted its 25th consecutive victory over Navy today, Coach Lou Holtz was not happy.


Catherine Miles Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At St.
Michael the Archangel Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich, Conn., Catherine Rita Miles was married yesterday to Daniel Francis Crowther 3d by Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan.


Patent Cure
LEAD: To the Editor:


Straight Talk in Africa
LEAD: Olusegun Obasanjo, former President and still a powerful personality of Nigeria, says it straight out. ''The bold fact is that Africa is a continent in dereliction and decay.
We are moving backward as the rest of the world is forging ahead.''


SAFETY ISSUES FOR BUILDINGS ANS BUILDERS
LEAD: A six-story building in midtown Manhattan collapsed in an avalanche of concrete and glass last week, killing the owner and injuring at least 20 people.
City officials said the cause was illegal construction.
Workers attempted to strengthen a wall by replacing loose bricks, one by one, and weakened it instead.


156 Arrested in Los Angeles
LEAD: The police arrested 156 people, including 98 suspected of being gang members, and impounded 21 vehicles and seized four guns in a nine-hour sweep through a gang-infested area Friday night, the authorities said today.
The charges against those arrested ranged from curfew violations to narcotics trafficking.


Youth Service Ignored
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wait for a Club Tee Gets Longer
LEAD: PATIENCE is not only a virtue but a necessity for anyone hoping to join many country clubs.
This year, for example, S8 families were accepted into the Country Club of New Canaan after waiting about seven years to join the town's only golf club, which is also one of the oldest country clubs in the nation.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD: In percent  Tax-Exempt Bonds ... 7.36  Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index  Money Market Funds ... 7.83  Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Average Yield  Bank Money Market Accounts ... 6.07  Bank Rate Monitor  Home Mortgage ... 10.59  Federal Home Loan Bank Board  Fixed rate, national average


'WE'RE ALL SHOCKPROOF THESE DAYS'
LEAD:  THE COMING TRIUMPH OF THE FREE WORLD  By Rick DeMarinis.  177 pp.
New York: Viking. $16.95.


Ms. Samuels Weds
LEAD: At St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in the Bronx, Donna-Marie Samuels and Michael Anthony Artis, both graduates of the Howard University School of Law, were married yesterday by the Rev.
Wendell C. Roberts, assisted by the Rev.
Lorenzo Parker.
The bride, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald E. Samuels of the Bronx, will retain her name.


Adam Smelin Married to Nora Plesent
LEAD: Nora Elizabeth Plesent, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Plesent of Larchmont, N.Y., and New York, and Adam Paul Smelin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Raanan Smelin of New York and Quogue, L.I., were married last evening.
Rabbi Emily Korzenik performed the ceremony at the Century Association in New York.


The Timeless Appeal of Chanel
LEAD: What was it about her?
Gabrielle Chanel reached the height of her creativity in the late 1920's and the 30's.
She died in 1971.
Yet today, her fashion philosophy is as potent as ever - suits with jackets that fit like sweaters, women's clothing based on gentlemanly elements, masses of bogus bijoux replacing the demure real stuff.


Letters on Travel; Belleville
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding Julian More's article on Belleville (Travel, Aug. 28), I must point out that the Simone Signoret film that was shot there was not ''Casque d'Or'' but ''Madame Rosa.''  DON KOLL  New York, N.Y.


Reviews/Music; With a 60's Sensibility
LEAD: It's a common idea in music criticism that musical eras end abruptly, replaced by something new.
Zussan Kali Fasteau's show at the Knitting Factory on Tuesday night, dripping with 1960's sentimentality and esthetics, was proof that intellectual movement isn't always that orderly.


Letters on Travel; Cruises
LEAD: To the Editor: There ought to be some way that prospective cruise passengers could inspect a ship before committing their money and time.


Repairing Ceramic Floor Tiles
LEAD: CERAMIC floor tiles offer superior durability and appearance, but are brittle.
A powerful blow from a sharp object can crack even the most expertly laid tile, but often foot pressure alone is sufficient to crack tile that is improperly set or inadequately supported.


For Salem, a Reminder of a Dark Past
LEAD: It is the witching season again in Salem, when residents and tourists don black costumes and attractions like the Witch Museum draw more than the usual number of visitors.
But there are few reminders in this Boston suburb of the 1692 witch trials, whose dark events gave birth to this fascination.


POLICE INVESTIGATE CHARGES OF RACISM
LEAD: The New York City Police Department is investigating allegations that black police officers in the 113th Precinct in Queens have been subjected to racial slurs and harasssment by white officers over the last six months, a high-ranking police official said yesterday.


The Race For Congress; Without Incumbents, 3 Upstate Contests Heat Up
LEAD: Out here in Jack Kemp country, right for 18 years has meant might.
But Mr.
Kemp, who made an unsuccessful bid for the Republican Presidential nomination this year, is not seeking re-election in November, and his decision has set off an ideologically charged race that is perhaps the most heated Congressional contest in the state.


An American Triumph
LEAD: THE World Team Olympiad that ended in Venice a week ago was full of surprises.
One surprise was the early elimination of the favored United States women's team, which went down in the quarter-final round to an unheralded Bulgarian team.
Another was the victory in that series of the Danish team, giving


Streetscapes: London Terrace; Time Erodes Unity of a 1,665-Unit City Within a City
LEAD: London Terrace, the huge apartment development on the block bounded by 23d and 24th Streets and Ninth and 10th Avenues, was built as a self-contained urban community in 1929-1931 with an elaborate array of services.
Time and other elements have gradually compromised the special unity of London Terrace and now a partial co-op conversion is testing even further the cohesion of the venerable complex.


New Beer Makes a Pitch For the Upscale Market
LEAD: ''IT'S here,'' the bulletin board at trendy Dalt's restaurant and bar announced. ''Jersey Premium Lager Beer.'' The message is repeated in stand-up placards at each table: ''Now Available Here, Jersey Premium Lager Beer.
Jersey's Own.''


Expert Advice: What Makes a Party Go?
LEAD: If we took all the advice offered by experts we'd be perfect - and unbearable - people.
If we took all the advice offered by party experts, we'd have perfect - and unbearable - parties.
Still, there's no denying that some party-givers know a lot about what makes an enjoyable evening.
And certainly some party-goers are more schooled than others in the niceties of being a guest.


Trial Drains Grenada's Coffers and Emotions
LEAD: Nearly two years ago, 17 leftists were convicted of killing the head of Grenada's People's Revolutionary Government and 10 others in a spectacular outburst of violence that prompted an invasion by American troops in 1983.


Crew Teams in Simsbury Steal Thunder from Football
LEAD: AS a middle-school student, Paul DiGiacomo dreamed of playing football at Simsbury High School. ''I like the game and I used to think about all of the glamour - the cheerleaders, the band, the crowds and so on,'' he said.


High, Low and No Roads: Three Strategies For Holding Onto A Senate Seat
LEAD: Until the last few weeks, the campaigns for the United States Senate in New York, Connecticut and New Jersey had one thing in common: They all seemed like sideshow skirmishes that could not compete for the attention of a public preoccupied with the Presidential race, summer heat, ocean pollution and the


The View From: DEEP RIVER
LEAD: SCHOLARS say they study history to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past, but the Deep River Historical Society apparently needs another lesson.


Jasper Johns: Toward a Fuller Disclosure
LEAD: Jasper Johns is not yet 60, but he has been considered a great and important artist for a long time - more than half his life - and he is probably the closest thing American art has to a living national treasure.
Beyond question this status is deserved.
Johns is on, and may be at the top of, the short list of American and European artists who in the 1950's set the stage for the art of the second half of the modern century.


Belfast Amid the Strife: Wrenched but Not Ruined
LEAD: The war correspondent visiting this torn province for the first time would think parts of it are like Beirut: the bomb-charred barricades dividing sectarian communities, the taxis that will go to some neighborhoods and not others, the armed men patrolling sullen, hostile blocks of houses, the fear.


Current PINS Law: Everybody Loses
LEAD: Responding to the article, Dorothy Holmgren of Parents on The Move notified us because we are members of a statewide coalition working to change the PINS age to 18.


From China, Remembrances of Great Minds Lost
LEAD: Over the last 10 years, China's intellectuals have visibly if slowly shaken off the effects of decades of re-education and imprisonment, public humiliation and private despair.


HOWARD'S WAY
LEAD: There are more reasons than its familiarity in the English language to keep the title ''Remembrance of Things Past.'' The sonnet from which this title comes is a perfect capsulization of precisely what Proust achieved in his monumental work - the recapture of lost time through art.
The Scott Moncrieff title has a redolence to anyone acquainted with the Shakespearean sonnet that is lost in the banal ''In Search of Lost Time.


Time for a More Equitable System at Oxford and Cambridge
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mailbox; Give More Credit To Alysheba
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THEY WENT THAT-A-WAY . . .
By Malcolm Forbes with Jeff Bloch. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $18.95.) The unspoken and perhaps unintended message of this collection of ''death stories'' is that you should avoid being ''famous, infamous  [ or ]  great,'' since you will surely die young, unhappy or both.
Among the 178 notables whose final days are recounted in ''They Went That-a-Way .


Discovery Channel Finds Gold in Documentaries
LEAD: It was to be another breathtaking first from the Discovery Channel: the first underwater expedition ever to be broadcast live.
As it happened, the diver at the bottom of the Red Sea last May was breathless, too; because her helmet fit badly; ''every time she took a breath, it filled up with water,'' John Hendricks, the channel's founder and chairman, recalled recently.


THEURGY AND ECSTASY
LEAD:  KABBALAH  New Perspectives.
By Moshe Idel.  419 pp.
New Haven:  Yale University Press. $40.


For Prosperity and Employment, Don't Forgo International Trade
LEAD: IN a recent poll of my constituents, I asked them to rank the 10 greatest concerns facing our nation.
A healthy economy was at the top of their list, while international trade was near the bottom.
What concerns me about the results is that so few Americans, comparatively speaking, realize the great impact international trade has on maintaining a healthy economy.


Reviews/Music; Husband and Wife Duo In a Cello-Piano Debut
LEAD: Norman Fischer was the cellist of the Concord Quartet until it disbanded last year, but since 1971 he has also been giving concerts as half of the Fischer Duo, with his wife, Jeanne Kierman Fischer, a pianist.
The Fischers, who are on the faculty of Oberlin College, were presented by that conservatory in their New York debut recital on Wednesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.


Sports of The Times; Tyson, Rooney, Trump and King
LEAD: WHEN last seen in his black trunks and his black shoes, Mike Tyson was standing over Michael Spinks with the cruel dignity befitting a world heavyeight champion.
More than four months since then, it's as if Mike Tyson has been an actor playing himself in several strange roles unbefitting a world heavyweight champion.


Body and Mind; The Cheapskates Ploy
LEAD: MONEY, MONEY.
WHAT AN all-purpose container, what a dump.
Upon this dumping ground we play out the mortal combats of marriage, the rages of divorce, the lusts of power and vengeance, the lifelong grievances of childhood, all those fevered games, and we insist that the currency is dollars and cents.


Going After That First Charge Card
LEAD: WHEN Penny Kaganoff graduated from college, her low-paying editorial position did not qualify her for a credit card.
After she married, she used her husband's American Express and Visa cards, deciding not to apply again for credit of her own even when she got a better-paying job.


SOME WAYS TO PUT THE SPORT BACK INTO HUNTING
LEAD: HUNTING season is here again, and along with it all the tired old cliches, reasons and excuses hunters use to defend their sport.
That is if you can call hunting a sport.
There is something about the act of blowing an unarmed animal out of a tree with a high-powered semi-automatic rifle that somehow stretches the definition of the word sport to its broadest limits.


Islanders Beaten In Overtime, 3-2
LEAD: Tommy Albelin scored from the blue line 2 minutes 33 seconds into overtime tonight to give the Quebec Nordiques a 3-2 victory over the Islanders.


DESK SET
LEAD:  BECOMING THE ENEMY  By Brenda Peterson.  276 pp. St. Paul:  Graywolf Press.


A House With a Past
LEAD: ''YOU'LL love this house, in fact there was once a wedding here,'' the agent told my mother, a woman with two young single daughters.


Mack Lobell Retiring
LEAD: WHEN a Swedish breeder paid Lou Guida $6 million for a three-quarters interest in Guida's 4-year-old trotter, Mack Lobell, in May, the deal called for Guida to continue managing Mack Lobell's racing career in the United States through his 5-year-old racing season next year.
Then the Swedish breeder, John Erik Magnusson, would take control and Mack Lobell would be placed at stud.


Correction
LEAD: A Travel Advisory report on Oct. 9 misstated the United States telephone number for reservations at the Hotel Regina in Grindelwald, Switzerland.
It is (800) 223-6800; in New York State, the number is (212) 838-3110.


Bar Examinations For Practicing Lawyers
LEAD: In the article ''Debate Renewed on Barriers to Lawyers'' (Oct. 2), Dr.
Saul Wolfe comments that New Jersey's requirement that out-of-state lawyers take the state's bar examination is justified by a need to insure that lawyers practicing in the state have knowledge of local law.


The Race for Congress; Nevada Senator's Hope Is Revived
LEAD: Gamblers, of which there are several in this vast and arid state, might have thought they had a sure thing betting that the popular Democratic Governor, Richard H. Bryan, would push the state's hapless Republican Senator, Chic Hecht, out of office.


Carlucci Meets With Hussein To Discuss Peace in Mideast
LEAD: Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci met King Hussein of Jordan today for talks on Middle East peace prospects and military cooperation, a palace official said.


Q. ''How can I give a big party in my minuscule apartment?''  A. ''Rearrange your space.''
LEAD: New York City forces people to do many strange things, and so it is true in entertaining.
In a city where apartments can be tiny, it is not uncommon to encounter desperate measures, particularly among people with big ideas and little space.


Franchise Brokers Making Their Mark
LEAD: For years, people thought that picking a real estate broker was a little like choosing a new car: You asked friends and watched the ads.


CONNECTIUT GUIDE
LEAD:  PARISIAN HAUTE COUTURE  Original gowns from the houses of Paquin, Poiret and Worth, will be among 50 examples of early 20th-century Parisian haute couture in an exhibition opening today at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  Cheerleaders 1, Football 0


Carol Sundheim Engaged
LEAD: The engagement of Carol Sue Sundheim to Gary Scott Cozen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Cozen of Wyncote, Pa., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Sundheim of Elkins Park, Pa.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sundheim is a vice president in the investment-banking group at Cores States Corporation in Philadelphia.


THE WORLD
LEAD: In the three Baltic republics, where nationalist movements are gaining momentum, the Soviet Union is facing the consequences of its raw use of power at the outbreak of World War II and a bold attempt to tamper with the historical record.


The Reagan Years In the Region
LEAD:  The Caribbean: President Reagan, seeking to diminish what he calls Cuban and Soviet influence in Central America and the Caribbean, meets with the new conservative Prime Minister of Jamaica, Edward P. G. Seaga, in 1981 and promises economic aid.
In 1983, the region's English-speaking islands support the American invasion of Grenada.


Behind the Preference for 'Junk' Bonds
LEAD: THE relatively high returns of ''junk'' bonds have convinced many investors that these bonds are one of the most attractive investments of the post-crash market.
Lured by yields of more than 12 percent, individual investors too frightened to own common stocks are pouring billions of dollars into mutual funds investing in these bonds of low-rated and sometimes highly leveraged companies.


FUGITIVE EX-NAZI GIVEN GERMAN VISA
LEAD: The strange case of a former Latvian Nazi police chief who escaped deportation from the United States by quietly fleeing to West Germany, only to be arrested there on war crimes charges, has taken another unusual turn.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ending Oct. 15  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $385,000
315 West 23d Street
1,050-sq.-ft. open loft with bath in a former prewar warehouse; 24-hr. doorman, skylights, wrapped terrace, four exposures, Jacuzzi; maintenance $1,100, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Debra Kameros Co.)


More Pregnant Women Using Drugs
LEAD: ALTHOUGH many pregnant women are well aware of the problems cocaine use can have on their babies, the danger does not seem to frighten the women enough to change their behavior, some doctors in Connecticut say.


Credit Squeeze
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lehman Upsets DeWitt Clinton, 20-15
LEAD: In a major upset in the Public Schools Athletic League, Lehman defeated DeWitt Clinton, 20-15, in a Bronx Division game at Clinton.


Suffer the Little Children?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prague Police Seal Off Site of Friday Rally
LEAD: The police sealed off much of Prague's Wenceslas Square today as water cannon and military trucks stood ready to stop demonstrators from returning to the site of a police attack on a peaceful rally the night before.


Correction
LEAD: A picture last Sunday with an article about the Senate campaign in Florida was published in error.
It showed Representative Pat Swindall of Georgia, not Representative Connie Mack of Florida.


Trenton State Edges Montclair State
LEAD: Steve Ware, who had 32 carries for 259 yards, scored on a 44-yard run as Trenton State edged Montclair State, 23-21, tonight in a New Jersey State Conference game at Sprague Field.


Grocers to Give Food Stamps
LEAD: New York State will distribute food stamps in supermarkets beginning later this week as part of a pilot program intended to make redeeming the coupons easier.


Answering The Mail
LEAD:  Q. Our 63-year-old house was reshingled 11 years ago.
The shingles were coated with a good brand of gray shingle stain.
Two sides of the house have now started to mildew (south and west).
We have been told that this condition will not clear up even when the humid weather ends.
Can you advise us as to what we can do?


Letters on Travel; Car Sharing
LEAD: To the Editor: A word of warning regarding the Aug. 14 Travel Advisory mention of ''Car Sharing in Europe'' - the growing network of linking drivers with riders in major European cities.


Carolyn A. Rubin and Robert Kelly Have a Wedding
LEAD: The marriage of Carolyn Ann Rubin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard Francis Rubin of New York, to Robert Michael Kelly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Edward Kelly of Spring Lake, N.J., took place yesterday at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York.
The Rev.
Paul S. Tipton officiated.


Soviet Launching Delayed
LEAD:  Moscow postponed launching its first shuttle when a platform failed to separate from the rocket.
Page 14.
New Phase in Angola War Having lost direct South African aid, Angolan guerrillas still hope to win a voice in a peace agreement.
Page 10.
China's Scarred Literati
China's intellectuals have slowly overcome past persecution, but retribution is a constant threat.


DOS SANTOS REPORTED IN MOSCOW TO DISCUSS PACTS WITH GORBACHEV
LEAD: President Jose Eduardo dos Santos of Angola has been in Moscow meeting with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, to discuss the terms of a possible settlement of the conflicts in Angola and Namibia, American officials said today.


Sophie Nash Wed To G. R. Ours 3d
LEAD: Sophie Nash and George Ralph Ours 3d were married yesterday at St.
Thomas' Parish Church in Upper Marlboro, Md.
The Rev.
Edward Raffetto performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.


IT MAY LOOK LIKE A HOE, BUT IT'S REALLY MONEY
LEAD: What are these African metal objects that look like miniature iron banners, copper croquet wickets, a bronze spiral from a giant's bedspring or iron spearheads too thin to penetrate more than air?
Money, more or less, said Michael Ward.
The Manhattan dealer has assembled 49 such items in ''Symbols of Value: Abstractions in African Metalwork,'' an exhibition at the Michael Ward gallery, 9 E.


Greta Weil Is Married
LEAD: At the Dingletown Community Church in Greenwich, Conn., Greta Weil, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Weil of Chicago and Oslo, was married yesterday to Richard Francis Conway, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Conway of Greenwich.
The Rev.
Paul Beavers, a minister of the Christian Missionary


YO, BAUDELAIRE
LEAD:  VANNA KARENINA  By Frank Gannon.
Illustrated. 152 pp.
New York:  Viking. $15.95.


Editors' Note
LEAD: A political article in the ''State by State'' series last Sunday reported criticisms of Bill Wasserman, who was dismissed as state director of the Dukakis campaign in New Mexico.


Battle for Hispanic Voters in Texas Intensifies
LEAD: The battle for Texas' critical Hispanic vote has been given new urgency in a weeklong barrage of charges and countercharges between Republicans and Democrats.


Any Sale in U.S. Of Abortion Pill Still Years Away
LEAD: Although the abortion-inducing drug RU 486 is back on the market in France, experts say it will be years before the drug could be sold in the United States, even if a company decides to try to market it here.


MISSION IMPOSSIBLE
LEAD: I must apologize for many unkind thoughts I've directed toward postal workers for the inferiority of service (''Mission Impossible,'' by John B. Judis, Sept. 25).
I now realize it is not labor that is at fault.
Management seems to have caused the majority of difficulties by virtually mandating no thinking on the job.


Susan Sprague Wed to T. R. MacGregor
LEAD: St.
Bernard's Episcopal Church in Bernardsville, N.J., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Susan Hickock Sprague, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Hayes Sprague of Maplewood, N.J., and Benson, Vt., to Tracy Reel MacGregor, a son of Lieut.
Comdr.
Norman Kenneth MacGregor, U.S.N., retired, and Barbard Reel MacGregor, both of Broomall, Pa.


Presidential Candidates Gain Endorsements
LEAD: Newspapers in Kansas City, Mo., Denver and New York City endorsed Presidential candidates this weekend in editorials that also criticized the campaign as superficial and negative.


Reviews/Music; Ned Rorem Harmonies With a Choral Backdrop
LEAD: Ned Rorem, whose 65th birthday celebrations continued with a program of (mostly) choral music at St.
Thomas Church on Tuesday evening, is a composer who has remained faithful to many facets of traditional harmony without asserting the traditional power of harmony very boldly.
Like certain other basically lyrical and conservative composers in the postwar decades, he has tended to decorate his chords with added or altered tones that cloud their identity without adding any great sense of movement or direction, and that lends a certain feeling of sameness to the harmonies even when, underneath,


Dukakis Assails Administration's Rural Policies
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, clearly fired by a sense that his underdog campaign was on the move again, told a roaring rally here today, ''We're closing that gap.''


100,000 Sq. Ft. of Offices: Biggest in Bahamas
LEAD: The Bahamian economy runs on sunshine, palm trees and Eurobonds.


Bentsen Casts Two Ballots for Himself, Legally
LEAD: Senator Lloyd Bentsen voted for himself twice today in the Starr County Courthouse here, once for Vice President and once for Senator, and hopes fellow Texans will follow his example.


Fairest 'Lady' Issued On CD
LEAD: Lest anyone still doubt the vitality of the American musical in this age of imported blockbusters, the recent hit recording of ''Show Boat'' with an operatic cast - not to mention best-selling recordings of the recent past like the similarly cast ''West Side Story'' - should confirm the enduring popularity of the native form.


Some Familiar Faces in the Buyout Crowd
LEAD: WHENEVER one corporation dangles big money in front of another, a tight circle of seasoned bankers, lawyers and buyout artists bursts into action.
These are the people who are instrumental in formulating battle tactics, offering advice or actually mounting buyout offers of their own.


William H. Catto Exchanges Vows With Ms. Kent
LEAD: At St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York, Kristina Kent, a daughter of Elizabeth Kent Adler of New York and Erik A. Kent of Plandome, L.I., was married yesterday to William Haskel Catto, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry E. Catto of McLean, Va.
The Rev.
Thomas Dix Bowers performed the ceremony.


Two Good Men
LEAD: What a sour, superficial, misleading campaign: George Bush is not the nasty propagandist that his harsh attacks have made him seem.
Michael Dukakis is not the unfocused incompetent that his late and lame responses have made him seem.
Both are better men, and better potential Presidents, than the images they project on television.


Lincoln H. Clark; Co-Founder of CARE, 77
LEAD: Lincoln H. Clark, co-founder of the relief organization CARE and a professor of marketing at several colleges during his career, died of cancer Friday in his home Falmouth, Me.
He was 77 years old.


New Road in Delaware Collides With a Cemetery
LEAD: Perusing the legal notices in the local newspaper recently, Edward W. Heite, an archeologist from Camden, Del., made a discovery that excited him.
The state of Delaware was looking for the descendants of Robert Graham, believed to have been buried in 1813 in a cemetery of unmarked graves.


Hannah Tillich, 92, Christian Theologian's Widow
LEAD: Hannah Tillich, whose vivid but unblinking remembrance of four decades as the wife of Paul Tillich scandalized some of his fellow theologians in 1973, died Thursday at Southampton Hospital after suffering a heart attack.
Aged 92, she had lived in East Hampton, L.I., since her husband's death.


FISH STEWS WITH A MEDITERRANEAN HERITAGE
LEAD: MEDITERRANEAN seafood stews are particularly good for informal entertaining.
They are easy to assemble (the stock and sauces can be made in advance) and take only a short time to cook.
If you serve salad and cheese afterward, followed by a simple fruit dessert (something made with apples would be good), you have a dinner party menu that can be put together without a lot of fuss.


U.N. Backers Urge Full U.S. Dues Payment
LEAD: A suggested blueprint for the next United States Administration's political agenda at the United Nations has been set out in a study by the United Nations Association of the United States of America, based on a nationwide survey of the group's 20,000 members and other interested organizations.


Mailbox; A Tribute To Venezia
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Hints for Picking Out a User-Friendly CD Player
LEAD: Back in the beginning of the digital age, picking a CD player was simple, all you needed was $1,000 - the price of most players at the time.
It didn't matter much which one you chose.
They all sounded very much alike, which is not suprising, since they all used almost identical circuitry.


Show and Tell, With Visual Aids
LEAD: OF the thousands of meetings that your bosses, colleagues and casual acquaintances have invited you to attend so far this year, no doubt a few failed to quicken your pulse.
It is no cause for shame.
We've all had fleeting moments of ennui during meetings, especially when the person who has called the gathering - ostensibly to enlighten everyone on the statistical fluctuations in the third-quarter exchange rate of the zloty, for example - pauses, pulls out a foot-thick sheaf of overhead transparencies and says, ''I've brought along a few visual aids, which


Headliners; Parental Dispute
LEAD: Robert W. Mays denies that he and his late wife took the wrong baby home from the hospital in 1978, but he said last week that even if they did, he will not give up the child, Kimberly Michelle Mays.
Regina and Ernest Twigg of Pennsylvania, whose child was born about the same time in the same Florida hospital, say that tests showed that the little girl they took home, who died of a heart defect last summer, could not have been their biological daughter.


Both Candidates Say U.S. Should Increase United Nations Role
LEAD: The two major Presidential candidates, in their first formal statements of the policies they would adopt toward the United Nations if elected, say the United States should play a more active role in solving global problems through the world organization.


Current PINS Law: Everybody Loses
LEAD: As a clinical social worker in private practice in Suffolk County, I am very concerned about this issue.
I had no idea of the scope of the problem.
I feel that the age of emancipation should be raised to 18.


Outdoors; An Angling Classic Returns to Print
LEAD: WHEN Mary Orvis Marbury died in 1914, the English Fishing Gazette acclaimed her as ''the most famous but one female angling author.'' (The other was Dame Juliana Berners, an Englishwoman who wrote ''A Treatyse of Fysshying Wyth an Angle'' in 1496.) Marbury's ''Favorite Flies and Their Histories,'' which became a best seller among anglers after it appeared in 1892 and went through nine printings by 1896, has recently been reprinted by the Wellfleet


Fraud Charged in Jersey Condo Plan
LEAD: Bosses and associates of the Genovese organized-crime family held hidden interests in a $25 million condominium project in Edgewater, N.J., and paid the borough's Mayor $500 a week to help push it along, a Federal indictment has charged.


Oz for the Space Age  E.T. THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL  Starring Dee Wallace, Henry Thomas (in photo), Peter Coyote, Robert Macnaughton, Drew Barrymore. Directed by Steven Spielberg. 1982.  MCA Home Video.  115 minutes. $24.95. Closed captioned. Rated PG. Contains occasional rude language.
LEAD: E.T. has taken much longer to get to home video than to get home.
But the alien, marooned on a strange planet, is still civilized and learned, patient and gentle, as he is befriended by 10-year-old Elliott.


'WE CAN PROTECT BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY'
LEAD: LESLIE J. MEHRHOFF is one of the state's foremost champions of endangered species.
For more than 13 years Mr.
Mehroff, a biologist, has compiled and maintained the State Department of Environmental Protection's lists of locations of endangered and threatened species and of species of concern.


TEACHER'S TALES ARE A GHOSTLY LOT
LEAD: TOMORROW night, anyone near the old Norwichtown Cemetery in Norwich may see a strange figure at the tomb of Hannah Arnold, the mother of Benedict Arnold.
For it is said that on Halloween, Benedict Arnold's ghost visits his mother's grave.


Whalers and Liut Shut Out Devils
LEAD: The Devils played a listless game for the most part here tonight and suffered their second shutout in the last six games.


WANTED: GOOD THROWAWAY HOUSING
LEAD: I LONG for the era of the disposable house.
When a leak develops in the basement, the roof shows signs of deterioration and the kitchen has become obsolete, you simply press a button and the whole thing self-destructs leaving a small pile of ash which can be spread around the azaleas.
Until that time arrives, however, one must endure the endless struggle to keep the thing hanging together.


HOW BADOIT TOOK ON PERRIER
LEAD: WHETHER Americans visiting France dine in humble bistros or resplendent three-star restaurants, they are often surprised to see so many of the French drinking a sparkling water named Badoit.
Perrier is often nowhere to be seen.


Prospects
LEAD: Bond Market Jitters


Condensation Can Cause Problems
LEAD: FROST appeared on the windowpanes of my house last week, reminding me that the storm windows need to come out of the basement.
It's also the season to start thinking about protecting cameras from the cold.


WARMING UP TO FUR COATS
LEAD: Men who wear fur fall into two distinct classes: those who flaunt their passion for lambskin, mink or possum, and those who pay a premium to keep it under wraps.
Michael M. Connery, a New York City lawyer and the owner of a cloth coat smartly trimmed in beaver, ranks himself with the former. ''Lining a coat with fur misses the point,'' Connery says emphatically.


Repairing Ceramic Floor Tiles
LEAD: CERAMIC floor tiles offer superior durability and appearance, but are brittle.
A powerful blow from a sharp object can crack even the most expertly laid tile, but often foot pressure alone is sufficient to crack tile that is improperly set or inadequately supported.


'A Thousand Clowns': Offbeat Happy Home
LEAD: ''A THOUSAND CLOWNS,'' the production at the Broad Hollow Theater in Farmingdale, had its Broadway premiere in 1962.


Reviews/Music; Populists' Common-Sense Voices
LEAD: During the evolution of the modern folk-music movement, one quality that has remained in scant supply is an plainspoken unpretentious sincerity.
From Bob Dylan and Joan Baez to John Denver and Jackson Browne, even the most talented and well-meaning performers, in delivering political messages, have tended to treat the concert stage as pulpit.


Directional Illiteracy: Lost on the Island
LEAD: I'M in trouble on Long Island.
An architectural trend is interfering with my meager orienteering skills.
More and more strip malls are being built around parking lots.
Sometimes they're in straight rows, other times they're L-shaped.
They usually have a unifying roof or cornice. they all have delis, pizza places, stationery stores and dress shops.


Reviews/Music; Sounds of Puerto Rico
LEAD: Los Pleneros de la 21, who performed Monday night at Dance Theater Workshop, reminded the audience that the music of Puerto Rico was once made for a local community and that its aspirations and its references were intentionally small.
It dealt with familial, personal things often overlooked in popular music.


Integration Proves Elusive in an Ohio Suburb
LEAD: Eight years after a Federal judge ruled that this working-class suburb of Cleveland had actively excluded blacks for at least two decades, the city is building public housing, holding seminars on racial relations and spending $75,000 on an advertising campaign urging blacks to move in.


Sunday Buffet, Brazilian-Style
LEAD: For Alfred and Suzana Monacella, a Manhattan-based film maker and a Brazilian-born fashion designer, staging a party is as pleasurable as the party itself. ''We entertain so much because we enjoy the whole process,'' explained Mr.
Monacella, who, with his wife, especially likes giving Sunday afternoon buffets.


Camille Duvall, Champion Water Skier, Marries Byron Hero Jr. in the Bahamas
LEAD: At the Church of the Annunciation in Nassau, the Bahamas, Carole Camille Duvall, the daughter of Dianne Duvall of Windermere, Fla., and the late Samuel E. Duvall Jr., was married yesterday to Byron A. Hero Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Hero of New York and Southampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Milton B. Efthimiou of the Greek Archidiocese of North and South


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  THE PROSECUTORS: Inside the Offices of the Government's Most Powerful Lawyers, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $8.95.) Charges of insider trading at Morgan Stanley and bribery at McDonnell Douglas are among the cases portrayed in James B. Stewart's book about government prosecutors.


Furniture Fit For the Kings of France
LEAD: Today's big money goes into paintings, but in France in the 17th and 18th centuries it was decorative arts that commanded high prices.
The ebenistes, or cabinetmakers, and menuisiers, or chair makers, in the reigns of Louis XIV, XV and XVI produced furniture of richness and superb quality.
The word masterpiece can properly be applied to many, as its origin was the piece a journeyman had to submit to a guild in order to qualify as a master.


Business Behavior
LEAD: To the Editor:


What Rivera Saw
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pop From the Black Sea, Cloaked in Mystery
LEAD: The most unlikely contender on the 1987 British pop charts was an album of female voices, usually unaccompanied, singing in Bulgarian. ''Le Mystere des Voix Bulgares'' (''The Mystery of Bulgarian Voices'').
The album, originally released on the French label Disques Cellier, caught the restless ears of trend-happy


Births Among Teen-Agers Down a Bit
LEAD: A FIVE-YEAR decline in the birthrate among teen-age mothers in Connecticut has health planners optimistic that education efforts are meeting with some success.


QUIET ROADS ACROSS THE PRAIRIE
LEAD: You can drive on an Interstate across the most endlessly enchanting of countrysides and encounter only an unrelieved monotony.
The expressway exists in its own world, an unwalled tunnel, and moves at its own urgent pace.
It has a rhythm and a rigidly regular time quite distinct from the landscape it crosses.


TOW VIEWS OF WHAT ONE EUROPE SHOULD BE
LEAD: From the very beginning of the Common Market in 1957, two very different visions of Europe have inspired its leaders and institutions.
Shimmering in the distance was the dream of a federal European union, with a common currency, a common social and economic structure, and a common defense.
But looming more closely, was a practical framework of loose cooperation between the old, familiar nation-states of


NONFICTION
LEAD:  LOVING RACHEL: A Family's Journey From Grief.
By Jane Bernstein. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) When Jane Bernstein and her husband, Paul Glynn, discovered that their 2-month-old daughter, Rachel, was blind, the result of an incompletely developed optic nerve, they were stunned.
Blind?
Their pretty, cherished baby?


Verbatim: 'That Hellish Poison'
LEAD: ' During World War II, even during the most desperate battles, both sides refrained from using chemical weapons, weapons that Winston Churchill referred to as ''that hellish poison.'' The Iran-Iraq war ended that restraint and set a dangerous precedent for future wars.
These weapons are thought to offer a cheap and readily obtainable means of redressing the military balance against more powerful foes.


In Yonkers, Voters Reconsider the System
LEAD: Obscured by the lingering furor over housing desegregation is an Election Day proposition that might have averted last month's crisis.


AMONG TH MILLENNIUMS
LEAD: What a pleasure it is to deal with a man who loves his work.
And T. G. H. James, until his retirement earlier this year the Keeper of Egyptian Antiquities at the British Museum, clearly loves Egypt.
Starting with the proposition that ''in almost every respect the nineteenth-century traveler to Egypt was at an advantage compared with today's two-week visitor,'' Mr.


HOWARD'S WAY
LEAD: In Richard Bernstein's article ''Howard's Way'' (Sept. 25), on translating Proust, three different translations are offered of the famous opening sentence of ''Swann's Way'': Longtemps, je me suis couche de bonne heure.
The three versions are: ''For a long time I used to go to bed early.'' ''Time was when I always went to bed early.


Q. ''How Can I give a really nice dinner at home when I'm a terrible cook.''  A. ''Let a restaurant chef do the cooking.''
LEAD: Carryout has gone haute.
No longer does takeout necessarily mean little white cartons of Chinese food or big flat boxes of pizza, or even the elaborate pastas and salads that are now available.
Today's host can entertain at home in style, with meals from fine restaurants and possibly even a chef and waiter in attendance.


Amid Plenty, Many in Peru Face Hunger
LEAD: Wandering around a street market near her home with the equivalent of just 60 cents in her pocket, Sara Chaverry seemed almost in a daze as she tried to imagine how she would provide the next three meals for the 10 members of her household.


Proposals for Peace
LEAD: I LEARNED EVERYTHING I needed to know about how to make peace in the Middle East while grocery shopping in Jerusalem.
And even now, as the world awaits what may be momentous events - an Israeli election Tuesday that could determine whether Israel withdraws from the occupied territories, and an anticipated meeting of the P.L.O.


Headliners; Today, the Barnyard
LEAD: Revolution is afoot on the animal farms of Sweden, fomented largely by Astrid Lindgren.
Mrs.
Lindgren, the widely read author who is perhaps best known as the creator of the character ''Pippi Longstocking,'' lobbied tirelessly for the passage of an animal-welfare law that is now being implemented.


Signs of Intelligent Life in Music Television
LEAD: One evening this month as I was riffling through television by remote control, I happened to spot the stern, cherubic face of Wynton Marsalis.
The young jazz trumpeter was the guest on a program called ''New Visions,'' a weekly two-hour series that airs on Sundays at 10 P.M. on the 24-hour cable music channel, VH-1.


AMBIVALENCE IN THREE-QUARTER TIME
LEAD:  THE VIENNESE  Splendor, Twilight, and Exile.
By Paul Hofmann.
Illustrated. 346 pp. New York:
Anchor Press/Doubleday. $22.50.


WHERE A ZUNI'S SOUL DIES
LEAD:  PAINTED TURTLE  Woman With Guitar.
By Clarence Major.  159 pp.
Los Angeles:  Sun &amp; Moon Press. $14.95.


Kate Lynch Is the Bride Of Donald M. Grossinger
LEAD: Kate Lynch, a daughter of Mr. and William F. Lynch of Stuart, Fla., was married yesterday to Donald Michael Grossinger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Grossinger of Oceanside, L.I.
The Rev.
Eric Carpine, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Joseph Gelberman performed the ceremony at the Montverde mansion in Peekskill, N.Y.


Chicago
LEAD: Not so long ago, a fledgling airport named after a local war hero stood amid the corn and beanfields northwest of Chicago, a quiet stretch of prairie where night life could mean a tractor plowing in the moonlight.
But the field named for Butch O'Hare would become the busiest airport in the world, and corporate towers began to sprout prodigously from the soil, giving rise to a gleaming, sprawling suburbanopolis that today competes for visitors with its big-shouldered progenitor along Lake Michigan.


CANADA VOTE RACE SEEMS TO TIGHTEN
LEAD: Despite widespread expectations that the governing Progressive Conservatives would be easily returned to power in Canada, the general election campaign appears to have suddenly tightened because of voter anxieties over the free-trade pact with the United States.


Officials Realize 'Inmate' Was Never Jailed
LEAD: Corrections officials in Mississippi did not realize Shelly Teague had not served a day of his four-year prison sentence until they could not find him to let him out on parole.


Margery M. Trimble Wed in Maryland To R. B. Kennelly Jr., a Silver Medalist
LEAD: The wedding of Margery Mills Trimble, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Trimble Jr. of Owings Mills, Md., to Richard Bayard Kennelly Jr., the son of Mr.
Kennelly of Claremont, Calif., and Mrs.
Tevita Puloka of Nukualofa, Tonga, and Arlington, Mass., took place yesterday at St.
Thomas's Episcopal Church in Garrison, Md.


Temple Breaks Losing Streak
LEAD: Matt Baker, a sophomore quarterback who had thrown only three touchdown passes in the Owls' first six games this season, passed for thre touchdowns and a school record-tying 313 yards today as Temple ended a four-game losing streak with a 35-30 victory over Rutgers.


A Small Ring Leaves a Large Hole
LEAD: MY hand feels strange, different, off balance.
For a brief moment I think I have forgotten something; I look down, and then I remember.


Police Training Overhaul Sought in Massachusetts
LEAD: State Attorney General James M. Shannon has called for a ''radical, major overhaul of police training in Massachusetts'' after investigating a training center at which 47 cadets became ill.


'They' Were Right About Pollution
LEAD: RECENTLY, we have become acutely aware of an incipient problem that has been with us for years, but until now has only been the concern of the proverbial ''they.''


Minnesota Settles Drought Insurance Claims
LEAD: A $5.25 million settlement has been reached with the Chubb Corporation and its subsidiary, the Federal Insurance Company, in a dispute over drought insurance sold to Minnesota farmers last spring, state officials announced today.


Repairing Ceramic Floor Tiles
LEAD: CERAMIC floor tiles offer superior durability and appearance, but are brittle.
A powerful blow from a sharp object can crack even the most expertly laid tile, but often foot pressure alone is sufficient to crack tile that is improperly set or inadequately supported.


NO MIDDLE GROUND
LEAD:  EL INFIERNO  By Carlos Martinez Moreno.
Translated by Ann Wright.  266 pp.
St.
Paul:  Readers International/Consortium Book Sales.
Cloth, $16.95.
Paper, $8.95.


HANDLE WITH CARE
LEAD: As the wife of a hemophiliac who recently died of complications of AIDS, I was moved by Cecilia Worth's article, ''Handle With Care'' (Body and Mind, Sept. 25).


MEMORIAL TO MAN WHO BROUGHT THE BARD TO LIFE
LEAD: FOR 28 years here, children and their parents have sat around the dinner table discussing Ophelia's madness, Goneril's cruelty and the magic of fairies on a summer night.


MISSION IMPOSSIBLE
LEAD: While pay scales, productivity, poor union relations and management incompetence may all play a part, I believe the key to the dilemma is to be found in the very last sentence of your article, where you mention junk mail.
A privatized mail system would quickly decide that junk mail does not pay its way.


Sports of The Times; Halloween Party at Yankee Stadium
LEAD: THE invitation for the Halloween party at Yankee Stadium read that a costume was required.
The invitation was signed, ''King Kong.''


A Remark Enrages The Indian Community
LEAD: A RECENT comment by former Mayor Jed Colicchio has raised the ire of New Jersey's Indian community.
Mr.
Colicchio said his remarks were misinterpreted and he has apologized.


SOVIET TEST DATA REKINDLE DISPUTE
LEAD: The data gathered from a recent underground nuclear explosion at a Soviet test site have reinvigorated a debate over the Reagan Administration's stance in talks on nuclear testing.
The experiment was the second conducted under a verification agreement signed by the United States and the Soviet Union.


WHY MORE MONEY IS FLOWING TO THE DEMOCRATS
LEAD: In the competitive world of money and politics, some most unlikely alliances form.


IN FLAMES ON ASH WEDNESDAY
LEAD:  FIRESTORM  By William Coyle.  336 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.95.


Fish Pollution In Florida
LEAD: FLORIDA, which has had more than its share of walking catfish, three-pound poisonous toads and other exotic creatures not endemic to the state, has found one way to control the encroachment on its native wildlife: fighting fire with fire.


DATA BANK: October 30, 1988
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY
$
Gross National Product
III Q'88
II Q'88
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,073.1
$3,988.4
$3,831.0
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.2
3.0
3.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'88
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
162.7
$149.4
$136.4
Industrial Production Index
Sept.


Political Notes; A Democratic Tradition Ends in New York City
LEAD: A three-decade tradition in New York City will end Thursday when Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts campaigns in some other state rather than at a Garment Center rally that has whooped it up in past Presidential elections for Adlai E. Stevenson, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, George McGovern, Jimmy Carter and Walter


Joan Morrow Marries
LEAD: Joan Marya Morrow, the daughter of Canon and Mrs.
John T. Morrow of Gladstone, N.J., was married there yesterday to Clyde William Seigle Jr., the son of Mrs.
Richard Ackerman of Northampton, Pa., and Mr.
Seigle of Roanoke, Va.
The ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church, of which the bride's father is rector, was performed by Bishop Albert W.


Utility Cuts Bid to Raise Rates
LEAD: AFTER nearly five years without an increase, the Connecticut Light and Power Company is seeking to raise its rates, but the State Attorney General and the Consumer Counsel contend that even a modest rise is unwarranted.


Lake George Condos: A Victorian Evocation
LEAD: The Antlers resort has passed through phases that mirror those traveled by the Lake George area itself.
In 1880, Jerome Burton began building the Antlers Hotel on logging land he had been farming.
It was designed and run like the Adirondack camps then attracting wealthy New Yorkers whose doctors prescribed mountain air.


CHASING THAT HOT NEW ACCOUNT IN MOSCOW
LEAD: Anyone watching Chancellor Helmut Kohl lumbering into Moscow last week with 50 businessmen and $1.6 billion worth of credits in tow could hardly be blamed for assuming that change has its rich rewards.
That, no doubt, was how Mr.
Kohl hoped his gifts would be understood as he joined the long caravan of Western politicians and capitalists drawn by a new star to the


Correction
LEAD: An article on Oct. 16 about two Indians awaiting execution for the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi misidentified one.
The defendant, Kehar Singh, was a Government clerk not directly involved in the assassination but convicted of conspiracy; he was not a bodyguard.


Canceling a Deal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lisa Tenney Hearst Is Wed To Thomas Espy, Executive
LEAD: The marriage of Lisa Tenney Hearst and Thomas Pierson Espy took place yesterday at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
The Rev.
Frederick Hill performed the ceremony.


New Dean's Proposals Raise Concerns in a School at Yale
LEAD: Yale University last week named a new dean for its School of Organization and Management and announced a series of changes in the curriculum there, setting off concern that the school may be moving away from its experimental approach to graduate business education.


OCEANS, TOO, HAVE AREA CODES
LEAD: Everyone is familiar with telephone area codes, but you might not realize that oceans have area codes.
When you know their numbers, it becomes almost as easy to dial someone aboard a ship as it is on land.
It is also as easy to dial from a ship to someone at home as it is across town.


Let's Not Reject Compulsory Voting Too Hastily; Widen the Options
LEAD: To the Editor:


Penn Continues on Unbeaten Path
LEAD: Penn was penalized 21 times today, an Ivy League single-game record.
Nevertheless, the Red and Blue managed beat Princeton, 31-23, while curbing the Garrett brothers' flashy show, so much a part of Tiger football, before a crowd of 24,500 at Palmer Stadium.


Reviews Yes, Censorship No
LEAD: Even though I am a ''card-carrying'' feminist, I take strong exception to the directive of art reviewer Helen A. Harrison that ''male and female viewers alike should view its (the paintings of Tony Ingoglia) message with distaste''  [ ''Dissidents on Exhibition,'' Oct. 9 ] .


Janet Meyers Wed To Mark A. Pollak
LEAD: Janet M. Meyers, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hyman Meyers of Richmond, was married there last evening to Mark A. Pollak, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Pollak of Lakehurst, N.J.
Rabbi Jack Spiro performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth Ahabah.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 63-year-old house was reshingled 11 years ago.
The shingles were coated with a good brand of gray shingle stain.
Two sides of the house have now started to mildew (south and west).
We have been told that this condition will not clear up even when the humid weather ends.
Can you advise us as to what we can do?


Q and A; Study Abroad
LEAD:  Question: Many colleges and universities offer organized travel with academic credit during the summer.
How can I find out what courses will be offered next summer by the various instituions of higher learning in this country? - P. R., Pacific Palisades, Calif.
Answer: There is a comprehensive reference book on this subject, called ''Vacation Study Abroad,'' a guide that describes 1,300 programs, about 80 percent of them in Europe.


Night Games
LEAD:  BRIGHT LIGHTS, BIG CITY  Starring Michael J. Fox (in photo), Phoebe Cates, Swoosie Kurtz, Dianne Wiest, Frances Sternhagen, Jason Robards, William Hickey.
Directed by James Bridges. 1988.
MGM/UA Entertainment.  107 minutes. $89.95.
Rated R.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Budd Lake  $179,000
5 Budd Lake Heights Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 17-year-old contemporary; full basement, eat-in kitchen, fireplace; taxes $3,056.
Hanover Township  $234,500
271 Whippany Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; c/a, patio, fireplace in living room; taxes $3,500.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


ISRAEL FACES CRUCIAL ELECTION AND APATHETIC PUBLIC
LEAD: Three days before Israel's parliamentary elections, by all accounts the most important of recent times, the Israeli public seems to have lost interest, depressed by the likelihood that the balloting will result in another stalemate.


BEST SELLERS: October 30, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
2
THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice.
(Knopf, $18.95.) Continuing the chronicle of 6,000
years of vampirism begun in ''Interview With the
Vampire'' and ''The Vampire Lestat.


No Headline
LEAD: IT IS TWO DAYS AFTER THE MOST DRAMATIC moment in Lloyd Bentsen's political career, his Vice Presidential debate with Senator Dan Quayle in Omaha.
But in the more mundane realm of day-to-day politics, Bentsen has hit a snag.
He is sitting in a Houston television studio, from where he is to be linked by satellite to stations in such places as Amarillo, Wichita Falls, Harlingen, Midland and Sherman.


Perrier's New American Assault
LEAD: GUSTAVE Leven, the white-haired chairman of the Perrier Group, often sounds like an Old Testament prophet when he rails against the evils of tap water and hails the beneficial aspects of mineral water.


Update on Nielsen
LEAD: BRIGITTE NIELSEN, the fiancee of Mark Gastineau, has had a recurrence of a pre-cancerous condition, her publicist said yesterday.


CRIME
LEAD: Any theatergoer who has ever felt the urge to murder an actor for an execrable performance should get a kick out of two backstage mysteries that do the deed with a nice theatrical flourish.
In Herbert Resnicow's novel THE GOLD GAMBLE (Kahn/St. Martin's, $15.95), a Broadway producer's chippy girlfriend is smothered in her own cold cream when her backstabbing threatens to wreck a revival of ''Guys and Dolls.


Sandra D. Yearley To Have a Bridal
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas C. Yearley of Westfield, N.J., and Scottsdale, Ariz., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sandra Dunbar Yearley, to Mark Christopher Durgin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Durgin of Middleton, Mass.
The wedding is planned for December.


Erich Mendelsohn's Lyrical Vision
LEAD: Erich Mendelsohn is one of those architects whose name everyone knows - well, let's say everyone who follows the world of architecture knows - but about whom no one ever seems to know very much.
He hovers around the edges of modern architecture, a contemporary of such great figures as Mies van der Rohe, Walter Gropius and Le Corbusier, but never quite their equal.


Noll Still Setting the Traps
LEAD: A long time ago someone told Chuck Noll, ''Do what you know.''


Some Second Attempts Make First-Rate Music
LEAD: Brahms composed two string sextets, Schubert two piano trios and Smetana two string quartets.
In each case, the first of each pair is performed (and recorded) far more often than the second.
There seems an obvious reason for their popularity: all three are outstanding examples of gloriously melodic 19th-century chamber music.


Warsaw Pact Seeks a Summit
LEAD: Foreign Ministers of the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact today ended two days of talks after calling for a 35-nation European summit meeting on reducing conventional weapons, official reports said.
Most of the proposals made at the meeting were contained in previous documents issued by the military alliance, but the summit call was new.


Done In By Automatic Dial
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: An article on page 5 of the Arts and Leisure section today incompletely describes the production of ''Soul of a Jew,'' by the Haifa Municipal Theater of Israel, which opens on Wednesday at Symphony Space.
It will be performed in Hebrew, with simultaneous English translation available on headphones.


Theatricality Bedecks a Festival in Lyons
LEAD: Festival is a devalued word in the performing arts nowadays.
But if there is any event, in its scope and celebration of an art form that restored full meaning to the term, it was this autumn's International Dance Biennale in Lyons, France.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE BREAKTHROUGH: The Race for the Superconductor.
By Robert M. Hazen. (Summit, $18.95.) Early 1987 was a time of excitement in science labs around the world.
With the discovery of superconductors - electrical conductors that could operate free of resistance at temperatures warm enough to make practical applications conceivable - the world of physics snapped to attention.


What Will Mrs. Grundy Say?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Donna Ann D'Onofrio, a Banker, Wed To Norman M. Beretta in Connecticut
LEAD: At Our Lady of Fatima Roman Catholic Church in Wilton, Conn., Donna Ann D'Onofrio, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony A. D'Onofrio of Wilton, was married yesterday to Norman Morse Beretta, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Beretta Jr. of Jamestown, R.I., by the Rev.
Michael C. Palmer.


Rough Cut
LEAD: ''A ROSE BOWL IS A ROSE BOWL,'' Jim O'Leary says.
Perhaps that is so, but O'Leary, who is the master designer at Waterford Crystal, is a self-effacing man.
At least, so he seems during a telephone interview from County Waterford, Ireland, as he explains his recent creation: the crystal bowl that is to commemorate the centennial of the Tournament of Roses parade on Jan.


Headliners; Historic Race
LEAD: Of the contestants in the Presidential race, only Lenora B. Fulani has already secured a place in history.
As the New Alliance Party's candidate, Dr.
Fulani, a


Let's Not Reject Compulsory Voting Too Hastily
LEAD: To the Editor:


A La Carte: Hearty Fare for Autumn Diners
LEAD: AUTUMN'S chilly blasts have driven the crowds from the East End.
This might be an ideal time to try the hardy Tuscan specialties on the fall menu of Sapore di Mare (Montauk Highway, Wainscott, 537-2704), one of this summer's hottest Hampton restaurants.


Reduction Seen in Political Violence at U.N.
LEAD: It is the largest diplomatic community in the world in one of the most maligned cities when it comes to violent crime.
Yet the diplomats' principal security problems in New York City are automobile thefts and vandalism, stolen wallets and false bomb threats.


Reviews/Music; Life's Cycle, to Mozart
LEAD: Manuel Alum's ''Monte'' is a visionary dance about life.
It is not the most dramatic of pieces, at least as performed by Ballet Hispanico.
But it represents a change of pace for the company, which presented the piece for the first time on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater.
And the Ballet Hispanico dancers gave '


WHITE HOUSE RACE NEARS END MARKED BY MORE ATTACKS
LEAD: With just over a week to go before the election, the Presidential race is largely focusing on issues of economic class, with Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis accusing Vice President Bush of favoring the rich and Mr.
Bush asserting that his rival is dividing the country.


AFTER-DINNER DRINKS
LEAD: Planning a dinner party is a delicate enterprise: The appropriate guests, food and wine are just the beginning.
Offer the right after-dinner drinks, however, and the evening is guaranteed to prosper.
There are, after all, so many possibilities, from the simplest - real and decaffeinated coffee, fruit juices and water - to the grandest and most fanciful - a rare old


Wilmington, Del.: Luring Tenants In an Office Glut
LEAD: With the office vacancy rate at a record 23 percent in the central business district here, landlords are beginning to offer special incentives to attract tenants.
So far, they have been cautious about giveaways.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  The Adventures of Picasso  Starring Gosta Ekman, Hans Alfredson, Margaretha Krook, Bernard Cribbins, Wilfrid Brambell, Per Oscarsson, Lennart Nyman, Lena Nyman, Birgitta Andersson.
Directed by Tage Danielsson. 1980.
New Star Video.  88 minutes. $59.95.
Not rated.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  THE TURNAROUND WIND  Written and illustrated by Arnold Lobel.  32 pp.
New York: Harper &amp; Row.


The Economic Pace Slows Down a Bit
LEAD: The economy's pace slackened to an annual growth rate of 2.2 percent in the third quarter.
The gain in gross national product was the smallest in nearly two years and came after growth of 3 percent and 3.4 percent in the immediately preceding quarters.
The blame for the decline fell on the summer drought and a weaker trade performance.


Seasonal Pointers
LEAD: LAST call to plant peonies; be sure to select a sunny location where the soil drains well.
Finish bulb planting; daffodils should be in the ground as well as crocus and hyacinths.
Move plants of questionable winter hardiness into coldframes.
It is still too early to apply winter mulches; wait until at least after Thanksgiving.


Return of the 60's: Rock, Romance and Rebellion
LEAD: I ASKED my husband the other night if we were baby boomers.
Of course, he laughed heartily; anyone born in the 50's was considered a baby boomer.
We lived through the 60's, didn't we?
We experienced firsthand Haight-Ashbury, Woodstock, love beads, Nehru jackets, Jim Morrison, Vietnam, yippies; all the good stuff, the media would have us believe.


Employees Deserve Their Money
LEAD: IN the final hours of this Congressional session, I was able to press the Administration to adopt a new policy that will give Congress time to protect the pension security of millions of Americans.
The six-month Internal Revenue Service plan should deter companies from terminating healthy pension plans to strip them of so-called ''excess'' funds.


Bush, in Illinois, Keeps Up Tough Talk
LEAD: Vice President Bush, making appearances today in the counties outside the Democratic stronghold of Chicago, decided to do just a little bit more negative campaigning, at least in key states like this one where the race is considered by many strategists too close to call.


Elizabeth Tobin Is Wed To Jeff Brown, a Writer
LEAD: Elizabeth Ann Tobin and Jeff Brown were married yesterday at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Osborn Elliott in Stonington, Conn.
E.
Sims Casey, a justice of the peace, officiated.


Trying to Disagree, Opponent Tags Moynihan a 'Dukakis Democrat'
LEAD: Robert R. McMillan described Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan as ''a Dukakis Democrat'' and ''a liberal Democrat'' last night in the last debate of their campaigns for the United States Senate, although the two men often agreed on issues during the evening.


Alice Jeppe Dabezies Wed to Peter Madsen
LEAD: Trinity Episcopal Church in New Orleans was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Alice Jeppe Dabezies, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene Jean Dabezies of New Orleans, to Peter Bo Madsen, a son of Niels Bo Madsen of London and Janecke Naess Madsen of New Canaan, Conn.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.


DEMOCRAT AND DEBT: U.S. POLICY ON LATIN AMERICA IS WELL RECEIVED - IN WASHINGTON
LEAD: In proclaiming the success of its policy toward Latin America, the Reagan Administration has identified ''the greatest expansion of democracy in Latin history'' as its central achievement.
Yet not for the first time, the perspective from Washington is not the view south of the border.


MOTHER TAKES ENVIOUS LOOK AT CHAPERONING OF 18-YEAR-OLDS
LEAD: I USED to be 18 years old.
I remember clearly how I felt that the most important relationship I wanted with my parents was one in which I was away from them.
It was crucial for me then to have privacy and the independence to make my own decisions about friends, job choices and, most important of all, dating.


What It Takes to Dress Like a First Lady
LEAD: To the Editor:


Perspectives: Investing in Rentals; A Slower Pace for Housing Improvement
LEAD: ''Chemical, Citibank - they are all sitting back and wondering,'' said David Diamond.
He is wondering, too.


Letters on Travel; Carry-Ons
LEAD: To the Editor: In reference to ''Computer as a Carry-On Bag'' by L. R. Shannon (Practical Traveler, Aug. 21), I found it quite distressing as to the inconvenience to other passengers and the adverse effect it can have on the aircraft.


The Reluctant Voters
LEAD: George Bush has run a brilliant campaign in one vital respect:


Accord Allows Trips to Japan Without a Visa
LEAD: The United States and Japan have agreed to allow their citizens to travel between the two countries without a visa, beginning Dec. 15.
The two countries exchanged diplomatic notes earlier this month dropping the visa requirement for those traveling for business or pleasure for 90 days or fewer.


FISH STEWS WITH A MEDITERRANEAN HERITAGE
LEAD: MEDITERRANEAN seafood stews are particularly good for informal entertaining.
They are easy to assemble (the stock and sauces can be made in advance) and take only a short time to cook.
If you serve salad and cheese afterward, followed by a simple fruit dessert (something made with apples would be good), you have a dinner party menu that can be put together without a lot of fuss.


Sharon Gail Fass Wed in Scarsdale
LEAD: The marriage of Sharon Gail Fass, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome Fass of Great Neck, L.I., to Perry Pruzan Jacobson, the son of Liane Pruzan of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Richard Jacobson, took place last evening at the Fenway Golf Club in Scarsdale.
Rabbi Robert Rothman officiated.


Harvard Blacks Make Unusual Plea on Hiring
LEAD: A group of black professors who routinely criticize Harvard University's record on affirmative action have taken an unusual tack in their latest appeal to school administrators to begin immediately hiring more black and Hispanic faculty members.


CHILDHOOD: THE NAMES STILL HURT
LEAD: THEY said I was chubby, ''pleasingly plump.'' But I knew I was fat.
I could ride a two-wheeler, skate, catch a ball with either hand, but I couldn't run bases like my skinny tomboy friends.
You know you're fat when you're always the last one chosen for the softball team.


ABOUT THE ARTS: Film; 'Little Dorrit': Fine Performances, Vivid Faces - Gaunt Cheek by Comfortable Jowl
LEAD: The new film of ''Little Dorrit,'' written and directed by Christine Edzard, must be the most ambitious movie adaptation of a Dickens novel ever made, and, setting aside David Lean's superlative 1946 version of ''Great Expectations,'' the most successful.
Moreover, in ''Great Expectations'' David Lean was working with a relatively compact story, while ''Little Dorrit'' is a great urban sprawl of book,


Standards For Helmets
LEAD: When purchasing a bicycle helmet, make sure it has a sticker stating that it has been approved by the American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation.
An approved helmet has the following chracteristics:


Images of Dickens in a Historic Setting
LEAD: SECRET ROAD INN.
The name conjures up a myriad of images.
It could easily be the setting for a tale told by Dumas, Dickens or Robert Louis Stevenson.
The Long Island reality is a picturesque and historic restaurant in Miller Place.


Cup Maneuvers in Library
LEAD: The library at the New York Yacht Club on West 44th Street is a quiet enclave with more than a century of yacht-racing history on its shelves.
But the courthouse battles engulfing the America's Cup have turned it into something else, a kind of end zone for the legal teams looking for material to bolster their cases.


Current PINS Law: Everybody Loses
LEAD: I am responding to the article ''Emancipation Age: Should It Rise to 18?''  [ Oct. 2 ] .
As a member of the lobbying group Parents on the Move that will meet with Assemblyman Albert Vann in the near future for discussion on this issue, it is rewarding to see that The New York Times has taken the initiative in opening the eyes of the public to the sad state of New York's current PINS  [ Persons in Need of


A Late Burst by Yale Overcomes Dartmouth
LEAD: Scott Walton's third field goal of the game and a 57-yard touchdown run by Buddy Zachery, both in a 1-minute-13-second span of the final quarter, lifted Yale to a 22-13 comeback victory over Dartmouth today.


Repairing Ceramic Floor Tiles
LEAD: CERAMIC floor tiles offer superior durability and appearance, but are brittle.
A powerful blow from a sharp object can crack even the most expertly laid tile, but often foot pressure alone is sufficient to crack tile that is improperly set or inadequately supported.


For Some in Maine Town, a Boom Was No Boom
LEAD: Dennis Daniel feels like a prisoner in his own home.


Temple Breaks Losing Streak
LEAD: Rutgers, a team that surprised many people early this season by beating teams it was not supposed to beat, today surprised some more people by losing to a team it was not supposed to lose to.


Charlotte Murphy To Wed Nov. 26
LEAD: The engagement of Charlotte Tommins Murphy to Joseph E. Cox, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Cox of Grundy Center, Iowa, has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Murphy of Oldwick, N.J., and Groton Long Point, Conn.
A Nov. 26 wedding is planned.


LA PAZ TO COCHABAMBA BY BUS
LEAD: The flight from La Paz to Sao Paulo takes little more than three hours, and anyone in a hurry to get from the largest city in Bolivia to the largest in Brazil has no choice but to fly.
Bolivian buses and trains are not exactly the last word in comfort or convenience, yet crossing the Andes by land is vastly more rewarding than gazing down at the mountains from a plane.


Celebrating the Memory and Art of Paul Robeson
LEAD: They're throwing a 90th birthday party on Broadway tonight to celebrate the memory of Paul Robeson, the actor, concert singer, all-American football player and controversial political figure, who died in 1976 at the age of 77.


Reagan Signs Radon Bill
LEAD: President Reagan signed legislation Friday calling for a three-year, $15.5 million program to deal with radon contamination in schools and Federal buildings.
The bill provides for $10 million in grants to state and local governments, $3 million for seminars and information activities, $1.5 million for rating the proficiency of radon abatement programs and $1 million for development of eradication centers.


GUIDE
LEAD: BRITISH ENSEMBLE


NORTHERN PART OF COUNTY IS IN CONCERT SPOTLIGHT
LEAD: THE county's concert activity tends to be centered in its middle and southern parts, but this week the northern communities are in the spotlight, starting tonight with the season opening of the Mount Kisco Concert Association.


What Makes a Great Party?
LEAD: The elements usually include lively guests, good food and drink, and a genial ambiance.
Simple to set up if you have the know-how, tricky if you don't.
This issue is packed with expert entertaining advice, and our brief quiz will start you off.
You've invited 30 people for cocktails in your slightly- smaller-than-a-Fotomat-booth apartment.


State by State; In Swing Precinct in Modesto, Calif., The Presidency Is Still Up For Grabs
LEAD: Vice President Bush has struck pay dirt in Precinct 14 here.


Q and A
LEAD:  Renting a Room


Directory Assistance to Start Charging Jan. 1
LEAD: THE Department of Public Utility Control has approved a plan to charge telephone customers for directory-assistance calls, making Connecticut the 49th state to stop unlimited free calls to the service.


OUT AT SEA WITH GIANTS OF JAZZ
LEAD: The only thing better than jazz on dry land is jazz afloat.
For star-struck jazz buffs, cruises offer a chance to hear and even meet favorite musicians in congenial surroundings.
The barriers between audience and artist that exist at Madison Square Garden or Carnegie Hall fade in the average smoke-filled dive.


On Language; Like Ugly on an Ape
LEAD: I KNEW THE MINUTE I said 'card-carrying member of the A.C.L.U.,' '' George Bush told Maureen Dowd of The New York Times, ''a couple of your best columnists would jump all over me like ugly on an ape.''


FICTION
LEAD:  HOSPITAL OF THE TRANSFIGURATION.
By Stanislaw Lem.
Translated by William Brand. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.) An insane asylum as refuge from the madness of Nazi-occupied Poland in World War II - at first glance, the metaphor seems hopelessly trite.
Yet this skillful, semiautobiographical first novel just skirts the edge of allegory, and its author's artistry steers it gracefully away from the dangers of cliche.


THE SLIVER OF ANCIENT CARTHAGE
LEAD: In 1553 Dragut the Corsair descended on Gozo in a fleet of galleys, overwhelmed its hilltop citadel and carried off into captivity 7,000 survivors of the siege.
Fewer than 300 Gozitans managed to escape by slithering down ropes in the darkness before the final assault and hiding in a legendary tunnel near Il-Harrax hill.


Going On in the Northeast
LEAD:  THROUGH A LENS


Marjorie Lyn Howard To Wed D. M. Evans
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Howard of Westport, Conn., and Longboat Key, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Marjorie Lyn Howard, to Douglas Mark Evans, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald L. Evans of Sudbury, Mass.


The Poetic Art of a Japanese Warrior Elite
LEAD: The exhibition of Japanese art opening today at the National Gallery of Art in Washington is unprecedented in the scope, quality and numbers of treasures (close to 500 works of art) gathered from more than 100 collections all over Japan. ''Japan: The Shaping of Daimyo Culture 1185-1868'' represents the outcome of years of collaborative effort among Japanese and American officials and scholars following a meeting of the minds at the Tokyo


Let's Not Reject Compulsory Voting Too Hastily; Quorum Spells Crisis
LEAD: To the Editor:


FICTION
LEAD:  THE BLESSING &amp; THE CURSE.
By Linda Bayer. (Jewish Publication Society, $16.95.) Ida Morgan-Weiss, the heroine of Linda Bayer's first novel, faces a dilemma that is rapidly becoming a 1980's stereotype: approaching 40, successful and recently separated from her husband, she wonders whether she should beat the biological clock by having a child on her own.


Juli Bookstein Married
LEAD: Juli Bookstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sanford Bookstein of Albany, was married last evening to Daniel E. Karson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren Karson of West Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Martin Silverman officiated at the Colonie Country Club in Voorheesville, N.Y.
The bride is a lawyer specializing in commercial real estate.


EXPERTS QUESTION DRUG BILL'S IMPACT
LEAD: Law-enforcement officials say the drug bill passed by Congress last week provides them with new tools to curb illicit drugs but leaves unclear how some provisions, like civil penalties for occasional use, will work in practice.


Ms. Wright Is Married To David Mark Eldred
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of St.
Joseph of Arimathea in Elmsford, N.Y., Elizabeth Fullerton Wright, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Wright Jr. of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., and David Mark Eldred, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Linn Eldred of Mohawk, N.Y., were married yesterday by the Rev.
Donald R. Cutler.


Letting Computers Lend a High-Tech Helping Hand
LEAD: COMPUTERS are now helping with the dirty work of the job hunt, from addressing letters and tracking contacts to rewriting resumes.


Review/Theater; Humanity of Ordinary New Yorkers
LEAD: Ira Levin's ''Cantorial,'' which made its New York debut Thursday night at the Jewish Repertory Theater, may be the most melodic nonmusical in town.
What's more, it strikes the right note theatrically almost to the very end: good staging, attractive casting, inventive idea and crisp dialogue.


Special Today: Entertaining/Magazine Part 2
LEAD:  Expert advice on the ins and outs of a great party.
Gold and silver give desserts a special luster.
A wine collection for today's diverse needs.
Party-planning professionals.
''White-tablecloth'' restaurant fare at home.
Small apartment, big party.
Classic French cuisine, in a microwave.


Man Is Found Hanging in a Subway Station
LEAD: A man believed to be a psychiatric patient was found hanged in a Manhattan subway station yesterday, a transit police spokesman said.


BEARING THE CROSS IN INGLENOOK, MINN.
LEAD:  WHEAT THAT SPRINGETH GREEN  By J. F. Powers.  335 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Pushing the Stakes To New Heights
LEAD: THE nation was rocked this month by the spectacle of takeover fights for some of America's largest and best-known companies.
Even in this day and age when the multibillion-dollar acquisitions of household-name companies have become commonplace, the sheer size of the offers was astounding: $20.3 billion for RJR Nabisco, $11.5 billion for Kraft and $5.23 billion for


From Lassie to Pee-Wee
LEAD: I LOVED WATCHING television as a child.
In the early morning, I would turn on the set, sit on the floor and watch the odd assortment of farm reports, documentaries and public service announcements that came on before the cartoons.
None of this material was created or shown with children in mind, and that, certainly, was a large part of its appeal.


Having Third Thoughts On Yellowstone's Fires
LEAD: NOW that the smoke has cleared, Park Service officials are stating that the forest fires that swept through Yellowstone last summer will have no long-range ill effects on the park's environment and wildlife.
While it was undoubtedly a crisis, they say, the fire will actually enhance the park's ecology.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 30, 1988
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Weel
List
Fiction
1
4
HEAVEN AND HELL, by John Jakes. (Dell,
$5.95.) Two families in the aftermath of the Civil
War.
2
4
HER MOTHER'S DAUGHTER, by Marilyn
French. (Ballantine, $5.95.) A chronicle of four
generations of women.


Woman Who Hid Anne Frank To Speak
LEAD: MIEP GIES, the woman who hid Anne Frank and gave her diary to the world, will speak on Thursday at Temple Judea of Manhasset to conclude its monthlong ''Children of the Holocaust'' program.


Stalemate in Strike Threatens Quality of New York Racing
LEAD: The central question surrounding the strike by Aqueduct Race Track's jockeys is no longer who will be riding the horses each day, but whether the quality of New York racing is in serious jeopardy.


U.S. Shuttle Is Readied For November Liftoff
LEAD: The space shuttle Atlantis will be moved to its launching pad on Wednesday in preparation for a late November flight in which it will carry a secret military satellite.


EXPERT CHOICES
LEAD: Having company used to be an occasion for bringing out the ''good stuff'' and setting the same table the same way every time.
But now that entertaining tends to be more casual, an eclectic supply of tableware and accessories is what is needed.
The selection here includes some of this season's best, ranging from a high-tech wire-mesh casserole holder and bread basket to elegant French porcelain dessert plates, crystal champagne flutes and a mahogany and pewter salad set.


Nightingale-Bamford: Growth Awaits Grading
LEAD: After three years of bruised feelings on the Upper East Side, the conflict caused by the Nightingale-Bamford School's desire to build atop its present structure will go before the Board of Standards and Appeals on Tuesday.


U.S.C. Goes 7-0 By 41-20
LEAD: Rodney Peete threw for three touchdowns to Erik Affholter as Southern Cal took sole possession of first place in the Pacific-10 Conference with a 41-20 victory over Oregon State today.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article last Sunday about a debate over Islamic law in the Sudan reversed the relationship between that issue and the country's civil war.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday with an article about jukeboxes misidentified a Rock-ola machine.
The jukebox, wholly visible at the center of the page, was a 1422 model from 1946.


Waiting for Godot Tickets
LEAD: To the Editor:


Transformed by Diamond Dust
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sharpton and 15 Others Arrested in Court Scuffle
LEAD: Sixteen people, including the Rev.
Al Sharpton and the lawyers William M. Kunstler and C. Vernon Mason, were arrested Friday after a confrontation between demonstrators who refused to clear a Brooklyn courtroom and court officers, the police said yesterday.


Vietnam and Laos Finally Join Talks on Refugees
LEAD: Vietnam and Laos took part this week in international talks on the problems of Indochinese refugees, whose number has grown this year as more Vietnamese flee by boat to neighboring Southeast Asian countries.


Anderson's Aides to Receive A Pay Increase of 25 Percent
LEAD: Warren Anderson, with only a few weeks left as leader of the state Senate's Republican majority, has rewarded many of his top legal advisers with hefty pay raises.


Hempstead Wins Coaching Rivalry
LEAD: Not a lot was at stake when the Farmingdale High School football team took the field against Hempstead at the Tigers' homecoming game today.


Deer Win Repreive From Hunt
LEAD: THE shrub-nibbling deer on Mason Island off the coast of Mystic have a new lease on life, but they will apparently have to live out their days elsewhere.


For Sean O'Casey, Acceptance at Last As a Modern Master
LEAD: To his consternation, Sean O'Casey saw his theatrical reputation fluctuate widely during his lifetime.
When he died in 1964 at the age of 84 he was generally regarded as a playwright who had not measured up to his early potential.
Even those plays that were acknowledged as his finest - his Dublin trilogy, ''The Shadow of a Gunman,'' ''Juno and the Paycock'' and ''The Plough and the Stars'' - were not in the active international repertory.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-19


Arafat Restates His Interest In International Conference
LEAD: The chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Yasir Arafat, reiterated in an interview released today that he was prepared to participate in an international peace conference with the Israelis.


A Sure Sign of Halloween: An Eggy Deluge
LEAD: It's Halloween. It's egg time.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


KRAFT BEING SOLD TO PHILIP MORRIS FOR $13.1 BILLION
LEAD: In one of the biggest takeovers to date, two of the nation's best-known makers of consumer goods, Philip Morris Companies and Kraft Inc., yesterday agreed to merge in a deal valued at $13.1 billion in cash.


Catholics in Illinois Offering Loans to Farmers
LEAD: Roman Catholics in central Illinois are sending financially troubled farmers a little cash along with their prayers this year.


Dragging of Woman by Train Prompts New Transit Inquiry
LEAD: A Brooklyn woman was dragged 15 feet by a subway train Saturday, prompting a Transit Authority investigation of the train's crew and whether the doors were functioning properly.


Bank Board to Alter Its Evaluation Method
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Bank Board, beset by criticism that it is the weakest of the agencies regulating financial institutions, has overhauled its system for examining savings and loan institutions.


Review/Television; Politics and Pledges,
LEAD: Once again, we have a national election campaign so uninspiring that, at best, only half of the eligible voters will bother to participate.
And once again, television is being perceived as the culprit, the machine that reduces everything to simplistic images.
The ads with the most emotional clout, evidently, determine the future of our country.


Reviews/Theater; Strutting Those 'Fiorello' Tunes
LEAD: As long as those Jerry Bock-Sheldon Harnick songs occupy stage center at the Equity Library Theater, its production of ''Fiorello!'' is a vote-getter.
Who can resist ''Politics and Poker'' or ''Little Tin Box,'' as belted by the card players in the clubhouse, not one of whom looks like a song-and-dance man.


Learning Disabilities and Crime: Struggle to Snap the Link
LEAD: The 40 New York City probation officers, learning about the relationship between juvenile delinquency and learning disabilities, began to shift uncomfortably in their seats.
Richard Lavoie, playing the role of stern teacher, began to ask questions so quickly that few had time to think and answer.


Review/Theater; Love in Little Italy, as Told by John Patrick Shanley
LEAD: When the moon hits your eye like a big pizza pie, that's amore.
But these days it may also be a new script by John Patrick Shanley, who has followed his Oscar-winning screenplay for ''Moonstruck'' with another slice of sometimes gooey, sometimes piquant, always moonlit romanticism, Italian-American-style.


Political Memo; G.O.P. Makes Reagan Lure Of Young a Long-Term Asset
LEAD: It is said that the future belongs to the young, which gives the Republican Party a lot to look forward to.


Foreign Writers, Even Nobel Winners, Find Few Outlets
LEAD: MORE books are being translated into English than ever before, but American bookstores, unlike some automobile showrooms, are not likely to become dominated by imports.
Indeed, the real problem now is finding bookstores that sell the translations.


Ad-Heavy Giants Fight for Los Angeles Suburbs
LEAD: Twenty years ago, the radically libertarian Orange County Register was demanding an end to taxpayer support for institutions as deeply rooted as public schools, the post office and police departments.
Its publisher, R. C. Hoiles, helped make this Southern California county well known for conservative thinking.


Sports World Specials; Hurdle of Obscurity
LEAD: Quickly: Name the Olympic champion in the men's 400-meter hurdles?


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I'm a liberal in the tradition of Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman and John Kennedy.''  - Michael S. Dukakis.  [ A1:4. ]


Not So Exotic, the Jews of Samarkand
LEAD: There were a dozen people, nearly twice as many chickens, a few roosters and a pair of doves waiting for Rabbi Bakhor Kuyenov when he came to work one recent day.


Campaign Finance; Contributors Help Dukakis By Avoiding Limits He Set
LEAD: Although Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis pledged that the Democratic National Committee would refuse contributions from corporations and labor unions this year, those sources are giving state party organizations millions of dollars that can help his Presidential campaign.


Reviews/Dance; Harlem Troupe Celebrates Itself on the Stage
LEAD: Dance Theater of Harlem had two reasons to celebrate on Friday night.
Its performance opened its Fourth Community Concert Series, which runs through Nov. 12 at Davis Hall, City College, West 134th Street and Convent Avenue.
More important, it began the company's 20th anniversary season.
The program offered a sample of the kinds of productions that Dance Theater of


4 Black Youths Held in Attack
LEAD: Four black youths were charged yesterday with beating and robbing a white youth on a city bus in Queens in what the police have classified as a bias incident, a police spokesman said.


Ivy League Race Is On Again
LEAD: The Ivy League race is not quite a runaway and Saturday's results gave promise of the usual turbulent November in a conference famous for the unexpected.


Jets Use Turnovers to Top Steelers
LEAD: The Jets today called on their oldest defensive player, one of their youngest, a trick play and some surprises by the special teams to continue their unexpected march toward respectability.


Don't Call the Shroud of Turin a Forgery
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wiesenthal Center Honors Reagan for Humanitarianism
LEAD: President Reagan, declaring that ''we must not, we cannot, and we will not'' forget the Holocaust, received the annual Humanitarian Award of the Simon Wiesenthal here tonight in recognition of his ''historic contribution to the cause of world peace.''


INSIDE
LEAD:  Fresh Face in Afghanistan  An Afghan official with an independent streak is being promoted by the Soviet Union as a candidate to lead a national unity government.
Page A3.
New Approach by Jockeys  Striking jockeys and Aqueduct officials have agreed on a two-tiered fee system that could bring back regular riders.


Review/Art; The Flowering of Japan's Daimyo Culture
LEAD: ''Japan: The Shaping of Daimyo Culture 1185-1868'' is one of the most ambitious exhibitions of Japanese art ever held in the United States.
It spans 700 years and includes more than 400 works, some of them national treasures that have never before been out of Japan.
The exhibition is quiet and discreet, encouraging sustained contact with the objects.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Addenda
LEAD: *
Newsweek will raise its ad rates 4.1 percent with the Jan. 2 issue.
Its circulation remains at 3.1 million.


A Connecticut Wedding For Dr. Carole Lengyel
LEAD: Dr.
Carole Lengyel, a pediatric resident at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, and Dr.
Satori Iwamoto, a fourth-year medical student at Harvard University, were married yesterday.
Town Justice Barbara Amatruda officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Peter Lengyel, in Woodbridge,


Work on AIDS and Fatherhood Still Theoretical
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hopes Rise For Finding 8 Lost Planes
LEAD: For more than a quarter of a century, engineers and pilots searched in vain for the Lost Squadron, two B-17 Flying Fortresses and six P-38 Lightnings that went down on the Greenland icecap while flying to Britain in the summer of 1942.


Von Bulow Furnishings Set Records at Auction
LEAD: A two-day auction of English furniture and paintings, porcelains and silver belonging to Claus and Martha (Sunny) von Bulow ended at Sotheby's on Saturday evening with sales of $11,562,980, $3.5 million above the auction house's high estimate.


Population Size Can't Be Overlooked as an Environmental Danger
LEAD: To the Editor:


Work on AIDS and Fatherhood Still Theoretical; A Venereal Disease
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mary Jo Gallo Is Wed To Bruce Fox on L.I.
LEAD: Mary Jo Gallo, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sullivan A. Gallo of Patchogue, L.I., and Bruce Evan Fox, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Fox of Great Neck, L.I., were married yesterday at the Interfaith Chapel at the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University in Brookville, L.I.
The Rev.
Edward Roberts, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony, assisted by Rabbi Irwin


Prejudice on Campuses Is Feared to Be Rising
LEAD: Racist, sexist and anti-Semitic incidents on and near college campuses from Dartmouth to Wisconsin to Stanford this fall have provoked worries by education and civil rights leaders that such acts are on the increase.


Dr. James Lerrick Wed To Wendy Ann Munoz
LEAD: Wendy Ann Munoz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Munoz of Freehold, N.J., and Dr.
James Andrew Lerrick, a son of Dovia Lerrick of Chappaqua, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Robert B. Lerrick, were married yesterday at the Sleepy Hollow Country Club in Scarborough, N.Y.
Rabbi Chaim Stern officiated.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Metro Matters; Another Detour In Troubled Life: Back to Prison
LEAD: What is to be done with Dwayne Gosso?


Sports of The Times; The Jets' Instant Leader
LEAD: HE had joined the Jets only the week before, claimed on waivers after the Pittsburgh Steelers had cut him.
He was a stranger in their midst, but sometimes a stranger can see what's wrong quicker than those accustomed to the problems.
And the day after the Jets were routed, 28-3, by the New England Patriots in their season opener, Robin Cole, a 33-year-old linebacker with two Super


Rangers Win 7th in a Row
LEAD: The Rangers trounced the Penguins, 9-2, for their seventh consecutive victory last night in an ugly hockey game marked by 272 minutes in penalties.


Lincoln H. Clark, CARE's Co-Founder, 77
LEAD: Lincoln H. Clark, co-founder of the Cooperative for American Relief Everywhere, died of cancer Friday in his home in Falmouth, Me.
He was 77 years old.


ON YOUR OWN: Fitness; Orlon Socks Go Toe to Toe With Cotton
LEAD: ONE day last summer, Timothy Graham decided to perform a test in a tennis match with some of his cronies at the Hempstead Country Club on Long Island.


Traffic Notes
LEAD: The Halloween parade will begin at 7 o'clock tonight on West Street between Houston and Christopher Streets, travel east on Houston Street to the Avenue of the Americas, north to 14th Street and east to Union Square.
Because of All Saints Day, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City tomorrow.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Some Ads The Public Never Saw
LEAD: HARD by an ersatz cemetery with cardboard tombstones bearing the inscriptions ''Herb - R.I.P.'' and ''Nissan Engineers -R.I.P.'' several dozen creative people gravely contemplated advertisements that died too soon.


Pat Moynihan's Salad Days
LEAD: A word of praise, first, for Robert R. McMillan.
He's the Republican who volunteered for the suicide mission of running against Daniel Patrick Moynihan for the United States Senate.
Mr.
McMillan, who's been stumping the state in his own car, has waged a creditable campaign, making sensible suggestions on issues like lower-income housing and cleaning up New


Dukakis Asserts He Is a 'Liberal,' But in Old Tradition of His Party
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis dropped his resistance today and accepted the label that Republicans have been trying to pin on him for months.
But he defined it in his own terms, declaring, ''I'm a liberal in the tradition of Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman and John Kennedy.''


Rams Win, 12-10; End Saints' Streak
LEAD: Jim Everett passed for 243 yards and Mike Lansford kicked four field goals today to give the Los Angeles Rams a 12-10 victory over the New Orleans Saints, snapping the league's longest winning streak.


Paper, in a First, Backs Democrat for President
LEAD: The Wichita (Kan.) Eagle-Beacon yesterday endorsed a Democrat for President for the first time in its history, saying Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis ''seems uniquely prepared to deal with the crises certain to confront the next President.''


Vogue Tries a More Relaxed Look
LEAD: The jeweled Christian Lacroix T-shirt on the cover of the new issue of Vogue costs at least $10,000.
That may not be so surprising; Vogue has always gone gaga over expensive French couture.
What is unusual is that a $50 pair of blue jeans accompanies the T-shirt.
It may well be the first time blue jeans have appeared on a


Algerian Revolution Inspires Freedom Struggles
LEAD: To the Editor:


Friends of Forests
LEAD: Jungle fever is sweeping the nation's capital.


Builder of People Express Links Failure to Technology
LEAD: In the ''where are they now'' department, Donald C. Burr, the executive who built People Express, is working on a book about his ill-fated airline and also riding the lecture circuit.


Chile Promotes Forestry Industry
LEAD: Chile has begun to reap the benefits of a forestry planting program that was started in the mid-1970's and is expected to make the country a major exporter of wood and wood products by the mid-1990's.


Hearing for Drexel Judge
LEAD: A Federal Appeals Court will hear arguments today on whether a Federal judge violated conflict-of-interest rules and demonstrated bias against Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., a defendant in a securities fraud case brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission last month.


Sports World Specials; Back in the Right Lane
LEAD: At the age of 30 and after six years of steady progress on the talent-packed Professional Bowlers Association tour, Brian Voss has enjoyed solid success in the last 10 months.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; WRG Resigns From Pan Am
LEAD: Wells, Rich, Greene resigned from the Pan American World Airways account Friday morning and declined to participate in the airline's agency review.


Net Down 7% At Aetna Life
LEAD: The Aetna Life and Casualty Company said Friday that its third-quarter net income fell 7 percent because of declining results from personal, commercial property and group insurance.


11 Progresso Unions Gain In Battling Publisher
LEAD: The National Labor Relations Board has accused the publisher of Il Progresso Italo-Americano of negotiating in bad faith with two unions and subsequently moving its business in order to publish with nonunion employees.
At the same time, 24 former Il Progresso journalists and typographers have distributed a prototype of America Oggi, which would compete with Il Progresso, the nation's only


Patient Held in Nurse Slaying
LEAD: A 33-year-old Connecticut man was arrested Saturday and charged with the murder of a Metropolitan Hospital nurse in her East Side apartment on Oct. 19, the police said.


Review/Music; John Adams Conducts New and Old Works
LEAD: According to one school of thought, composition is a form of game playing, the object being the discovery of the right balance of sounds and durations for the circumstances at hand.
A variant of the game adds the challenge of overcoming, but not abandoning, sets of stylistic strictures.


Review/Chamber Music; New Australian Works
LEAD: ''Terra Australis,'' a local chamber ensemble with links to the Australian musical scene from which some of its members hail, presented six works new to New York at the Asia Society Saturday evening.
All six were composed within the past four years, and they suggest that composers Down Under are finding Minimalism and popular music invigorating influences just now.


Fore! 18 Holes in Dubai, Then a Day at the Races
LEAD: With grass seed from Georgia and around $10.5 million, the rulers of this emirate on the Persian Gulf have turned the desert green to create what is said to be the only all-grass, 18-hole championship golf course in the Arab Middle East.


Sports World Specials; Auerbach's Structure
LEAD: Red Auerbach has been the architect behind the raising of 16 National Basketball Association championship banners in the Boston Garden.
In another part of Massachusetts today, Auerbach, who has devised the Celtics' blueprint for success, will have his name on a real set of blueprints.
He is not the architect, however.


Dying Nuclear Plants Give Birth to New Problems
LEAD: An expanding program to decontaminate and decommission radioactive nuclear weapon factories is emerging as another of the enormous costs of producing history's deadliest weapons.


Nuclear Reactor Shuts Down
LEAD: The one operating reactor at Three Mile Island automatically shut itself down today for reasons believed to be linked to the plant's non-nuclear turbine system, said Gordon Tomb, a spokesman for the plant operator, GPU Nuclear Corporation.
He said no emergency condition existed and said the reactor would remain out of service until an investigation was completed.


Compromise on Jockeys' Pay Could End Strike
LEAD: Officials of Aqueduct Race Track and a jockeys' group confirmed last night that a new two-tiered system of riding fees could be approved today, bringing an end to the 12-day-old strike by more than 30 of New York's regular jockeys.


The Race for Congress; Choice in Wisconsin: Rich Is (A)Evil or (B)Good
LEAD: In a state that prides itself on progressive politics and clean government, Herbert Kohl, one of the wealthiest men in Wisconsin, is spending millions of his own dollars to win a seat in the United States Senate.


Connecticut Candidates Busy as Campaign Winds Down


N.C.A.A. Panel Checks Sooners
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association Infractions Committee spent much of today reviewing its case against the Oklahoma football program, sources told The Associated Press.


Manville Plan On Bankruptcy
LEAD: The Manville Corporation said Saturday that it would emerge from bankruptcy on Nov. 28.


4 ISRAELIS KILLED IN ATTACK ON BUS
LEAD: Four Israeli civilians were killed and eight were wounded Sunday evening when a passenger bus was attacked with firebombs during an ambush just outside the West Bank city of Jericho, the Israeli Army said early today.


Bridge
LEAD: Four decades ago, the idea of presenting bridge deals through a consistent cast of characters was popularized by S. J. (Skid) Simon in England.
He was followed by another Englishman, Victor Mollo, whose death last year brought an end to the series of tales about the Hog, the Rabbit and other denizens of the Griffins Club.


Key West Journal; Homosexuals Unmask On Night of Costumes
LEAD: With his broad shoulders, rose-red lipstick, white chiffon dress and runs in his stockings, William Shultz looked like Joan Crawford on a bad night.


Business and the Law; Retiree Benefits And Bankruptcies
LEAD: WITH the surge in leveraged buyouts, restructuring of companies and foreign takeovers, many retired employees have had to struggle in Congress and the courts to protect their expensive medical benefits from the sharp knives of cost cutters.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


A Tribute to Paul Robeson on Boards He Trod
LEAD: What Lena Horne called the ''unbearably majestic beauty'' of Paul Robeson's voice returned to the Shubert Theater last night, 12 years after his death and 45 years after he first gave a legendary performance on the Shubert stage as Othello.


Ad About Turmoil in Mexico Seeds a Mystery in Washington
LEAD: A mysterious committee predicts an immiment Communist-inspired insurrection in Mexico, masterminded by a defeated candidate for president of that country.
The group is well bankrolled.
The warning appears in full-page ads, all paid for in advance, in several of this country's major newspapers.


Taverns Making Effort to Discourage The Big Drinkers, Through Service
LEAD: The 27-ounce margarita cocktail in a glass resembling a frosted fishbowl is no longer served here at the restaurant-bar where it won fame.
Double scotches are out, too.
Instead, patrons are politely offered a new nonalcoholic beverage menu.


Battle for Nabisco Is Called Unlikely
LEAD: The prospect of a bidding battle for RJR Nabisco Inc. appeared to diminish over the weekend as the company's financial advisers decided that they were unlikely to match the $20.3 billion that has been offered by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, people close to the situation said.


New Jersey Candidates on the Issues
LEAD: The United States Senate race in New Jersey has been among the most hard-fought and bitter in the country.
Yet when addressing specific issues, the Democratic incumbent, Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, and his Republican challenger, Pete Dawkins, do not differ dramatically.
For example, both want the Federal Government to spend more on the environment, on anti-drug programs and on day care.


London Journal; Watch Out, Lager Louts! Here's Sobering News
LEAD: On busy streets, in the subways below and amid the tight, after-work squeeze on commuter trains, a menacing, befuddled and reeling regiment is on the attack.


Fans Behave Better
LEAD: Three hours before the 1 P.M. kickoff of the Jets' game against the Pittsburgh Steelers today, sunshine, footballs, hamburgers and beer, the staples of a tailgate party, were as abundant as cars in the parking lots at Giants Stadium.


Utilities Worried by Decision on Older Coal Plant
LEAD: In a decision dismaying to power companies throughout the country, the Government has told a Wisconsin utility that plans to repair its coal-burning power plant will subject it to the strict air pollution standards that apply to new plants.


Claudia Grossman Wed to Aaron Jaffe
LEAD: The wedding of Claudia Leigh Grossman, a lawyer in New York, to Aaron David Jaffe, a civil engineer in New York, took place yesterday at Temple Beth Israel in Niagara Falls, N.Y.
Rabbi Samuel Porrath and Cantor Herbert Strauss officiated.


George Carey, a Professor, Is Wed to Janet Lipschultz
LEAD: &gt;The International Center for B'nai B'rith in New York was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Janet Lipschultz, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Lipschultz of Brooklyn, to Dr.
George W. Carey, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Carey of the Bronx.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs and Cantor Janece Erman


Work on AIDS and Fatherhood Still Theoretical; California's Prop. 102
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Jungle Gym for Adults
LEAD: The idea of a gyroscope large enough for a person to climb inside has taken shape as a new fitness tool.
National Survival Games, a company based in New London, N.H., has developed a 9-by-9-foot gyroscope made of tubular steel.
Three concentric rings rotate round each other on a stationary frame.
The rider fastens his feet into bindings on a base plate at the center of the inner loop.


A Good Rule Preserved
LEAD: One of the best features of new Federal drug legislation is that in the end it does not water down the exclusionary rule any more.
This was unexpected because the Senate and House had each voted for exceptions to the rule, under which courts refuse to admit illegally seized evidence.
Somewhere during the reconciliation meetings, both sides called a truce and struck both provisions.


BUSH FIGHTS BACK ON ISSUE OF ELITISM
LEAD: Fighting back against Democratic charges that he is an elitist whose policies favor the rich, Vice President Bush flew up from Washington today to have lunch with the owners of an automobile body repair shop in a working-class suburb of Philadelphia.


Pressure Is on Brazil to Cut Deficit
LEAD: Under attack from labor groups and business organizations, the Brazilian Government is scrambling to find new ways of controlling its huge budget deficit to prevent the economy from being consumed by hyperinflation.


A Murder in Texas: 12 Years Later, Questions Linger About Justice System
LEAD: Despite widening assertions that an innocent man may have been convicted of killing a Dallas police officer 12 years ago, local and state officials are contesting efforts to win a new trial in a case that is raising troubling questions.


U.S. Pact With Abu Dhabi
LEAD: The United States Government-owned Overseas Private Investment Corporation has signed an accord with the United Arab Emirates for protecting overseas investments by Americans from political risks, officials said today.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Account
LEAD: *
Clarke Goward Fitts of Boston was retained by the Towle Manufacturing Company for its $2 million cutlery and housewares account.


Ercil Howard Is Wed To Capt. Mark Wroth
LEAD: Ercil C. Howard and Capt.
Mark B. Wroth, U.S.A., were married yesterday at the Cadet Chapel at the United States Military Academy in West Point, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard Camp Jr., a Baptist minister and a chaplain at the academy, performed the ceremony.


Massachusetts Voters Will Decide the Fate of a 1914 Labor Law
LEAD: Unions and contractors in Massachusetts are entangled in a high-stakes fight over a referendum that asks voters to repeal a 74-year-old state law requiring communities to pay union wage rates on public building and maintenance projects.


Literary Guild Post Filled
LEAD: Maureen Mahon Egan, the editorial director of the Literary Guild, was named to the additional post of editor in chief on Thursday.
The Literary Guild is the flagship of Doubleday Book and Music Clubs Inc.
Mrs.
Egan thus reassumes the post she held until 1985, when Genevieve Young became editor in chief.


One More Obstacle Confronts Lalonde
LEAD: NOT long ago, Sugar Ray Leonard, seated ringside at his training camp in Scotrun, Pa., got to his feet to show a visitor his impression of Donny Lalonde, the World Boxing Council light-heavyweight champion.


Quick Crash Response Praised
LEAD: A Pentagon study has praised the quick and professional response by military medical teams to the air show disaster in August at Ramstein Air Base in West Germany.


September Tool Orders Fell by 3.4%
LEAD: After a sharp surge in August, orders for American-made machine tools slipped 3.4 percent in September, according to a report scheduled to be released today by the industry's trade association.


College Football; List of Heisman Candidates May Include a Mountaineer
LEAD: The top of the national rankings underwent a major realignment Saturday with Washington State's 34-30 upset of U.C.L.A. (7-1), which was ranked No. 1 in the news agency polls and No. 2 by The New York Times in its computer ranking.


Image Crisis for Savings League
LEAD: It is hard not to be relaxed at the lavish resorts on the beach of Waikiki, but the 2,300 executives gathering here for the annual convention of the United States League of Savings Institutions will be wringing their hands nonetheless.


Cuomo Son Plans Units for Homeless
LEAD: Andrew Cuomo, the Governor's son, announced plans yesterday to build transitional housing in the South Bronx for 300 homeless families.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Auto Racing  Senna Clinches Drivers' Title: Ayrton Senna of Brazil, driving a turbo-charged McLaren Honda, overcame a stall from his pole position start yesterday and won the Japan Grand Prix, along with the 1988 drivers' title.
Senna, 28 years old, clinched his first world drivers' championship with one race remaining in the Formula One championship series, at Adelaide, Australia, Nov.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-11  Four Israeli civilians were killed and eight wounded when a passenger bus was ambushed and attacked with five firebombs in the West Bank city of Jericho, Israelis close to the military said.
A1


Julie Cooper Wed To Donald Spero
LEAD: Julie Cooper, a program analyst in Mayor Koch's office of operations, and Donald Spero, the director of capital budget for the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, were married yesterday at James House in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Dr.
Robert L. Berson, the leader of the Ethical Society of Northern Westchester, officiated.


Burmese Leaders Take Steps To Help Private Enterprises
LEAD: Burma's military rulers announced new steps over the weekend to encourage private enterprise in the midst of dismantling the country's 26-year-old socialist system.


Your Marathon Countdown
LEAD: TWO days before the 1981 New York City Marathon, Alberto Salazar had lunch at the Carnegie Deli.
He ate a mile-high pastrami sandwich, hardly a staple of a runner's diet, and few crumbs were left on his plate.
The result?
Salazar won the marathon that year, setting a world record.


Imelda Marcos in New York For Her Arraignment Today
LEAD: Imelda Marcos, wife of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines, arrived here yesterday from Honolulu to be arraigned today on embezzlement and racketeering charges at Federal District Court in Manhattan.


Outdoors: Unusual Encounter
LEAD: OVER the years, I have grown accustomed to being bested by my cherished fishing companion, Vic Pomiecko.
And on a recent trip he not only caught more trout than I but also captured a ruffed grouse with his bare hands.


Doron Resheff Is Wed To Karen Joy Lehrman
LEAD: The marriage of Karen Joy Lehrman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert O. Lehrman of New York and Edgewater, N.J., to Doron Resheff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arie Resheff of Nahariya, Israel, took place yesterday at the Carriage House in Englewood, N.J.
Rabbis Daniel S. Wolk and Mark Schneier officiated.


Airline Guide Being Sold To Maxwell
LEAD: The Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation has agreed to sell its Official Airline Guide for $750 million in cash to the British publisher Robert Maxwell, the two parties announced yesterday.


Bio-Gas and Sun Energy Make Life Better in India
LEAD: Twenty-four-year-old Ponnulingham, like most of India's 800 million people, will never be part of the new middle class that frequents the coffee shops and health clubs of five-star hotels.
Chances are he will never live in a house with electricity or running water.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Seminar for Volunteers
LEAD: Agency people with souls for more than selling are invited to a free seminar on options for volunteer work in New York, to be held Wednesday from 6 P.M. to 7:30 P.M. at the J. Walter Thompson auditorium, 466 Lexington Avenue, between 45th Street and 46th Street, on the second floor.
Representatives from organizations that help homeless people, children, the elderly and AIDS patients will speak.


Looking to History
LEAD: Imagine the United States this way in the year 2010: It has lost its competitive edge in all major industries; its allies have fallen away or turned elsewhere; the dollar is weak and Washington cannot borrow abroad; its schools turn out future lawyers, dentists and real estate agents, but not scientists, engineers and skilled craftsmen.


Imelda Marcos Arrives in New York for Arraignment    She is to be arraigned today on embezzlement and racketeering charges at Federal court. (AP) (Page A2.)


Paul S. Graziano, 70, a Retired Professor
LEAD: Paul S. Graziano, a retired professor at St.
John's University Law School, died of a heart attack Friday at his home in Flushing, Queens.
He was 70 years old.


State By State; California Realist Assesses Dukakis
LEAD: No city in America gives its politicians more leeway to do and say what they please than this one, and no politician takes better advantage of his constituents' forbearance than Willie Brown, the Speaker of the California Assembly, who is from San Francisco.


For the Malaysian Chinese, A Year of Disenchantment
LEAD: A year after the leader of his party and six other members of Parliament were detained without trial, Lee Lam Thye is trying to sustain interest in the travails of his political group, the Democratic Action Party, and in the difficulties of the Chinese minority.


Soviets Said to Offer Afghan Premier as a Conciliator
LEAD: Prime Minister Hassan Sharq of Afghanistan will address the United Nations this week as part of a Soviet-inspired campaign to promote him as the potential head of a national reconciliation government in Afghanistan, State Department and Pakistani officials said this weekend.


Bhutan Lifts the Royal Wedding Veil
LEAD: The Kingdom of Bhutan, locked in its Himalayan fastness, had an important announcement to make today.


Breeders' Cup; Three Stars Will Be Racing For More Than Just a Victory
LEAD: At least nine horses will go to the post for each of the seven Breeders' Cup contests at Churchill Downs Saturday, but three of the races seem to be contests between a horse and a different kind of opponent, the judgment of history.


Truck Driver Goes on Rampage, Killing One
LEAD: The driver of a tractor-trailer ran at least nine vehicles off the road today, killing one driver, and shot and wounded an officer in a violent spree along 70 miles of Interstate 10, the police said.


Marathan; At Starting Line, More Open Lanes
LEAD: When there is fine fall weather the call of the road can be strong.
But rain or shine, come next Sunday, if you decide to take a spin through Staten Island you'd better get an early start or wait until afternoon.


For Running Mates, Differing Final Roles
LEAD: In the final week of the Presidential election, the Bush and Dukakis campaigns are planning different roles for their running mates.


Confusing the Polls And Being Proud of It
LEAD: Tired of polls?
And pollsters?
And pundits telling us who is going to win before anyone votes?


Horse Show; Horse and Rider A Lucky Match
LEAD: The last time Greg Best received a stinging critique of his horsemanship was 10 years ago, the first time Frank Chapot, coach of the United States Olympic jumping team, watched him ride.


Reviews/Dance; The World's Last Act Has A Latin Beat
LEAD: JoAnn Fregalette-Jansen is a choreographer with an original voice.
It is a very dark voice.
But Ms.
Jansen's gifts, so clearly evident in a performance by her company last Thursday at the Whitney Museum of American Art at the Equitable Center, make her apocalyptic vision almost exhilarating.


Review/Music; Firkusny Plays Dvorak
LEAD: Rudolf Firkusny has not pursued his career in such a way as to build cult followings or be called a legend in his own time, but it is hard to think of a pianist whose name one would be gladder to find on an evening's program.
He played Dvorak's G-minor Concerto, with which he has long been identified, at the Metropolitan Museum on Friday evening, accompanied by the Orchestra of St.


The Race for Congress; In Connecticut, Politics Of Apples and Omelets
LEAD: A Sunday morning late in the campaign found the State Attorney General, Joseph I. Lieberman, at the New Colony Diner in Bridgeport where Eli Rosa was just sitting down to his usual Sunday breakfast: a three-egg omelet with hash browns.
The two men had never met.


This Week's Election
LEAD: The election in Israel this week has this startling similarity to our own election: swing voters believe what their candidates are saying about each other.


Several Giant Pension Funds Investing in Offer for Nabisco
LEAD: The $2 billion down payment on the $20.3 billion buyout offer for RJR Nabisco Inc. will be provided by the retirement funds of Coca-Cola, Georgia-Pacific and United Technologies; the endowment funds of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, and the pension funds for state employees of New York, Iowa and Michigan, among others.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Allied-Signal Aerospace Co., Morris Township, N.J., a unit of Allied-Signal Inc., announced that William C. Purple, president of its Defense Systems Co. and an executive vice president of the parent company, will retire at the end of the year.


6,000 Couples Are Married in Korea


Books of The Times; To the Fringe and Back: Burroughs's Life's Circle
LEAD:  Literary Outlaw  The Life and Times of William S. Burroughs  By Ted Morgan  Illustrated. 659 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $27.50.


Giants Top Lions in Overtime
LEAD: The Giants' offense was hardly pretty today, and most of the time it found a way to thwart a drive.
But the defense was efficient and fired up, and in overtime it made the big play that set up a 13-10 victory over the Detroit Lions.


End May Be Drawing Near In Suit on '83 Bond Default
LEAD: The expected $200 million settlement on Monday by 13 utility defendants in the securities-fraud lawsuit involving the Washington Public Power Supply System could mean that the remaining four defendants will also settle quickly.
It would halt a trial that began nearly two months ago and end a five-year legal battle over the nation's largest municipal-bond default in history.


Bears Fall Victim To Flutie's Passes
LEAD: Doug Flutie threw four touchdown passes, including an 80-yard connection with Irving Fryar on the first play from scrimmage, as the New England Patriots stunned the National Football League's top defense with a 30-7 victory over the Chicago Bears today.


The Ghost Maker: A Halloween Tale
LEAD: I live my days in silence, behind the barred windows of this asylum, in a cell of shadows.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Thompson Media Buyer For a Canadian Brewer
LEAD: J. Walter Thompson, Toronto, went into the weekend with a $20 million media-buying assignment, awarded by Carling O'Keefe, the Canadian brewer, for all English-language buys in Canada.
Just last month the agency won the $10 million advertising account for three of Carling's major brands - OV, Foster's Quebec and Miller, which markets in Canada through


An Intricate Deal Saves M.T.A. Dollars
LEAD: Rube Goldberg would have loved it: An intricate deal in which the Japanese buy 190 new subway cars from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, lease them back and somehow, some way, everyone comes out ahead.


Around New York, They're Singing And Playing the Blues
LEAD: The blues will be all over Manhattan this week, from Greenwich Village to Harlem.
Benson &amp; Hedges Blues will present all-star blues and soul concerts this weekend at the Beacon and Apollo Theaters - with such performers as B. B. King, John Lee Hooker, Koko Taylor, Etta James, Albert King and Albert Collins - and Tuesday through Sunday there will be blues shows at the Lone Star


Savings Units: A Fairer Way
LEAD: Well-heeled thrift institutions long ago stopped loving their indigent insurer, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation.
Now, the Great Western Financial Corporation, of Beverly Hills, Calif., one of the richest, is trying to leave it.


Shirley in Person
LEAD: The other afternoon, the former owner of a Shirley Temple doll walked over to a Fifth Avenue bookstore to peer at its prototype autographing her book, ''Child Star.'' Judging by the line that curlicued through B. Dalton, every other former owner of a Shirley Temple doll within hailing distance of midtown had the same idea.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 2 New Print Gimmicks Ready for Consumers
LEAD: Advertising's silly season is upon us, judging from a couple of new gimmicks intended to draw readers' attention to the printed page.


Boxing; Welterweight Class in Chavez's Plans
LEAD: Julio Cesar Chavez has an agenda.
That's the word his promoter, Don King, used when he spoke of the boxing future of Chavez after the fighter from Culiacan, Mexico, beat his countryman Jose Luis Ramirez on a technical decision Saturday night at the Hilton Center here.


New Zealand Inquiry
LEAD: New Zealand's Justice Minister, Geoffrey Palmer, said Friday that he had appointed a panel to investigate whether there were sufficient controls on the New Zealand stock market.
Mr.
Palmer has expressed worries about the market's practices for some time.


11% Korea Growth Seen
LEAD: South Korea's gross national product is expected to grow 11 percent this year, instead of the 10 percent previously projected, the Bank of Korea said Friday.
The central bank attributed the revised projection to strong export earnings, high domestic demand for products and the continued expansion of capital investment.


Congress Cleans Up After Itself
LEAD: For too long Congress has been open to the charge that it legislates ethics for the other branches and nondiscrimination for everyone but not for itself.
In its final days, the 100th Congress finally gave two presentable responses.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct. 30, 1988:  MONDAY  Airborne Freight  Armstrong World Ind  Boeing  Consol Freight  Foster Wheeler  TUESDAY  Carlisle Cos  Emerson Electric  General Housewares  Hershey Foods  Liberty Corp  Mickelberry Corp  Monarch Machine  Phila Suburban  Polaroid Corp  Smucker Co  Source Capital  US Surgical  Zero Corp


Seamen Institute Finds a Haven On Water Street
LEAD: Almost as nomadic in recent decades as the seafarers it serves, the Seamen's Church Institute of New York and New Jersey plans to anchor at last in the South Street Seaport Historic District of lower Manhattan.


Linda M. Ecksmith Is Wed To Peter Charles Farranto
LEAD: Linda Mary Ecksmith, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gene R. Ecksmith of Canton, Ohio, and Peter Charles Farranto, the son of Helen Farranto of Mew Dorp, S.I., and Charles C. Farranto of Willowbrook, S.I., were married yesterday at the Plumbush Inn in Cold Spring, N.Y.
Carmine Ricci, a Town Justice of Cold


Slight Fall in Rates Is Forecast
LEAD: Interest rates on Treasury notes and bonds could move a bit lower, credit market analysts predict, even without the assistance of the Federal Reserve Board.


The 29-Year Ordeal to Tear Down One Building
LEAD: In 1960, it took five months and $1 million to build a modest one-story building here to process plutonium for the military.


The Two German Nations Prepare To Recall Kristallnacht's Brutality
LEAD: The night of Nov. 9-10, 1938, has always stood out as a fateful turning point in the annals of the Nazi terror, and with the approach of the 50th anniversary of what has come to be known as Kristallnacht, both Germanys have announced plans for a broad range of nationwide ceremonies, conferences and other commemorative acts.


California Dreaming: At Least Three to Share Record Lottery Prize
LEAD: Three winning tickets were sold for California's $60.8 million lottery jackpot, perhaps the largest lottery jackpot in the world, state officials said today.


When Big Salaries Prove Embarrassing
LEAD: Making a populist pitch before blue-collar and farm audiences can prove a little delicate for Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, especially if his supporters are well-paid entertainers.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday


Reviews/Dance; On the Ice, Olympians And Their Technique
LEAD: How satisfying it can be to watch a skater glide across the ice.
The sheer ease of the act can create a glow of well-being in any spectator.
One felt such a glow Saturday night at the very start of ''Benson &amp; Hedges on Ice'' when Scott Hamilton, a 1984 Olympic gold medalist, not only glided across the vast rink at Madison Square


Browns Stymie Bengals, 23-16
LEAD: As usual, dog biscuits littered Cleveland Stadium today, and several of the 79,147 who kept tossing the real ones wore paper ones on their heads.
Others waved placards celebrating their dog defense.
And afterward, those in the east end zone nearly fell out of the stands leaping and cheering joyously as a few


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday on life in Belfast incorrectly described the population of Northern Ireland in some copies.
The British Government estimates that 61 percent of the population is Protestant and 39 percent Roman Catholic.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Orel Hershiser's 6-0 victories over the Mets and the Oakland Athletics during the postseason made him the first pitcher in the 20-year history of the league championship series to throw shutouts in both the playoffs and the World Series in the same year.
How many pitchers had two shutouts in the same World


Bullet-Riddled Bodies Found Dumped in Queens Driveway
LEAD: The bullet-punctured bodies of three men were discovered in the driveway of a Queens apartment building Saturday night, and police investigators were trying to figure out who had dumped them there.


'Leak' Is an Issue in Aid Scandal
LEAD: The chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee asked the Reagan Administration today to investigate whether Administration officials had leaked classified papers to the authors of a newspaper article describing corruption in a secret United States program to aid Cambodian rebels.


Mary E. Tippett, 83, Thoroughbred Breeder
LEAD: Mary Elizabeth Tippett, an owner and breeder of such racing thoroughbreds as Mr.
Gus, Tumbleweed, Pretense and Racing Room, died late Saturday after a long illness at Llangollen Farm, her 4,000-acre estate at Upperville, Va.
She was 83 years old.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Kennedy Assassination


Land Dealer Is Acquitted
LEAD: Thomas Gaubert, a Texas land developer, was found not guilty Saturday in a fraud case involving a $32 million loan made in a condominium project.


Koch Picks 8 Sites in 3 Boroughs To House Homeless AIDS Patients
LEAD: The Koch administration, anticipating an acute need for housing for homeless people with AIDS, has decided on at least eight such sites, city officials said yesterday.


Heavy Schedule of Municipal Financings
LEAD: For investors seeking new tax-exempt issues, the calendar shows an abundance of municipal financings that are tentatively scheduled for this week.
A modest amount of corporate debt issues are also ready to come to market this week should market conditions dictate.


Campaign Tactics Provoke New Charges
LEAD: Supporters of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis complained today about a flier from the Maryland Republican Party that suggested that violent criminals would invade American homes if Mr.
Dukakis becomes President.


Limon Group Names 2 To Administrative Posts
LEAD: The Limon Dance Foundation has announced the appointment of Rick Reynolds as managing director of the foundation and of Norton Owen as director of the Limon Institute.
Mr.
Owen has also been named development director for the foundation.


Apartheid Critic Urges Vote Against Bush
LEAD: A leading South African critic of apartheid said yesterday that the best thing Americans could do to free South Africa would be to vote against Vice President Bush.


Reviews/Theater; Perils of Dalejean in 'Good Black'
LEAD: Dalejean is a middle-aged single mother of three teen-age children, each of whom is going through a period of adolescent crisis.
But Dalejean doesn't have a lot of time to worry about them.
She is usually running late to her job as a waitress in Jake's soul food diner.
Jake drinks too much, keeps a gun under the counter and is constantly trying to seduce Dalejean.


Look Out, Harvard: Here's DePauw
LEAD: Goodbye Harvard.


Poll Indicates Smaller Lead By Lautenberg
LEAD: As the United States Senate campaign in New Jersey moves into its final phase, Pete Dawkins, the Republican challenger, has reduced the lead held by his opponent, Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, according to a poll released yesterday by the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University.


Boston Fed's New Head An 'Eclectic Pragmatic'
LEAD: For Richard F. Syron, it all started in ''Money and Banking'' at Boston College in 1963.


Finding Dual Causes For an Upbeat Mood
LEAD: Upbeat as Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis seems, the reason is not simply the fact that some polls show that Vice President Bush's lead is narrowing.
In recent days Mr.
Dukakis's wife, Kitty, joined the campaign.
Aides say that whenever Mrs.
Dukakis joins the candidate, he turns more buoyant.


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
China's cabinet, the State Council, has ordered a wide-ranging investigation of market prices and has threatened tough penalties for price gouging, The People's Daily reported yesterday.
The newspaper said the main aims would be to insure stable prices for rationed items like grain and cooking oil and steady supplies of vegetables, meat and eggs.


16 New Israeli Parties Have Little Chance but May Bar Clear Election Victor
LEAD: ''They're all corrupt, and so will we be if we get elected,'' Yaakov Gross flatly tells potential voters in a brief campaign commercial on television.


2 Men, 2 Women and 2 Deaths
LEAD: Two men died within a half-hour on Saturday in separate accidents in which they fell from apartment buildings while trying to climb in to see their girlfriends, the police said today.


Strong Quake Shakes Alaska
LEAD: A strong earthquake awakened residents early today, but no damage or injuries were reported, the Alaska Tsunami Warning Center reported.
Paul Whitmore, a geophysicist at the center, said the earthquake measured 5.1 on the Richter scale of ground motion and struck at 1:33 A.M., about 60 miles northwest of Homer, in the south central part of the state.


Market Place; Breadth Indicator Shows Weakness
LEAD: IT takes more than takeover stocks to make a strong stock market, and some analysts are starting to worry that this market has little else to offer.


Gibbons, Green To Buy Stake
LEAD: Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen, a merchant banking firm, said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $21 a share, or a total of $65 million, for 27 percent of Robert Half International Inc., a large personnel-service organization.


